33
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Functioning and Expansion of Postal Network’ of Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology]
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Functioning and Expansion of Postal Network’ of Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 155
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER IR eport .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government ........................ 37
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 49
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/Observations in respect of
which the Replies are interim in nature............ 65
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-Third sitting of the
Committee held on 30 June, 2006 ....................... 66
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 68

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman*
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
***10. Vacant
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
***16. Vacant
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
(iii)
* Appointed w.e.f. 10.5.2006.
** Nominated w.e.f. 27 September, 2005.
*** Vice Shri Ajay Maken, Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu and Shri Ashwani Kumar
have been appointed as Ministers of State w.e.f. 29 January , 2006.
**** Nominated w.e.f. 6.6.2006.
***** Nominated w.e.f. 8.6.2006.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
*****23. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
***24. Vacant
****25. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
26. Shri Dara Singh
**27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
****29. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Third Report on Action Taken
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Functioning and Expansion of Postal Network’ of Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts).
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 13 May, 2005. The Ministry furnished Action taken
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report
on 14 September, 2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 30 June, 2006.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
18 July, 2005 Chairman,
27 Asadha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Functioning and Expansion of Postal Network’ of Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts)
which was presented to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on 13 May, 2005.
2. The Report contained twenty recommendations/observations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect
of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These
have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Recommendation Nos:—1, 3, 8, 10, 13, 15 and 16 to 20
Total : 11
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:-
Recommendation Nos:—2, 9, 12 and 14
Total : 04
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:—
Recommendation Nos:—4, 5, 6, 7 and 11
Total : 05
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
Recommendation No:—Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-V

2
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Utilisation of Retailing Capacity
Recommendation (No. 4)
5. Emphasising the need for optimising utilisation of the retailing
capacity of the rural postal network in the country, the Committee
had recommended as follows:—
“The Committee observe that there are 1,39,280 Branch Offices in
the country as on 31.3.2004. They are mostly in rural, hilly and
tribal areas. The impact of technology and the presence of
competitors for providing communication and remittance facilities
in these Branch Offices is either marginal or non-existent. The
Department has justified that the low level of opportunities for
income generation activities in these rural areas does not help to
promote any demand for postal services and the Department
continues to open the BOs with a view to fulfil its universal service
obligation to help socio-economic development.
The Committee are not at all impressed by the justification given
by the Department of Posts in this regard and feel that there is
enough potential for income generation in the villages which needs
to be explored. The Committee are of the opinion that the non-
existence of other competitors makes the job of the Department all
the more easy and responsive to the needs of Postal and allied
services in the rural areas. The Government is implementing the
‘Common Minimum Programme’ at present, and is constantly
focusing on providing more facilities and services to the rural areas.
The postal network is the ideal delivery mechanism, which can
render services right upto the doorsteps of the customers. According
to the Committee, this concept is not new with the postal
Department. The Committee are of the strong conviction that the
Branch Offices can do much more with little initiative by the
Department by seriously planning and co-ordinating with other
Government Departments and get the business through strategic

3
alliances. The Post Office should become a hub for dispensing
variety of services to the people in the far-flung areas. The
Committee, therefore, desire that new avenues in all the 1,39,280
BOs be explored and a fresh environment be created wherein
officials are motivated and made sensitive to the issues of
developing more business for the Post Offices. The Committee also
feel that DoP should elicit public opinion from Panchayats and
villages to know the actual requirement of the people with regard
to the variety of services rendered by the Post Offices at the grass
root-level which will help them in the optimal and efficacious
utilization of the network. Thus, the postal department can achieve
the goal of becoming a commercial organization doing good
business alongwith enabling the DoP to come out of the debt trap
and also fulfilling its universal service obligation in rural areas
with pride. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the
progress made in this regard periodically.”
6. The Department of Posts, in their action taken reply have stated
as under:—
“The efforts being made by the Department to enhance the
business/revenues in BOs have been elaborated in response to
Recommendation No. 2. The Department has also taken up with
Cabinet Secretariat the need to use this network more optimally,
and the latter have set up an inter ministerial Committee to
inter-alia address this issue also. Recently the Department made a
presentation to the National Commission for Informal/unorganized
sectors, elaborating upon the capacity of the network to provide a
wide array of services. The possibility of providing some services
through the postal network to these segments of the population
are being explored.
A study undertaken by the Planning Commission on the rural
network identified the additional products that were in demand in
villages. These include: bill collection viz. telephone, electricity, water
and other such utility bills, banking services, agricultural credit,
insurance—life, health, crop, agro services, literacy functions etc.
This study also, inter-alia, brought out the fact that the level of
revenue generation in a BO is dependent on the efforts made by
the BPM.
Unfortunately, there is very little incentive in the existing model of
providing services through EDBOS/SOs to generate business. If a
BO exceeds 5 hours of workload, it will get converted into a DSO
and the GDS BPM will be reduced to the level of GDS packer in

4
the same office. Thus, there is an in-built disincentive to increase
business, as the GDS BPM can retain his position and continue to
avail of his allowances only if the office does not generate workload
beyond a certain level. Therefore, there is a need to change this
model if EDBOs/SOs are expected to generate more business
revenues. Simultaneously, all avenues are being explored to generate
more revenues.”
7. The Committee note that the Department have taken up the
matter of optimising utilisation of the retailing capacity of the rural
postal network in the country with the Cabinet Secretariat and the
latter have set up an inter-ministerial Committee to inter-alia address
the issue. The Committee also note that a study has been undertaken
by the Planning Commission on the rural network for identifying
the additional demand of products in villages i.e. collection of
telephone, electricity, water bills and other such utility bills, banking
services, agricultural credit, insurance—life, health, crop, agro services,
literacy functions etc. This study has brought out the fact that the
level of revenue generation in a Branch Office (BO) depends on the
efforts made by the Branch Post Master (BPM). However, the
Department of posts believe that there is very little incentive in the
existing model of providing services through EDBOS/SOs to generate
business. As pointed out by the Committee in their earlier Report
and recognised by the study undertaken by the Planning
Commission, there is enough potential in the rural areas which needs
to be effectively explored to generate more income. What is required,
therefore, is for the Department of Posts to re-invent themselves to
meet the changing demands of the time. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Department of Posts to have a re-look into the
present model of Extra Departmental Branch Offices (EDBOs)/Sub-
Offices (SOs) to make it more compatible to the present situation
keeping in view their universal obligation to help socio-economic
development in rural, hilly and tribal areas. The Committee would
like to be informed of the precise steps taken in the matter.
Universal Service Obligation
Recommendation (No. 5)
8. Commenting on the need for involving the private couriers in
meeting the Universal Service Obligation, the Committee
recommended/observed as under:—
“The Universal Service Obligation that the Government has to fulfil
through the Postal Activities via the Department of Posts is to

5
provide basic postal services throughout the country, irrespective
of terrain at an affordable price. In meeting this requirement the
Department has set up 1,55,837 Post Offices in 1,20,048 Panchayats.
Another 1,23,014 Gram Panchayats are awaiting that vital link
today.
In fulfilling the USO the Government have been providing subsidy
continuously and will do so in future. A large work force
constituting 5,65,922 employees is serving the nation to provide
postal & allied services. According to the Department, the cost of
running these establishments consumes upto 96% of the budgeting
provisions of the Department. The Department’s revenue deficit
for 2004-05 is stated to be approximately Rs. 1600 crore. The
Committee feel that one of the commendable measures adopted
by the Department for expansion of further POs is the
redeployment of manpower and demanding no plan budgetary
support for extra manpower. The other measure being adopted is
making genuine efforts to downsize the work force and
simultaneously technologically upgrading the Department to meet
the competition from communications.
According to the Committee steps should be taken by the
Department to include the private couriers in discussions and
evolve a process by which the private courier could help the
Government in meeting the universal service obligation in an
effective manner.”
9. The Department of Posts in their action taken reply stated as
follows:—
“Universal Service Obligation requires the Department to provide
affordable postal services within easy access as per approved norms.
Daily delivery of dak, collection of mails through letter boxes and
provision of basic postal facilities through outlets are all part of
this Universal Service Obligation and the Department strives to
meet this obligation even in the remotest parts of the country
irrespective of economic implications on the basis of approved
norms. These norms allow for substantial subsidy to the extent of
66
2/3% in normal rural areas and 85% in hilly, tribal, inaccessible
and desert areas, to be provided for opening new post offices. The
IPO Act, 1898 also entrusts the exclusive privilege for carriage of
letters to the Department. Hence the Department has a legal
obligation to ensure access to postal facilities throughout the
country. Private Couriers provide services where they are able to
generate a profit and provide services at a cost that the market

6
can afford. Therefore, as the market develops, and socio-economic
conditions allow more generation of revenues, the couriers will
seek a niche in these areas.
The department is currently competing with private couriers for
the more creamy segments of the market, to generate revenues to
cross-subsidise its Universal Service Obligation. In this commercial
aspect of the Departments operations, there is no scope for dialogue
with its own competitors as these are not segments where the
commitment towards fulfilling USO is involved.
Any support from private couriers towards fulfilling the USO in
such areas will be forthcoming only if they are made liable to do
so as per legal requirements. For this suitable statutory provisions
would need to be provided.”
10. The Committee appreciate the twin role played by the
Department of Posts. On the one hand, they are fulfilling Universal
Service Obligation by providing basic postal services throughout the
country irrespective of difficult terrain at an affordable price and,
on the other hand, they are competing with the private couriers for
the more creamy segment of the market, to generate revenues to
cross-subsidise their Universal Service Obligation. The Committee
note the Department’s submission that in the commercial environment
there is no scope for dialogue with its own competitor i.e. private
couriers etc., as they are not committed towards fulfilling USO.
However, at the same time, it is also a fact that the private couriers
are in a way supplementing the work of the Department of Posts in
the urban areas by delivering letters in time at a cost that the market
can afford. Considering the above aspects, the Committee would
like the Government to evolve some kind of process so that the
private couriers are also involved in servicing the rural and hilly
areas by which they could help the Government in meeting the
Universal Service Obligation in an effective manner. The Committee
would like the Department of Posts to report the progress made in
this regard from time to time.
Consolidation Plan/Rationalisation of Network
Recommendation (No. 6)
11. Emphasising the need of consolidation and rationalisation of
the existing postal network, the Committee had observed/recommended
in their earlier Report as follows:—
“The Committee are informed that out of 26,186 departmental post
offices in urban and rural areas, approximately 57% i.e. 14,926

7
departmental post offices are running at losses. Out of these 14,926
post offices, 1,030 single handed and double handed branch post
offices in 43 major urban centres with a population of over
7 lakhs are running at losses. The major reason attributed by the
Department of Posts to these losses are fall in mail traffic and
availability of alternative modes of communication.
The Post Offices in the urban sector are incurring losses even
though they are required to be financially self-sufficient alongwith
earning some profit. Many of the Post Offices for historical reasons
are located at less than the distance allowed as per policy for
setting up of the post offices in urban areas. As regards the post
offices situated in rural areas, particularly extra departmental post
offices which are located in close proximity to each other than
permissible under the norms for various historical reasons are also
going into losses.
The Committee are of the opinion that single handed or double
handed branch post offices are incurring losses because sufficient
business is not available to them in their area of operation to
cover for the salary of the employees, rents, taxes and other
overheads. It is, therefore, necessary that such post offices in the
rural as well as urban areas should be located and merged into
other post offices which are in their close proximity. In other words,
consolidation of post offices in the rural and urban areas is the
order of the day. In this connection, the Committee would like to
be informed about the roadmap to the process of consolidation
and also like to be provided with a list of post offices which have
been merged into other post offices in the urban as well as in the
rural areas.
The Committee feel that Department should realise the need of
the hour as new environment is coming up with new technological
advancements. They, therefore, trust that Department will come
up with a clear-cut consolidation plan keeping in view the reliability
of the postal networks, aspirations of the urban customers needs
by not compromising with the quality and reliability of the services.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the major issues like
re-deployment, use of technology, outsourcing and franchising and
serving to underserved areas with financial viability will also be
rightly addressed in the consolidation plan of which roadmap is
to be completed by the Department of Posts. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made by the Department in
this regard.”

8
12. The Department of Posts in their action taken reply have stated
as under:—
“One of the main concerns of the Department while undertaking
this exercise of rationalising the network is to ensure that any
consolidation/rationalisation that it undertakes should not result
in reduction in the access that customers currently have to
post office facilities, as per approved norms. Therefore, the strategy/
Plan evolved by the Department for rationalising its network
includes the following elements: (1) first redeploy manpower to
the extent possible to open new post offices so that losses in
existing post offices are reduced to that extent. This strategy has
been under implementation for the last 5 years and post offices
have been opened in this manner from 2000-01. (2) Relocate/merge
post offices, which do not meet the current distance norm. In the
case of single/double handed post offices in urban areas this has
been under implementation from 6/1/03 while in the case of BOs
in rural areas, orders were issued only on 28/1/05. So far
172 post offices have been merged, 56 have been relocated to new,
justified locations in 2004-05. Details of post offices merged as on
31.3.2005 is annexed. (3) In underserved areas like the N.E., to
help sustain existing levels of communication facilities, the
Department has proposed to the Planning Commission the need
to support NRC post offices, which would have been otherwise
downgraded. (4) Given the public resistance to shifting existing
post offices in certain locations, despite the availability of another
post office within the distance norm, and also to expand the
network in a self sustainable manner without the restrictions faced
in the past, the Department is in the process of bringing out a
franchise model which will also have a technology component i.e.
computer facilities, wherever extent possible. A formal consolidation
Plan will be drawn up in consultation with Circles once the
franchise schemes is firmed up.”
13. The Committee note that the Department of Posts have
undertaken the exercise of consolidation/rationalising the network
in such a way, which will not result in reduction in the access that
customers currently have to post office facilities, as per approved
norms. The Committee further note that a formal consolidation Plan
would be drawn up in consultation with Circles once the franchise
scheme is firmed up. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
major issues like re-deployment, use of modern technology,
outsourcing, franchsing and serving underserved areas with financial
viability should be rightly addressed to in the consolidation plan.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made
in this regard.

9
Modernisation and upgradation of technology
Recommendation (No. 7)
14. Stressing the need for the induction of modern technology, the
Committee in their earlier report had recommended as follows:—
“The Committee note that the ‘Expert Committee on Excellence’ in
Postal Services has emphasised the need for the induction of
technology in various Postal mail and agency functions with a
view to transform the traditional Postal Services into a modern
high technology service. The Committee are happy to note that
the Department has taken the recommendations of the Expert
Committee in the right spirit and has allocated 79% of its
10th Plan Budget towards modernisation and upgradation of
technology. In the implementation process the Department have
started installing Multi Purpose Counter Machines, Satellite money
order network with VSATs and ESMOs in the Post Offices. The
Department have also introduced electronic franking machines in
large offices, computerized saving banks operation, postal life
insurance operations and has improved stamps and seals in a
phased manner.”
15. The Committee further note that in the wake of economic
liberalisation and competition, the Department have set up separate
directorates for promoting PLI, Business Development and Parcel and
Logistics. More than 500 Head POs have been placed in the LAN
environment upto X Plan. During X Plan the Department has a
proposal to link these POs and also the set of new POs to be
computerized through virtual private network to a centralized data
centre. The Department has computerised 506 Head Offices, 1266 Sub
POs and 69 Centres etc. apart from taking care of core postal
transactions, such as booking of registered articles, money orders,
acceptance of bills. These machines are also used in various financial
services including savings bank operations. The Committee further note
that a pilot project for satellite Money Order Scheme—SATMO was
executed in the VIII Plan by installing VSATs in POs which is a quick
transmission of MOs instead of traditional mode of payment/
transmission of money order, but this facility has not made much
headway as only 10% of the MOs are transmitted through VSATs. The
Committee feel that there has been dismal feedback regarding the
reliability of the VSAT transmission facility and desire that the
Department should take concrete steps to popularise and streamline
the scheme so that VSATs are utilized to their optimum capacity.

10
16. The Department in their reply have stated as under:—
“The Department of Posts started computerizing its post offices
from the early 1990s. The objective of computerization and
networking of post offices is to improve the quality of service.
The Government has approved a plan for induction of computers
in 845 Head Post Offices (HPOs) and 245 major Postal
Administrative Offices (AOs) during the 10th Five Year Plan with
a financial outlay of Rs. 836.27 crore. The scheme was approved
by CCEA in January, 2004. The Department has been able to utilize
most of the funds allocated in 2004-05 for computerization and
networking of post offices. An amount of Rs. 116.53 has been spent
for computerisation of post offices in the financial year 2004-05.
During 2004-05, 839 HPOs, 1533 SOs, 34 AOs and 19 PAOs have
been computerised. In 2005-06, the Department proposes to
computerise more than 3400 SOs. By obtaining special permission
from the Ministry of Finance, the Department has placed purchase
order at DGS & D rate contract for supplying computers and
peripherals in respect of 2860 post offices for the year 2005-06. On
finalization of the new DGS & D rate contract for computers. The
Department will computerize the balance post offices as envisaged
in the Annual Plan for 2005-06.
Money Order Transmission through VSAT Network:
Money orders intended for destinations outside the district of origin
are required to be transmitted through the VSAT network. The
technology inducted in the 8th Plan was upgraded to provide for
High Speed Transmission technology in the 9th Plan. This caused
service problems. These problems have since been sorted out and
efforts are underway to optimise this network, and ensure speedy
delivery of money orders. The functioning of the VSAT system is
being monitored on a daily basis at the Circle and Directorate
levels.
A latest version of the VSAT money order software (version 4.2)
has been provided to Circles, which has special provisions to enable
effective monitoring and provide value additions. The critical areas
resulting in complaints about VSAT money orders have also been
identified and corrective action initiated. One of the main problems
was in respect of non-receipt of acknowledgements. In 2003-04,
complaints on account of non-receipt of acknowledgements were
54% of the total money order complaints. The concerted action
taken in this regard has resulted in drop in percentage of
complaints on this account to 47% in 2004-05. Currently, on an
average, 60,000 money orders are transmitted through VSAT

11
Network for 150 VSAT stations and 1350 Extended Satellite Money
Order stations. However there have been occasions when the
quantum of Money Orders sent through VSAT have touched
95,000/day thereby confirming the system’s ability to handle the
projected volume of traffic.”
17. The Committee note that the Department proposed to
computerise more than 3400 SOs in 2005-2006 by obtaining special
permission from the Ministry of Finance. The Department are stated
to have placed purchase order at DGS&D rate contract for supplying
computers and peripherals in respect of 2860 post offices for the
year 2005-06. On finalisation of the new DGS&D rate contract for
computers, the Department of Posts are going to computerize the
balance post offices as envisaged in the Annual Plan for 2005-06.
The Committee trust that the Department of Posts will lay due
priority for modernisation of Technology with a view to improving
the quality of service. The Committee would also like to be informed
about the progress made in the computerisation process so far.
18. The Committee find that Money Orders intended for
destinations outside the district of origin are required to be
transmitted through the VSAT network. The technology inducted in
the 8th Plan was upgraded to provide for High Speed Transmission
technology in the 9th Plan. This caused service problems which have
been sorted out and efforts are underway to optimize this network
and ensure speedy delivery of money orders. The functioning of the
VSAT system is being monitored on a daily basis at the Circle and
Directorate levels. The Committee also note that a latest version of
the VSAT money order software has been provided to Circles, which
has special provisions to enable effective monitoring and provide
value additions. The critical areas resulting in complaints about VSAT
money orders have also been identified and corrective action initiated.
The Committee desire that the Department should take concrete steps
to popularise and streamline the scheme so that VSATs are utilized
to its optimum level and the complaints made by the public in this
score are effectively brought down.
Franchising Scheme
Recommendation (No. 11)
19. Commenting on the proposed introduciton of franchising as a
strategy for future expansion of the postal network, the Committee
observed the following:—
“The Committee have been informed that the Department has a
proposal for introducing franchising as a strategy for future

12
expansion of the network. This model will focus on unemployed
youths in rural areas, while in the urban and semi-urban areas the
scheme will cover the retired employees of the Department among
other eligible categories. Such POs will be centred around basic
postal services, including value added services, bill collection
facilities as well as retailing services on behalf of other
organisations. The concept of franchising has evolved because the
whole gamut of services could not be provided in the PSSKs which
dealt with limited services ranging from stamp and stationary sale
to registration of letters only. Further, space is a major constraint
in newly emerging urban areas where post offices are not justified
as per norms. Franchising would help revenue earning to the
Department on the one side as well as giving employment to
youth in these areas.
As regards the rural areas the department have stated that it will
help cater to segments, which do not justify a post office on
population and income norms, despite fulfilling distance norms. It
would speed up the computerization process in the rural areas
because the franchisee could avail of credit facilities from institution
and also from other resources like the USO Fund of the DoT, the
provision of urban facilities in rural areas (PURA) scheme which
will otherwise take a long time if the DoP goes about it on its
own.
The Committee are informed that the proposal of franchising is
before the Ministry of Communications & I.T. (DoP) for approval.
The Committee are happy that the DoP has shown great interest
in the scheme and is finding out ways to earn more revenue and
get out of the deficit by thinking purely on commercial lines. The
Committee at the same time desire that DoP in coordination with
DoIT should explore the avenues of setting up of Franchisee Post
Offices in Information Kiosks in the States. In this connection, the
Committee would not put in a word of caution that before taking
a plunge in to franchising the DoP should weigh all the pros and
cons in this regard. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the views of the Department before they actually go in for
implementing the scheme.”
20. The Department of Posts in their action taken reply have stated
as under:—
“The final response of Department of Information Technology of
this Department’s proposal to use post office as one of the nodal

13
points for its community service delivery centres is awaited. The
draft guidelines however indicate that there is no provision to
include post offices in this scheme except where no other alternative
is available. The Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th Plan also speaks
of using post offices for further e-governance initiatives. The
Department recognizes the fact that harnessing technology in these
rural post offices will enhance their capability to provide services
that are relevant to the needs to customers (e.g. information needs,
speedier and more efficient financial services etc.) and thereby
enhance the revenues. This is also a crucial factor in developing a
self-sustainable model in franchising postal services. Hence, these
aspects are all being taken into consideration when formulating
the franchise model, and will be finalized only after consultation
with Ministry of Law etc., wherever required. The Department
will apprise the Committee of the Scheme once it is firmed up.”
21. The Committee find that the final response of the Department
of Information Technology to the proposal of the Department of
Posts to use Post Office as one of the nodal points for their
community service delivery centres is awaited. The Mid Term
Appraisal of the 10th Plan also speaks of using Post Offices for
further e-governance initiatives. The draft guidelines, however,
indicate that there is no provision to include Post Offices in this
scheme except where no other alternative is available. The Committee
trust that the potentials of Post Office in the scheme will be duly
considered and suitably incorporated in the final guidelines.
22. The Committee also note that the Department of Posts are
considering various issues like information needs, speedier and more
efficient financial services etc. while formulating the franchise model,
which will be finalized after consultation with Ministry of Law. The
Committee desire that the Department should expedite the matter
and they be apprised of the progress made in this regard.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (No. 1)
National Postal Policy
The Committee note that to provide cost effective and efficient
Postal Services to the people at large a need for ‘National Postal Policy’
was felt by the Government as far back as in 1992, when in pursuance
of discussions held in the Consultative Committee of the Ministry of
Communications formulation of the Policy was taken up. In their
Fourteenth Report (11th Lok Sabha), the Committee had adversely
commented on the inordinate delay by the Government in formulation
of the ‘National Postal Policy’. Further, the Committee were informed
that the ‘Consultative Committee’ attached to the Ministry of
Communications at their meeting held on 5th February, 1999 discussed
the ‘Draft National Postal Policy’ and also made certain suggestions
regarding expansion of postal services in rural areas, induction of
modern technology, private sector participation in provision of postal
services, remunerative pricing and giving enhanced functional
autonomy to the Department. The Committee regret that the policy
paper is still under reformulation.
The Committee are deeply concerned over the long delay in
formulation of ‘National Postal Policy’ which is hanging fire since
1992. They also deplore the delay of more than 6 years in reformulating
the draft policy in the light of the suggestions made in the Consultative
Committee meeting held in February, 1999. In the opinion of the
Committee, a comprehensive Policy will give a meaningful direction
to the Department for fulfilling its obligation to the people at large as
well as to the Nation, therefore they feel that it is all the more necessary
to bring out the ‘National Postal Policy’ without further loss of time.
In view of the above and also the beautiful vision for Resurgent
India Post outlined by the Hon’ble President during his address at the
inauguration of the sesquicentennial celebration of India Post, the
Committee strongly urge upon the Department to formulate the policy
at the earliest in order to meet the challenges of the modern day
competitive environment, revenue deficit of the Department and

15
Universal Service Obligation of the Department etc. They feel that the
nation should not be further deprived of the benefits of the Policy,
which will accrue to the people. The Committee would like to be
constantly kept informed about progress made in regard to finalisation
of the National Postal Policy in a fixed timeframe.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the concern expressed by the
Standing Committee regarding the need to bring out a national Postal
Policy at the earliest.
In this context it is clarified that the Department is in the process
of updating the provisions of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 to make
it more relevant to the times and empower the Postal Services Board
so that the Department enjoys more functional autonomy. The
Government has also recognised the need to clearly identify the
Universal Service Obligation and the cost of fulfilling it, which is
presently included as a part of the Department’s budgetary deficit/
loss, and examine the scope for providing explicit subsidy to support
these activities. A major exercise to review the system in terms of
structure, products, processes, resources, accounting and pricing
structure, technology requirements, etc., is also underway to identify
how best the Department can meet the twin challenges of becoming
commercially viable while continuing to fulfil its Universal Service
Obligation. This is being done through an Inter Ministerial Group set
up by the Cabinet Secretariat and through a professional consultant
engaged for this purpose.
The inputs from these initiatives are required to reflect the
Government’s stand on a number of crucial issues that are an integral
part of any National Postal Policy. These include (1) definition of
Universal Service Obligation (USO) and the products and services to
be covered under it; (2) the cost of providing this USO and the manner
of funding it; (3) the regulatory mechanism to ensure level playing
field among competitors in the non-USO segment to ensure
transparency in the accounting of support given for USO; (4) inputs
for deciding on the framework for ensuring the gradual opening of
the controlled market to competition and the role of private service
providers in USO; (5) the pricing strategy; and (6) the roadmap for
future development of the Department by leveraging its assets and
achieving financial self-sufficiency. The report of the Inter-Ministerial
Group and the consultant are expected by end-October, 2005. Efforts
are being made to place the IPO Act Amendment Bill in Parliament
after approval of Cabinet in the Winter Session. The drafting of the
National Postal Policy will be taken up once the reports of Inter-

16
Ministerial Group and the consultant are available as it will help the
Department to reflect its long term goals and strategies in the policy
in line with the data generated through these initiatives.
Recommendation (No. 3)
Tenth Five Year Plan
The Committee are concerned to note that Department of Posts
(DoP) had proposed an outlay of Rs. 3689.13 crore for the Tenth Plan
period and the same has been drastically reduced to Rs. 1350 crore, as
a result of which the Department has been forced to curtail the outlay
on almost all its important schemes. Outlay for the Expansion of Postal
Network has been reduced to Rs. 37.27 crore from the projected outlay
of Rs. 41.25 crore which itself was miserly projected vis-a-vis the task
ahead. On computerization of Post Offices, projections have been
reduced by more than fifty percent i.e. from Rs. 1,876.71 crore to
Rs. 836.27 crore, which made the DoP to scale down the computerization
process to merely 150 post offices against original projection of 5000
post offices. Similarly on important schemes like upgradation of
customer care centres, modernization of operative/working systems,
upgradation and promotion of philately, training, development and
designing of work sites, substantial reduction has been made in the
proposed outlay which is bound to affect the schemes adversely.
The Committee in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants
pertaining to DoP have been very emphatic about providing adequate
financial allocation to the Postal Department, as it has remained one
of the most neglected Department. According to the Committee, such
allocations have become more imperative for the Department in order
to move at a rapid pace of modernization and technology upgradation.
The Committee feel that absorption of the modern technology by the
Department in the present competitive, liberalized and technologically
advanced scenario, would greatly assist the Department to come over
their huge revenue deficit quickly, which is accumulating over the
years.
The Committee therefore, impress upon the DoP to take up the
issue of adequate financial support to them with the Government at
the highest level so that it is able to achieve twin benefits of
modernizing itself speedily to face the competition confidently and
maintaining its confidence with the people by serving them in a
qualitative manner.

17
Action taken by the Government
The concern of the Committee about the need to invest in
technology to compete with other service providers in this liberalised,
technologically advanced scenario and to reduce the revenue deficit at
the earliest is noted. The Department shares this concern, which is
why over 79% of the funds allocated in the 10th Plan is earmarked
for modernising and computerising the postal system. Today, even as
the Department is making all out efforts to utilise these Plan funds
and achieve the physical targets, overcome shortfalls in the initial years
due to delayed start in implementing the computerisation and
technology induction programmes, every effort is being made to seek
additional funds to fully computerise all Departmental post offices.
For this purpose, an additional sum of Rs. 625 crore has been sought
from the Planning Commission. MoC&IT has also written to the Prime
Minister and also to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, seeking
this additional allocation at the earliest to obtain the maximum benefit
in terms of efficiency and productivity from computerisation.
Recommendation (No. 8)
Speed Post
The Committee note that there have been substantial growth in
the Speed Post business of DoP from 1997-98 onwards. The revenue of
Rs. 77.95 crore earned in 1997-98 has increased to Rs. 298.00 crore in
2003-2004. Although, the projected revenue of DoP for the year
2004-05 is Rs. 514.29 crore, but the overall market share of the Speed
Post Business is only 10% (approx.), which according to the Committee
is abysmally poor as compared to the express market.
The Committee are highly perturbed to note that in spite of the
efforts made by the Department like upgradation of the Speed Post
Service through internal track and trace system, induction of technology,
mechanization of delivery, monitoring of quality, focus on customers,
book now pay later scheme and discount to corporate customers and
major chunk of the business,  i.e. ninety per cent of the express market
is still being controlled by the courier service. The Committee feel that
with such a huge network alongwith other facilities available with the
Department, it should be able to capture a larger share by introducing
better marketing strategies. The Committee further feel that Speed Post
Services can be made self-sustaining by prudent handling and with
the help of technology induction, the Department of Posts can further
improve the business products by enhancing the quality of service
and providing customized service to different segments of the
population.

18
The Committee also find that the charge of the Speed Post for
local mails and long distance mails are almost at par, whereas the
private couriers charge less for local mails. Further, the Department is
facing problem of securing assured transportation for their mail, which
may be the reason for the business going to the private couriers. In
the opinion of the Committee the Department should explore
possibilities of partnership with the private sector for assured
transportation or look into the possibility of having their own dedicated
transport for increasing efficiency and optimising costs.
The Committee, also desire that the flexibility in operation
alongwith quick decision-making with regard to the fixation of price
through delegation of power to the circle levels may be looked into.
Action Taken by the Government
In its Speed Post business, the Department has continued to focus
on induction of technology and better marketing efforts to promote
the product, improve efficiency and provide more value additions to
customers. Since 2003-04, Speed Post offices have been upgraded in 82
Speed Post centres and 188 Booking offices of Speed Post centres while
215 booking offices and 307 delivery offices have been computerised.
Efforts are underway to computerise the remaining offices handling
Speed Post operations in order to increase the network of track and
trace. This will help the Department to give the delivery status of
Speed Post articles to customers expeditiously, resulting in increased
customer satisfaction. Speed Post facilities have been expanded to 37
more centres. To improve the quality of service, a system of Quarterly
Complaint Analysis has been introduced from April, 2005 which helps
to identify areas requiring improvement. The field units are asked to
take corrective action and also to provide skill enhancement to staff to
meet customer aspirations.
The Department is also offering customised solutions based on the
requirement of the customer. Tailor made solutions have been made
available to UPSC, SSC, IGNOU, SBI, etc., and Heads of Circles have
been authorised to approve business packages in consultation with
their IFAs. As a result of this, the revenues from Speed Post touched
Rs. 354 crore in 2004-05, showing growth rate of 19%, which is more
than the estimated growth rate of the express market—estimated to be
around 17.5% per year according to Kurt Salmon and Associates report
2000-2001.
Efforts are also being made to improve the marketing of Speed
Post. In the current year, a provision of Rs. 4.5 crore has been provided

19
for promotion of various premium products including Speed Post as
against Rs. 2 crore in the previous year. The following measures are
proposed to be taken for promoting the product: (a) Publicity efforts
in the electronic as well as print media; (b) Market intelligence is
being gathered on Speed Post pricing, rebate, commission, etc., offered
by private courier. The market survey is slated for the year 2005-06;
(c) A premium Speed Post service is proposed to be introduced which
will be offered to corporate customers, who would have to pay a
premium for getting better services. This Premium Service may be
introduced in the financial year 2005-06; (d) A media plan on the lines
used by other services like DHL is being prepared for promoting
premium products like Speed Post; (e) Internal marketing of Speed
Post is also being carried out.
The Department is also currently engaged in an exercise to
rationalise Speed post pricing. As far as improving transportation of
Speed Post articles is concerned, action is underway to enter into
agreement with private transporters for assured transportation of
consignments under Logistics Post. Once this system is put in place
and tested, this transportation facility could be used for expedite Speed
Post articles wherever it is found to be advantageous. The possibility
of having the Department’s own transportation arrangements, especially
in areas like the NE, to ensure timely delivery of time sensitive mails
is also being explored.
Recommendation (No. 10)
Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras
The Committee note that the Panchayat Sanchar Sevak Kendras
(PSSKs) were opened with the sole purpose of providing cheap means
of postal facilities in rural areas. They also observe that the opposition
of staff unions to this scheme was not the sole reason for its failure.
The major reason for failure of the PSSKs Scheme appears to be the
lack of interest shown by the panchayats.
The Committee are informed that in pursuance of an intensive
exercise carried out by the Department, they have been able to pin-
down some of the reasons for the failure of PSSKs. Amongst these
reasons, are the lack of interest of the gram panchayats, lack of
providing suitable accommodation and infrastructure equipment to the
Panchayat Kendras, frequent changes in the PSSKs agents which are
generally amongst relatives of the Sarpanch/Gram Pradhan, lack of
adequate publicity and misappropriation of the entitled allowance to
the volunteer who are running the PSSKs, are some of the reasons of
its failure.

20
The Committee are informed that out of 7,375 PSSKs, 1819 PSSKs
have given nil transactions during the year. This tantamount to 25%
of the PSSKs not being in business throughout the year.
The Committee are constrained to note that the dismal performance
of PSSKs as well as the reasons on account of which the PSSKs fail.
The Committee desire that the Department should initiate a dialogue
with the Gram Panchayats and come out with an effective model of
the last mile delivery mechanism. The Department should also consider
associating women organisations/mahila mandals in these discussions.
Action Taken by the Government
The concerns of the Committee on Panchayat Sanchar Seva Kendras
(PSSKs) have been taken note of. Given the lack of interest in PSSKs
by the Panchayats, as reflected in the independent evaluation conducted
by the Planning Commission and based on their recommendation that
the Department should take over this scheme from the Panchayats, a
decision has been taken to revamp PSSKs and make their products
relevant to the needs of rural customers. The revamping is being
undertaken as part of the exercise to formulate the franchise scheme.
The Committee’s suggestion to involve women’s organizations etc. will
be incorporated in the draft guidelines for setting up franchised outlets.
Recommendation (No. 13)
Postal Life Insurance/Rural Postal Life Insurance
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the
Department of Posts would like to introduce many more attractive
schemes in comparison to similar schemes which are available with
the LIC and other private insurers to enable the Department of Posts
to get varied and greater business. Whereas the Life Insurance
Corporation has more than 100 schemes for the public, the Department
of Posts has only 5 schemes in the PLI and RPLI sectors. The
Committee have also been informed that the difficulty lies in the
sanction of the new products because the Ministry of Finance governs
the Postal Life Insurance and the Rural Postal Life Insurance Schemes
and all other insurance schemes are regulated by the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA).
The Committee are further informed that, whereas, the DoP can
change the scope of the PLI and RPLI Schemes, which the Ministry of
Finance should not have any reservations to approve, while the
introduction of entirely new products viz., Group Insurance of BSNL

21
employees which is regulated by the IRDA will have to have the
approval of IRDA. Further, since the DoP  has got exemption under
section 118(c) of the Insurance Act, 1938 and under section 44(d) of
L.I.C. Act, 1956, it cannot introduce new products coming under the
jurisdiction of IRDA.
The Committee have noted with great surprise that in spite of the
exemptions that DoP enjoys the market share of PLI and RPLI in the
year 2002 is only 1.25% and 0.27% respectively of the insurance market.
This, the Committee note is abysmally low and a lot of work can still
be done for the promotion of these two schemes, especially in RPLI.
The Committee are of the opinion that with the penetration
available with the DoP in Rural India and the advantage it is gaining
through the Special Deposit Rates through the exemption, DoP should
concentrate on increasing their business in the PLI and RPLI with
greater zeal. DoP should have suitable variations in their schemes of
PLI and RPLI and get their agents to generate greater business in the
field. As the DoP by virtue of its large reach has decided to get into
financial services business, it should explore the possibility of floating
a new SPV (Special Purpose Vehicle) to tap the available insurance
market.
As regards training of PLI agents in IRDA accredited institutes all
over the country, the Committee are of the opinion that DoP should
work out a scheme with IRDA wherein its agents go through a
specialized training which will meet the requirements of DoP .
Action Taken by the Government
In the matter of introducing new schemes PLI Directorate has sent
a proposal to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance
New Delhi vide letter No. 26-02/2005-LI dated 30/3/2005 seeking of
approval for introduction of Children Policy as a rider option in PLI.
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, New Delhi vide
their letter No. 97(36)/Ins.II/2003 dated 5/6/2005, informed that the
matter was taken up with IRDA who desired to discuss the proposal
in person before giving their views in the matter. The proposal was
discussed on 28.7.2005 with IRDA and they have informed that
necessary views in the matter would be sent to the Ministry of Finance
directly. The discussion with IRDA was positive. The above product
shall be introduced in PLI and Rural PLI after getting approval of
Ministry of Finance in the matter.

22
Efforts are being made to increase the market share of PLI and
RPLI by increasing the target for business/sum assured in each Circle
and by improving the quality of service. After the year of 2002 the
business in PLI and RPLI have increased manifold due to the sincere
efforts made at all levels. Details of business generated in the last
4 years are given below:
Year Business No. of policies Premium Total Fund
procured procured Income Balance
(in crores) (in crores) (in crores)
PLI
2001-02 1710.02 1,72,163 501.85 5090.16
2002-03 2110.21 2,12,967 591.84 5797.30
2003-04 2846.66 2,76,880 698.17 6619.81
2004-05 4087.66 3,80,000 841.49 Not yet
(Unaudited) compiled
RPLI
2001-02 1696.85 3,68,527 94.70 341.05
2002-03 3347.94 7,02,542 171.35 510.69
2003-04 5949.97 10,83,152 245.32 756.48
2004-05 9069.51 15,85,119 613.68 Not yet
(Unaudited) compiled
The Combined market share of PLI/RPLI for the year ending
2004-05 is assessed to be 5.42%. The business and premium income in
RPLI is increasing annually since 2001-02 and efforts are being made
to exploit this potential. The scope for growth in PLI is limited since
the potential clientele is restricted.
The schemes in PLI and RPLI have been given wide publicity by
advertising the same in leading news papers throughout the country,
and in TV channels, after main news in National and Regional
languages in the country. The advertisement through Mail Vehicle is
also being done for publicity, to create awareness of the products using
media available in house.
The Department has also made progress in its efforts to provide
training of the agents through IRDA accredited institutes. Some

23
institutes did not entertain our agents for training under the plea that
PLI does not come under IRDA. The matter was taken up with IRDA
and finally it has been decided in consultation with IRDA that the
training to these agents shall be imparted by institutes accredited by
the Insurance Institute of India. Necessary action is under process for
imparting training to those agents who are yet to be covered.
The Ministry of Finance has decided to withdraw the facility of
paying interest at Special Deposit rate on POIF/RPOIF and the
Department is in the process of establishing its own mechanism for
investment of POIF/RPOIF as per IRDA pattern. Actually the
exemptions to PLI under the Insurance Act and the LIC Act are now
proving to be disadvantageous to the Department as it is not able to
expand its clientele under PLI due to the fact that the insurance cover
is limited to a particular category of persons, and we are also not
allowed to introduce new products/schemes to popularise the PLI and
RPLI.
Therefore, the proposal for coming under IRDA is also under
consideration. If PLI/RPLI comes within the ambit of IRDA, the
Department would be able to sell its products to the general public
and new products can also be introduced to make the schemes more
popular. The Department is also reviewing the newly introduced
Agency system in order to make the marketing base strong enough to
tap potential markets.
Recommendation (No. 15)
Revenue Deficit
During examination of Demands for Grants (2004-05) the Committee
were informed that the Department of Posts is facing a revenue deficit
of approximately Rs. 1640 crores during the current year. The
Committee are further informed that an amount of Rs. 600 crore every
year goes as subsidy mostly to the rural Post Offices from where the
returns are very poor. The other sources from where the revenue deficit
is accumulating is the pay, salary, allowances and pensions to the
employees of the Department and the remuneration paid by Ministry
of Finance for Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) work done on their
behalf which is paid less than the rates agreed for payment to the
Department by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee have also been
informed that the Department of Posts have been categorised as
revenue earning Department and not a utility Department and hence
it has to earn what it spends and simultaneously make profits.

24
The Committee are of the strong opinion that service, whether it
is public or to the Government goes at a price. They are also of the
opinion that if an agreement has been reached between the two
departments, it should be honoured, specially in the case of Department
of Posts, which have been declared to be a revenue earning Department.
The Committee feel that the Ministry of Finance should abide by its
agreement in letter and spirit. The Committee would also impress
upon the Department to work on commercial lines and improve upon
the services, technology, multiplicity of services etc. and earn sizeable
profit so that its deficit is wiped out at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
As per Revised Estimates of the year 2004-05, upto March (Sy.),
deficit of the Department of Posts works out to Rs. 1605.18 crores
which can be revised on finalisation of accounts.
Regarding remuneration payable by the Ministry of Finance for
Post Office Saving Bank work done on their behalf, Ministry of Finance
has been addressed through a D.O. letter No. 95-178/95-SB (Pt.) dated
11.5.2005 at the level of Member (Development) to restore the rates of
remuneration based on annual escalation of 10% for the financial year
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 and payment of arrears. (copy
annexed). Their response is awaited.
Meanwhile efforts are being made to improve the quality of services
in POSB through computerization, to increase the range of financial
services offered through Post Offices and even to promote POSB by
setting revenue targets to Circles. The effort is to leverage the reach of
the Department to the optimum extent possible and retail services in
a manner that meets the growing aspirations of the public. The setting
up of Postal Finance Marts is an initiative that is being taken up in
this context, to meet the needs of the customers for one stop interface
that will provide a range of services in a computerized, upgraded
environment. The objective is to meet customer aspiration on par with
services provided through other service providers like Banks in the
financial sector.

25
JYOTSNA DIESH
Member (Development)
Postal Services Board
Tel. : (+91-11) 2309 6080
: (+91-11) 2303 6612
Fax : (+91-11) 2309 6081
Email : jyotsna@indiapost.org
D.O. No. 95-178/95-SB (PI) Dated : 11.5.2005
Dear Ms. Vas,
Kindly refer to DO. No. 20-1/03-BGT (PA) dated 21.4.2001 from
Secretary (Posts) to Secretary (Expenditure) followed by reminder dated
14.10.04, 4.11.2004 & 10.01.05 relating to revised estimates 2003-04 and
Budget Estimates 2004-05 in respect of Major Head : 8008.03.101—
Payment of remuneration to Department of Posts for Management of
Saving Bank and Savings Certificate work. No reply has so far been
received in this regard.
2. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the
Recommendation No. 116 (Copy enclosed) of the Sixteenth Report of
the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2004-05) on
“Demands for Grants (2005-06)” pertaining to the Department of Posts
wherein the Committee has impressed upon the Ministry of Finance
to abide by its terms of agreement and enhance the per account/per
certificate remuneration by 10% every year. Keeping in view the facts
and figures mentioned in the above mentioned DO letter and the
recommendation of the Committee, it is once again requested to restore
the rates of remuneration based on an annual escalation of 10% for
the financial years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 and provide
arrear payments an account of financial year 2002-03 too. A response
in the matter may kindly be given so that Department of Posts can
furnish reply to Standing Committee in the matter.
With regards,
Your sincerely,
Sd/-
(JYOTSNA DIESH)
Ms. L.M. Vas,
Joint Secretary (Budget),
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs,
North Block
New Delhi-110 001
Copy to:
JS & FA, Dak Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001 for kind information
and necessary action.
(JYOTSNA DIESH)
÷Ê⁄UÃËÿ «UÊ∑§ Áﬂ÷Êª
‚¢øÊ⁄U •ı⁄U ‚ÍøŸÊ ¬˝ılÙÁª∑§Ë ◊¢òÊÊ‹ÿ
«UÊ∑§ ÷ﬂŸ, ‚¢‚Œ ◊Êª¸,
Ÿß¸ ÁŒÀÔ‹Ë-vvÆ ÆÆv
Department of Posts, India
Ministry of Communications &
Dak Bhawan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi-110 001

26
Recommendation (No. 16)
Complaints/Grievances
The Committee are constrained to note that the number of
complaints received in respect of Registered letters and Money Orders
is quite high and the rate of disposal of the complaints is quite low.
The complaints received with regard to registered letters during the
years 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 were 244276, 214553 and
198101 and the pendency for the same years were 16731, 15356 and
13769 respectively. The complaints received in regard to Money Orders
for these same years were 411730, 226180 and 492501 and the pendency
were respectively 23347, 25514 and 31459.
The Committee feel that to be successful and competitive in
business the rate of complaints should be very low. The DoP has a
grievances redressal machinery set up at the Post Office level, divisional
level, circle/regional level and the Directorate level, but still the
pendency of complaints is quite high. There should be an accountability
mechanism put in place to have a check on the number of complaints
received and their disposal. The Committee, therefore, desire that DoP
should make all-out efforts to check the number of complaints as also
to dispose of these complaints/grievances expeditiously.
Action Taken by the Government
Though the number of complaints received in respect of Registered
Letters and Money Orders is maximum, the traffic handled in respect
of these services is also high. The complaint to traffic ratio in case of
registered letters is 0.088% and for money orders it is 0.36%. The
complaint in these cases arise primarily due to non-receipt of
acknowledgements, as 75% of Registered Letter complaints, and 50%
of Money Order complaints during 2003-04, relate to this account alone.
As a result of steps taken to streamline the process of handling
acknowledgement cards in transmission, the percentage of such
complaints have come down to 61% and 47% respectively during
2004-05. Steps are also being taken to streamline the operations relating
to these services by induction of technology and simplification of
procedures to increase efficiency in delivering these services.
As far as the pendency of complaints is concerned, majority of the
pending complaints relate to the immediately preceding period at the
end of the financial year. More than 90% of the pending cases are less
than three months old. Less than 2% of the complaints take more than
6 months for settlement and the time taken in such cases is long

27
because of factors like incomplete details, non-availability of papers,
non-availability of the complainant/addressees etc. The Department is
conscious of the need to settle all complaints within a specified time-
frame, and it has a monitoring and accountability mechanism in place
to ensure achievement of this objective. The time norms for settlement
of complaints are being publicized through the Citizens Charter of the
Department.
Step is are being continuously taken to improve efficiency in settling
complaints. The Department has introduced a web-based software to
interconnect the 1116 Computerized Customer Care Centres (CCCCs)
set up across the country to facilitate faster exchange of information
on grievances of customers. It facilitates constant monitoring of the
functioning of these centres online, and enables the customers to register
complaints on its web site www.indiapost.gov.in. These steps are
expected to further bring down the average time taken for settlement
of complaints.
Over and above these steps the Department has taken the proactive
step of reaching out to its customers to get their feedback and
suggestions on its services without waiting for them to approach it
with their complaints. This is a customer friendly step taken by the
Department to gauge customer expectations and to meet them in
today’s competitive environment. Post Forums have been formed in
important post offices involving customers of the area as part of the
Citizens’ Charter, and phone calls, questionnaires and personal visits
by officers of the Department to important customer groups are being
utilized to know the pulse of the customers in respect of postal services.
Recommendation  (No. 17)
Human Resource Development
The Committee note that the Department has conducted in-service-
training/management development programmes for the Group ‘A’
officers during IX Plan and Refresher training for inspectors and postal/
sorting Assistants including Supervisors. Keeping in mind that it is a
service oriented organisation the Committee desire that the training
should be fine tuned to reducing the number of complaints and re-
enforcing the good image of reliability and service that the Department
enjoys.
Action Taken by the Government
At induction level the subjects relating to Customer Care and Public
Complaints and redressal of grievances were included in the Induction

28
training programmes of Group “C” Staff, Inspector of Posts and officers
of Group “A” & “B” level. Apart from these two subjects, matters
relating to customer care and public relations are also covered during
training, while teaching subjects like Delivery of Mails, Money Orders,
Counter Operations and claims relating to Savings Bank/Savings
Certificates.
In-service training given to staff periodically also includes subjects
on customer care and public relations to update their knowledge
relating to customer relations. Postal Training Centres are also
organizing special courses on Customer Care for one-week duration
for the Postal/Sorting Assistants including supervisors and Inspectors
of Posts. The following topics have been included in the curriculum of
Customer Care courses:
(i) Customer importance
(ii) Customer identification
(iii) Customer delight
(iv) Handling difficult customers
(v) Citizens Charter
(vi) Handling of complaints and settlement of claims.
In-service training to postmen and GDS BPMs are new initiatives
that the Department has taken up in recent years. This is in response
to the recognition that there is need to provide these employees a
better appreciation of the services that the Department provides, its
impact on society, their role in providing quality service to customers
and to meet the customer aspirations in this regard. In the case of
GDS BPMs, a two day training module is currently being provided,
conducted by the inspectorial staff at the sub-divisional level. From
2005-06 similar training will also be provided to the Delivery Agents.
These training initiatives are crucial for improving customer service,
especially in view of the proposals to use the services of the GDS
BPMs/Delivery Agents as well as postmen to retail more services,
collect and disseminate more information etc., thereby ensuring
customer appreciation.
Recommendation (No. 18)
Jammu and Kashmir
The Committee are constrained to note that the 27 DSOs and 42
BOs were closed in J&K due to militant activities during 1992-93. Out
of these 5 DSOs and 18 EDBOs have been reopened. The Committee

29
trust that the Department will give utmost attention to the people so
that the closed post offices can be reopened again. It also becomes
imperative in the wake of the announcement made by the State
Government regarding payment of pensions through Money Orders.
The Committee therefore feel that the needful be done at the earliest
in best interest of the people of J&K.
Action Taken by the Government
Out of 27 Departmental Sub Post Offices (DSOs), 1 Extra
Departmental Sub Office (EPSO) and 42 Extra Departmental Branch
Post Offices (EDBOs) closed in J&K previously due to militant activities,
all have been reopened except 3 Branch offices in Chachwan, Ind and
Deeda located in Udhampur District.
Of the 27 Departmental Sub Post Offices (DSOs), 21 have been
reopened at their original locations while 5 have been relocated to
needy, newly developed colonies since there is another post office at
an average distance of 1 km away from the earlier locations of these
5 post offices which are catering to the areas previously served by
them. One Departmental Sub Post Office has been merged with another
post office located hardly 100 meters away from its previous location.
Similarly 38 Branch Offices have been reopened at their original
location while one has been relocated to a needy area because there
is another sub post office half a kilometre away which caters to this
area.
The relocation/merger of post offices, which do not fulfil the
distance norm, is part of the strategy of the Department to consolidate
the network in consonance with the policy directives contained in the
10th Plan in this regard.
The 3 Branch Offices (BOs) in Udhampur District continue to
operate from Sangldan area of Udhampur division due to the prevailing
militancy in these areas. Postal services to such areas are provided by
these Branch Offices (BOs) after assessing ground level situation and
at times with the assistance of the police.
Recommendation (No. 19)
North-East
Keeping in view that a 10% of the budget has been earmarked for
the development of the North-East the Committee feel that close
monitoring for the optimal use of the funds may be done so that
efforts made by the Department for providing better postal facilities in
these areas could yield desired results.

30
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts has 19 Plan schemes for implementation
in the current year of which 14 schemes are being implemented in the
North East. The outlay for all these 14 Plan schemes in the North East
is Rs. 15.23 crore out of an overall outlay of Rs. 354 crore, which
constitutes only 4.3% of the total outlay.
The Department is finding it difficult to invest larger percentage
of Plan outlay to reach the requirement of 10% of the budget for the
North East region for the following reasons:
1. The level of capital investment required for most Plan
activities is low except for induction technology and
construction of buildings. The outlay required for
computerising administrative and accounts offices selected
for coverage in the North East region under the 10th Plan,
based on certain defined parameters adopted for the whole
country, does not provide enough scope to invest adequate
volume of funds to meet the 10% norms. In fact, while
only post offices with three hands or more are being covered
in the rest of the country, a decision has been taken during
Mid Term Appraisal to computerise even 2-handed post
offices in the North East as a special case. But even this
additional investment is not substantial enough to help the
Department to cover 10% of the investment made in the
rest of the country.
2. There is scope for more investment in developing the
Department’s own infrastructure in terms of buildings for
operative offices, providing facilities for transmission of mails
(so that not only basic services but even time sensitive
services like Speed Post can be improved), and also for
sustaining the network and providing greater access to postal
services. However, there are certain restrictions on the use
of funds in these areas. In the case of buildings, Planning
Commission gives low priority for construction so that the
Department is unable to invest beyond a limit in the North
Eastern region due to requirements in other arrears.
In so far as transportation is concerned, the economy orders
imposed by Ministry of Finance on purchase of vehicles
was made applicable even to purchase of mail vans, etc., so
that the provision sought for the North Eastern region could

31
to be utilised. Further, with the embargo on creation of
posts, even the provision of driver’s posts for the new
vehicles has become a problem. A proposal for securing
exemption from the ban on purchase of vehicles for North
East and creation of posts is in the process of being taken
up with Ministry of Finance since the investment is required
for operational reasons.
In so far as expansion of the network is concerned, under
the 10th Plan the Department is being given a one time
support of Rs. 4000/BO and Rs. 10,000/SO for meeting non-
recurring cost, while 96% of the cost of maintaining a BO
relates to recurring expenditure. On an average, a BO with
one GDS BPM costs about Rs. 31,000/annum while DSO
with on SPM and minimum complement of staff costs
Rs. 3,02,060/annum. 66 2/3% of the cost of a BO in normal
rural areas is being subsidised. However, it is estimated
that 177 BOs out of a total of 6240 BOs and 945 DSOs out
of a total of 37 DSOs in the North Eastern Region earn less
than the minimum revenues that they are expected to
generate, while 151 PSSKs have nil transactions. This entire
cost is being subsidised by the Department since no explicit
subsidy is provided by the Government for this purpose,
nor is any recurring Plan support being given for the new
post offices opened under the 10th Plan.
3. These issues have been taken up by the Department with
DONER and the Committee of Secretaries. DONER has been
advised by CoS to identify what could be the realistic levels
of investments that can be possibly made by those
Departments which are finding it difficult to adhere to the
10% norm. This Department was also asked to indicate the
norms that were felt necessary to be relaxed to facilitate
more investments in the North East. The issues mentioned
at pre-paras have been informed to DONER.
Meanwhile, the Department continues to implement the
approved Plan schemes and introduce new facilities through
the existing infrastructure. Every effort is being made to
achieve the existing physical and financial targets and to
identify the special needs of the region so that these can be
included in the Vision 2020 document being prepared for
the North Eastern region, and for which special support
can be sought in future Plans.

32
Recommendation (No. 20)
Non-Returnable Contribution (NRC) Post Offices
The Committee are informed that there are in all 1453 Non-
Returnable Contribution (NRC) Post Offices in the whole of the country.
They also understand NRC Post Offices are opened on special
conditions of payment and request either by the State Governments or
the party, which desires the retention of post office.
The Committee are constrained to note that arrears to tune of
Rs. 31.90 crore are still with these post offices that are situated in the
States of Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradsh, J&K, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, North-Eastern States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Meghalaya, Orissa,
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. The Committee are further
surprised to note that the further retention of a NRC Post Office,
which does not pay its contribution is extended for the period for
which experimental post offices are kept, but however, in these post
offices which are having arrears, the Department of Posts have failed
to take any concrete and strict action against the party that too even
after the expiry of the experimental period. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken, if any, by the Department of Posts
against those erring State Governments/individuals to recover the
amounts. A detailed list may also be forwarded for the amounts that
are pending as arrears against each of such post offices and the dates
on which the erring post office was converted into an experiment post
office.
The Committee would also like the Department of Posts to forward
the recommendation of the Committee to the erring State Governments
and impress upon them to clear all the arrears as early as possible. In
the case of individual post offices which were opened on the request
of individual/factory/mill/party, the Committee would recommend that
these post offices may be shut down immediately as it would not be
prudent to bear the burden of these post offices year after year without
any signs of recovery.
Action Taken by the Government
The details of amounts pending as NRC dues against each State
is given at Annexure. There is no action that the Department can take
against the erring State Governments except to close/downgrade the
post offices opened under the NRC scheme. Closure would militate
against the principles of Universal Service Obligation as most of them,

33
especially in HP , NE, Uttaranchal etc. are located in remote, hilly,
inaccessible terrain having no access to communication facilities. While
action has been taken to downgrade a few post offices in accordance
with quantum of its workload, one option is to gradually  convert
such offices into franchised outlets. Secondly, the Department has
already taken up with Planning Commission a proposal that NRC
post offices in the NE should be provided Plan support. A suitable
allocation has been received for this purpose in BE 2005-06. For the
balance pending amount, the matter is proposed to be placed before
the Inter State  Council for a final decision in the matter.
In the case of NRC post offices opened on the basis of sponsorship
from individuals/factory/mill etc., while some of the defaulting cases
have been closed, there is difficulty in closing others, since the nearest
post office is located more than 3 kms. away. Hence closure will result
in depriving public the level of access to facilities that they currently
enjoy. However wherever the distance norm is not being maintained,
orders have already been given to merge/relocate the offices, and this
is being done in a phased manner.

34
ANNEXURE
AMOUNT OUTSTANDING AGAINST STATE GOVTS. AND STATE
GOVT. UNDERTAKINGS AS SPONSORS OF POS OPENED IN THE
ABSENCE OF FULFILMENT OF INCOME NORMS AND GIST OF
RESPONSES RECEIVED FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS
Sl.No. Circle No. of NRC POs Amount Gist of responses received
as on 31.3.2003 outstanding at from the State Govts.
present from
Govt. & Govt.
undertakings
DSO EDSO EDBO
 12 3 4 56 7
 1. Andhra Pradesh 15
 2. Assam 7
 3. Bihar 160 16599478.64 Matter under examination
with Bihar Govt. from Feb.
2005 Copies of letters by
Panchayat Raj Deptt.
regarding opening of POs
to be provided.
 4. Chhattisgarh 103 15987900.08 Matter under examination
with State Govt. from Feb.
2005
 5. Delhi
 6. Gujarat 9 4 8964514.98 Provision of Postal facilities
is the prime duty of the
Deptt. of Post. Since DOP
decided to bear the cost
from 1.4.2003, pending dues
be waived off. However,
decision taking in the ISC
will be followed.
 7. Haryana 2 6 1194735.91 No response
 8. Himachal Pradesh 114 337 122492169.00 Govt. considering the
matter. Decision will be
communicated.
 9. J&K 1 13 882220.41 Districtwise details of
amount called for by State
Govt. Circle has been
requested to coordinate.

35
12 3 4 5 6 7
10. Jharkhand 25 15041.00 Name of Post Offices with
details of villages, tehsil,
block and districts and
particulars of sponsoring
authorities from the State
Govt. called for by the
State. Circle has been
requested to coordinate.
11. Karnataka 7 1115775.96 No response received
12. Kerala 6 3 5
13. Madhya Pradesh 1 103 35183309.24 No response received
14. Maharashtra 2 19 1040247.24 No response received
15. North East 103 298 81399356.00 Some of States have
requested for exemption
due to financial crunch and
AG objecting against such
payments. Commercially
backward States where
there are meagre resources
of revenue have requested
not to reduce the Plan
allocations for retaining
NRC POs.
16. Orissa 44 12582989.44 Asked for some more time.
State Govt. is in touch with
circle.
17. Punjab 5 34 1572500.00 State Govt. has advised the
district authorities to direct
the village panchayats to
clear their liabilities.
18. Rajasthan 1 50493.00 Details of location of POs
running on the basis of
NRC which has been
sponsored by the State
Govt. called for. Circle has
been requested to
coordinate.
19. Tamil Nadu 7 4 3869075.00 Postal services have to be
maintained on public
demand. Recovery for
annual Plan assistance not
acceptable proposition as
this is in the nature of
development funding.
Expenditure prior to
31.3.2003 should also be
borne by the DOP .

36
20. Uttar Pradesh 4 1188749.16 Detail of NRC scheme, POs
opened on NRC basis,
request of Govt. under
taking, amount due from
each Govt. undertaking.
Circle has submitted detail
information to the State
Govt.
21. Uttaranchal 16 6619842.16 Opening and operating of
POs is the function of the
Department. Payment
should be done by the
Department of Post and old
dues should be waived off.
22. West Bengal 5
Total 256 7 1200 310758397.22
12 3 4 5 6 7

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH  THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (No. 2)
Talwar Committee Report
The Committee find that Justice Talwar Committee in their report
have given a very dismal picture of the workload of the Department
of Posts stating that only 3% of the Branch Offices have workload of
more than 3 hours, 36% have a workload of only 70 minutes, 19%
have a workload of 1.5 hrs. and 39% have a workload between
1.5 hrs. and 2.5 hrs. The reason advanced by the Department for the
same was that EDBOs are opened if it fulfils the population, distance
and income norms prescribed for a given area and it is expected to
function for a minimum of 3 hours. In the opinion of the Committee,
it is a matter of grave concern.
The Committee note that the Department has initiated some
measures to meet the emerging needs and exploring means to harness
the development in technology and the infrastructure available with
other sister Departments like DoT and DoE in order to bridge the
digital divide of modern technology, which can be extended to the
rural public through post offices. The Committee further note that
post offices have certain inherent unique advantages and by virtue of
its existing role in rural economy, it can be an ideal source of extending
new services to the customers in those areas. In this connection, the
Department has already started its services with BSNL to provide
mobile telephone facilities in selected rural areas on commission basis.
However, the Committee feel that the steps taken by the Department
in this regard are not adequate and trust that the Department will
explore all the avenues to add new services, like disbursing of rural
credit at economic interest rates in collaboration with NABARD through
its postal network etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the outcome of the initiative taken by the Department with other sister
Departments.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has taken a number of steps to increase the
workload in BOs. These include (1) fixing targets for different products
to motivate BPMs to secure business (2) to introduce new products
like sale of non-life products, e-post, bill collection and other retail

38
products (3) efforts are also underway to persuade other Departments
to utilize this network. In this way, the Branch Office network was
used to collect data for the Registrar General of India, to distribute
old age and widows pensions in some States like Tamil Nadu, Gujarat
etc. Department of Information Technology has been requested to use
post office as one of the nodal points for their Community Service
Delivery Centre project under the National e-governance programme.
Although a final decision is awaited, the draft guidelines indicate that
POs will be considered by them only where no other alternative is
possible.
In the Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th Plan, there is a specific
reference to the capability of the Postal network to play a crucial role
in dissemination of Health Information, education and distribution of
some simple health products to the below poverty line population.
This initiative will be followed up with the Central and State
Governments. Similarly, the Mid Term Appraisal also recognizes the
need to use the network to further e-governance initiatives. These
initiatives will be actively pursued with the concerned Departments.
As far as the disbursal of micro credit is concerned, though the
scheme is ready for implementation, the Department is unable to
proceed further due to recent amendments to the Government Savings
Bank Act, 1873, and Government Savings Certificate Act, 1959, and
the rules governing various small savings schemes, which allow only
individuals to deposit funds in POSB. Since the same facility is no
longer available to institutions, Self-Help Groups (SHGs) can no longer
open accounts in POSB. To overcome this problem Ministry of Finance
has been addressed at the level of Secretary (P) for a special exemption
for SHGs. Their response is awaited. This matter is also being pursued
for early implementation.
Recommendation (No. 9)
Subsidy Given by DoP
The Committee are happy to note that the DoP is doing a
commendable service by carrying printed books, registered newspapers
to the mofussil areas at a cheaper rate. It is also giving subsidy on
letter cards, registered articles, money orders, etc. In this regard, the
total subsidy borne by the DoP is stated to be Rs. 124.52 crore and the
scheme is running at a deficit of Rs. 27 crore. The Committee appreciate
the subsidy being provided on postcards which is primarily for the
benefit of common man but at the same time they desire that the
Department should conduct a study for optimal and credible use of
subsidy and prevent its misuse. The Committee would like to have a
detailed break-up of the subsidy, the services on which it is being
provided by the Department and the effective steps suggested to
rationalize the subsidy.

39
Action taken by the Government
The Department of Posts offer 36 products and services to public
through its outlets. Of these only 11 are earning more than their costs.
A statement showing cost, revenue, deficit/surplus of postal services,
as projected for each of the products/services offered by the
Department for 2003-04 is annexed.
In this context the following further issues merit consideration.
1. The estimation of cost revenue, deficit and surplus have not
been made on activity based costing in respect of each product but on
allocation/apportionment of total expenditure incurred by the
Department on all its products and services in the previous years.
2. The actual expenditure is taken from the figures reflected in the
Demand for Grants of the Department. It is further allocated among
various cost centers and thereafter apportioned amount the different
products and services. This apportionment is done on the basis of a
number of factors like workload, traffic, weight and revenue from
individual products.
3. While this method of apportioning costs among different
activities and products is as per the methodology approved by the
Cost Accounts branch of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance, the actual process of assessment requires voluminous data
that is not readily available through the Government system of
Accounting, which does not reflect product activity based costs. There
is also no system at present to collect the data required for such a
detailed exercise on an annual basis. Therefore the allocation is itself
being done on the basis of assumptions and apportionments that are
derived from inputs collected from time to time. Therefore, the
assessment is not an accurate assessment of the costs and revenues
involved in providing any of the individual products and services in
the given year. To this extent, while the system of costing may meet
the requirements of a Government Department, it does not meet the
requirement of a service organization functioning in a commercial,
competitive environment.
However recognizing the fact that the overall costs of the
Department exceeds its revenues, the Department focuses on efforts to
increase revenues, streamline costs through, rationalizing the network,
process reengineering and improved realization of dues from other
Departments for agency functions etc. But the need for a system of
accounting and MIS that will enable the Department to pinpoint those
products and services that need more focused attention in order to
make them viable, or costs, that need to be further streamlined, is

40
recognized. Therefore efforts are underway to also put in place a
commercial system of accounting that will facilitate the Department in
this endeavour.
As far as the subsidy issue is concerned, the Department is required
to fulfil its Universal Service Obligation in terms of providing access
to basic postal services and also to ensure that the common man has
affordable means of communication. However, the products and services
that should be included within the definition of USO, for which subsidy
should be provided, has never been clearly defined. While every
country is free to define its USO, taking into account its socio, economic
and technological conditions, there are certain uniform commitments
that the country is required to make as member of the UPU regarding
the services provided under the USO.
In order to focus the subsidies only in the needy or committed
areas, there is need to clearly define the USO of the Department. This
exercise is underway. To assist the Department in this exercise, a
consultant has been engaged to undertake a System Study, and identify
the options before the Department to compete in a commercial
environment while continuing to fulfil its USO. As part of this exercise,
product/service-wise analysis in terms of viability, the market for the
product/service, etc., is also being attempted. This will provide the
Department evidence based insights into how different products/
services need to be handled, to make them more commercially viable
and to what extent subsidies are needed for products which need to
be included under USO.
There are a number of products and services, which are being
currently subsidised by the Department. These include some products
like registered newspapers, printed books, periodicals etc. which are
being transmitted at heavily subsidised rates. Thought here may be a
need to subsidise the transmission of these articles in the larger public
interest, these are not strictly part of the USO of the Department of
Posts. It is merely the means by which this facility is being channelised.
There is a need to recognise this fact, and explicit subsidy provided
for this purpose, rather than include this subsidy component as part
of the Department’s USO. Whether the benefit of subsidy needs to be
continued for all categories of periodicals currently enjoying this benefit
is also an issue that needs to be highlighted for a decision, when
defining the USO.
The above initiatives are all part of the effort being made by the
Department to focus the subsidies in deserving areas, and streamline
them with the management tools currently available to it, in order to
reduce the budgetary deficit to the extent possible.

45
Recommendation (No. 12)
Opening of Post Offices in rural areas
The Committee learn that the Department has no mechanism of
its own to identify the need of post office in the rural areas and rely
totally on the requests or demands received in the circle offices. The
Committee have been informed that at present there are 63 applications
which fulfill the norms out of 175 requests received and these post
offices will be opened as per the targets fixed for various circles
annually.
On the one hand the Department of Posts has a Universal Service
Obligation (USO) to fulfill by providing basic postal facilities at all the
gram panchayats in India, whereas, on the other hand the Department
has a demand of setting up of only 63 post offices which fulfill the
norms laid down. The above two aspects simply show that there is a
lack of information within the gram panchayats, as regards
requirements for setting up a post office by sending in a demand.
The Committee feel that the Department of Posts should take the
responsibility to identify viable rural locations for setting up of Post
Offices instead of waiting for a demand. The department should also
create awareness among gram panchayats regarding norms laid down
for opening of post offices.
Action taken by the Government
Post Offices are opened only in those G.P . villages, which fulfil
distance, population and income norms (Annexed). Of the 1,23,014
G.P . villages yet to be provided post offices, only 3752 G.P . villages
were found to fulfil at least 2 of the 3 norms, viz. distance and
population norms. Of these very few fulfil the income norms, and
event heir parent offices are incurring losses. So there would be very
few locations which justify all the three norms for opening post offices.
In addition to demands received from the public, the inspecting
authorities are also required to identify areas, which would appear to
justify a post office, and examine such proposals for justification as
per norms. Hence, more than one avenue is available to consider
opening post offices in needy areas.
Norms for Opening Post Offices
1. Norms for opening Extra Departmental Branch Post Offices:
1.1 Population
(a) In Normal Areas:
3000 population in a group of villages (including the PPO village)

46
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
500 population in an individual village or 1000 population in a
group of villages.
1.2 Distance:
(a) In Normal Areas:
The minimum distance from the nearest existing post office will
be 3 Kms.
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
The distance limit will be the same as above except that in Hilly
Areas, the minimum distance limit can be relaxed by the
Directorate in cases where such relaxation is warranted by special
circumstances which should be clearly explained while submitting
a proposal.
1.3 Anticipated Income:
(a) In Normal Areas:
The minimum anticipated revenue will be 33
1/3% of the cost.
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
The minimum anticipated income will be 15% of the cost.
It is further to be ensured that as a result of the opening of a
new post office, the loss in respect of the parent post office does
not increase beyond the permissible limit nor is its income
reduced below the minimum prescribed.
2. Criteria for upgrading/opening Deparmental Sub-Post Offices:
(a) In Rural Areas:
The minimum work load of the Extra Departmental Branch Post
Office, proposed to be upgraded, should be five hours per day.
The permissible limit of annual loss is Rs. 2400 in normal rural
areas and Rs. 4800 in Tribal and Hilly areas.
It is further to be ensured that as a result of the opening of a
new post office, the loss in respect of the parent post office does
not increase beyond the permissible limit nor is its income
reduced below the minimum prescribed.

47
(b) In Urban Areas:
In urban areas, the post office should initially be self-supporting,
and, at the time of the first annual review, it should show a 5%
profit to be eligible for further retention.
The minimum distance between two post offices should be
1.5 kms. in cities with a population of 20 lakhs and above, and
2 kms. in other urban areas. No two delivery offices, however,
should be closer than 5 kms. for each other.
Heads of Circles have powers to relax the distance condition in
10% of the cases.
A Delivery Post Office in Urban Area should have a minimum of
7 Postmen’s beats.
Recommendation (No. 14)
Rents
The Committee feel that a huge amount of revenue which is
drained off by the Department on renting buildings for accommodating
Post Offices could be saved by constructing buildings on 1700 vacant
plots (approx.) already available with the Department throughout India
on a maximum floor space index basis and renting out such additional
space created to legitimate/credible parties exercising adequate legal
safeguards to protect the assets.
Action Taken by the Government
The amount spent on Rent, Rates and Taxes during the last three
years is as under:—
2001-02 Rs. 43.20 crore
2002-03 Rs. 46.17 crore
2003-04 Rs. 44.68 crore
2004-05 March (Sy.) Rs. 44.98 crore
While savings can be effected in this head of account through the
Department constructing its own buildings, it needs to be noted that
the Department does not have vacant plots in lieu of all buildings
taken on rent at present. Against 1700 vacant plots available, there are
more than 21,000 operative offices functioning in rented buildings.
Therefore, the outgo on rent is likely to continue, though at a reduced
level. Further, under Plan, very low priority is being given for

48
construction activities. Therefore, availability of adequate resources, not
merely for construction of buildings, but even for constructing boundary
walls to prevent encroachment, is a problem.
To optimise the available resources and to explore alternate options
to generate more resources, the Department has taken the following
actions:
1. Guidelines have been issued to all Heads of Postal Circles/
Regions vide Circular No. 10-2/2003-Bldgs. dated 25.4.2005
for giving vacant built-up space in postal buildings to
generate non-tariff revenue on Leave and License basis.
2. The Department has also taken a policy decision to construct
on vacant plots up to the maximum FSI (Floor Space Index),
and rent out excess space for augmenting financial resources
from non-tariff sources. A self-contained paper for setting
up Special Purpose Vehicle for development and optimum
utilisation of Postal Estate has been prepared and further
action will be taken in consultation with Planning
Commission and other concerned Departments.

49
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (No. 4)
Utilization of retailing capacity
The Committee observes that there are 1,39,280 Branch Offices in
the country as on 31.3.2004. They are mostly in rural, hilly and tribal
areas. The impact of technology and the presence of competitors for
providing communication and remittance facilities in these Branch
Offices is either marginal or non-existent. The Department has justified
that the low level of opportunities for income generation activities in
these rural areas does not help to promote any demand for postal
services and the Department continues to open the BOs with a view
to fulfil its universal service obligation to help socio-economic
development.
The Committee are not at all impressed by the justification given
by the Department of Posts in this regard and feel that there is enough
potential for income generation in the villages which needs to be
explored. The Committee are of the opinion that the non-existence of
other competitors makes the job of the Department all the more easy
and responsive to the needs of Postal and allied services in the rural
areas. The Government is implementing the ‘Common Minimum
Programme’ at present, and is constantly focusing on providing more
facilities and services to the rural areas. The postal network is the
ideal delivery mechanism, which can render services right upto the
doorsteps of the customers. According to the Committee, this concept
is not new with the postal Department. The Committee are of the
strong conviction that the Branch Offices can do much more with little
initiative by the Department by seriously planning and co-ordinating
with other Government Departments and get the business through
strategic alliances. The Post Office should become a hub for dispensing
variety of services to the people in the far-flung areas. The Committee,
therefore, desire that new avenues in all the 1,39,280 BOs be explored
and a fresh environment be created wherein officials are motivated
and made sensitive to the issues of developing more business for the
Post Offices. The Committee also feels that DoP should elicit public

50
opinion from Panchayats and villages to know the actual requirements
of the people with regard to the variety of services rendered by the
Post Offices at the grass root-level which will help them in the optimal
and efficacious utilization of the network. Thus, the postal department
can achieve the goal of becoming a commercial organization doing
good business alongwith enabling the DoP to come out of the debt
trap and also fulfilling its universal service obligation in rural areas
with pride. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the of
progress made in this regard periodically.
Action taken by the Government
The efforts being made by the Department to enhance the business/
revenues in BOs have been elaborated in response to Recommendation
No. 2. The Department has also taken up with Cabinet Secretariat the
need to use this network more optimally, and the latter have set up
an inter-ministerial Committee to inter-alia address this issue also.
Recently the Department made a presentation to the National
Commission for Informal/unorganized sectors, elaborating upon the
capacity of the network to provide a wide array of services. The
possibility of providing some services through the postal network to
these segments of the population are being explored.
A study undertaken by the Planning Commission on the rural
network identified the additional products that were in demand in
villages. These include: bill collection viz. telephone, electricity, water
and other such utility bills, banking services, agricultural credit,
insurance—life, health, crop, agro services, literacy functions etc. This
study also, inter alia , brought out the fact that the level of revenue
generation in a BO is dependent on the efforts made by the BPM.
Unfortunately, there is very little incentive in the existing model of
providing services through EDBOs/SOs to generate business. If a BO
exceeds 5 hours of workload, it will get converted into a DSO and the
GDS BPM will be reduced to the level of GDS packer in the same
office. Thus, there is an in-built disincentive to increase business, as
the GDS BPM can retain his position and continue to avail of his
allowances only if the office does not generate workload beyond a
certain level. Therefore, there is a need to change this model if EDBOs/
SOs are expected to generate more business revenues. Simultaneously,
all avenues are being explored to generate more revenues.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter-I)

51
Recommendation (No. 5)
Universal Service Obligation
The Universal Service Obligation that the Government has to fulfil
through the Postal Activities via the Department of Posts is to provide
basic postal services throughout the country, irrespective of terrain at
an affordable price. In meeting this requirement the Department has
set up 1,55,837 Post Offices in 1,20,048 Panchayats. Another 1,23,014
Gram Panchayats are awaiting that vital link today.
In fulfilling the USO the Government have been providing subsidy
continuously and will do so in future. A large work force constituting
5,65,922 employees is serving the nation to provide postal & allied
services. According to the Department, the cost of running these
establishments consumes upto 96% of the budgeting provisions of the
Department. The Department’s revenue deficit for 2004-05 is stated to
be approximately Rs. 1600 crore. The Committee feels that one of the
commendable measures adopted by the Department for expansion of
further POs is the redeployment of manpower and demanding no
plan budgetary support for extra manpower. The other measure being
adopted is making genuine efforts to downsize the work force and
simultaneously technologically upgrading the Department to meet the
competition from communications.
According to the Committee steps should be taken by the
Department to include the private couriers in discussions and evolve
a process by which the private courier could help the Government in
meeting the universal service obligation in an effective manner.
Action taken by the Government
Universal Service Obligation requires the Department to provide
affordable postal services within easy access as per approved norms.
Daily delivery of dak, collection of mails through letter boxes and
provision of basic postal facilities through outlets are all part of this
Universal Service Obligation and the Department strives to meet this
obligation even in the remotest parts of the country irrespective of
economic implications on the basis of approved norms. These norms
allow for substantial subsidy to the extent of 662/3% in normal rural
areas and 85% in hilly, tribal, inaccessible and desert areas, to be
provided for opening new post offices. The OPI Act 1898 also entrusts
the exclusive privilege for carriage of letters to the Department. Hence
the department has a legal obligation to ensure access to postal facilities
throughout the country. Private Couriers provide services where they

52
are able to generate a profit and provide services at a cost that the
market can afford. Therefore, as the market develops, and socio-
economic conditions allow more generation of revenues, the couriers
will seek a niche in these areas.
The department is currently competing with private couriers for
the more creamy segments of the market, to generate revenues to
cross subsidise its Universal Service Obligation. In this commercial
aspect of the Departments operations, there is no scope for dialogue
with its own competitors as these are not segments where the
commitment towards fulfilling USO is involved.
Any support from private couriers towards fulfilling the USO in
such areas will be forthcoming only if they are made liable to do so
as per legal requirements. For this suitable statutory provisions would
need to be provided.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (No. 6)
Consolidation/Review
The Committee are informed that out of 26,186 departmental post
offices in urban and rural areas, approximately 57% i.e. 14,926
departmental post offices are running at losses. Out of these 14,926
post offices, 1,030 single handed and double handed branch post offices
in 43 major urban centres with a population of over 7 lakhs are running
at losses. The major reason attributed by the Department of Posts to
these losses are fall in mail traffic and availability of alternative modes
of communication.
The Post Offices in the urban sector are incurring losses even
though they are required to be financially self-sufficient alongwith
earning some profit. Many of the Post Offices for historical reasons
are located at less than the distance allowed as per policy for setting
up of the post offices in urban areas. As regards the post offices situated
in rural areas, particularly extra departmental post offices which are
located in close proximity to each other than permissible under the
norms for various historical reasons are also going into losses.
The Committee are of the opinion that single handed or double
handed branch post offices are incurring losses because sufficient
business is not available to them in their area of operation to cover

53
for the salary of the employees, rents, taxes and other overheads. It is,
therefore, necessary that such post offices in the rural as well as urban
areas should be located and merged into other post offices which are
in their close proximity . In other words, consolidation of post offices
in rural and urban areas is the order of the day. In this connection,
the Committee would like to be informed about the roadmap to the
process of consolidation and also like to be provided with a list of
post offices which have been merged into other post offices in the
urban as well as in the rural areas.
The Committee feel that Department should realise the need of
the hour as new environment is coming up with new technological
advancements. They therefore, trust that Department will come up
with a clear-cut consolidation plan keeping in view the reliability of
the postal networks, aspirations of the urban customers needs by not
compromising with the quality and reliability of the services. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the major issues like re-deployment,
use of technology, outsourcing and franchising and serving to
underserved areas with financial viability will also be rightly addressed
in the consolidation plan of which roadmap is to be completed by the
Department of Posts. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Department in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
One of the main concerns of the Department while undertaking
this exercise of rationalizing the network is to ensure that any
consolidation/rationalization that it undertakes should not result in
reduction in the access that customers currently have to post office
facilities, as per approved norms. Therefore the strategy/Plan evolved
by the Department for rationalizing its network includes the following
elements: (1) first redeploy manpower to the extent possible to open
new post offices so that losses in existing post offices are reduced to
that extent. This strategy has been under implementation for the last
5 years and post offices have been opened inn this manner from
2000-01. (20 Relocate/merge pot offices, which do not meet the current
distance norm. In the case of single/double handed post offices in
urban areas this has been under implementation from 6/1/03 while in
the case of BOs in rural areas, orders were issued only on 28/1/05.
So far 172 post offices have been merged 56 have been relocated to
new, justified locations in 2004-05.  Details of post offices merged a
son 31.3.2005 is annexed (3) In underserved areas like the N.E., to
help sustain existing levels of communication facilities, the Department
has proposed to the Planning Commission the need to support NRC

54
post offices, which would have been otherwise downgraded (4) given
the public resistance to shifting existing post offices in certain locations,
despite the availability of another post office within the distance norm,
and also to expand the network in a self sustainable manner without
the restrictions faced in the past, the Department is in the process of
bringing out a franchise model which will also have a technology
component i.e. computer facilities, wherever extent possible. A formal
consolidation Plan will be drawn up in consultation with Circles once
the franchise scheme is firmed up.
Details of Post Offices Merged during 2004-2005
Sl. Name of the No. of Post Name of the
No. Circle Offices merged Post Offices merged
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 Ahmednagar DSO
2. Assam Nil
3. Bihar Nil
4. Chhattisgarh 1 Akashnagar SO
5. Delhi Nil
6. Gujarat 38 (i) Ambawadi (Sardarnagar)
(ii) Santpunit Marg
(iii) Bhayavadar Bazar Chowk
(iv) Jamnagar Khoja Naka Road
(v) Khambhalia KRM SO
(vi) Keshod LC PO
(vii) Veraval Krishnanagar SO
(viii) Rahpar Bazar SO
(ix) Jashodanagar SO
(x) Upleta Panch Hatdi
(xi) Halvad Town
(xii) Okha Bazar
(xiii) Sahpur Power House
(xiv) Vanthli Bazar
(xv) Junagadh Jagmal Chowk

55
12 3 4
(xvi) Naya Anjar
(xvii) Ramnathpura
(xviii) Rajputpura
(xix) Sihor GC
(xx) Dakor Town
(xxi) GIDC Ankleshwar
(xxii) Pyaka BO
(xxiii) Amreli Baharpara
(xxiv) Kalawad Green Market
(xxv) Morbi Green Chowk
(xxvi) Dandia Bazar
(xxvii) Wankaner GC
(xxviii) Una Bazar TSO
(xxix) Mahuva Vashi Talav
(xxx) B.V. Sola
(xxxi) Rupnagar
(xxxii) Bhuj College Road
(xxxiii) Changadhra Chemical Work
(xxxiv) Lakhapat
(xxxv) Navagam
(xxxvi) Padav Bazar
(xxxvii) Rajpipla SR
(xxxviii) Bhanvad Ranjit Para
7. Haryana 7 (i) Sujan Singh Park
(ii) IAF Line, Ambala
(iii) Arya Nagar, Rohtak
(iv) Prem Nagar, Rohtak
(v) Session Court, Ambala City
(vi) Alexandra Road, Ambala Cantt.
(vii) Siha BO

56
12 3 4
8. Himachal Pradesh Nil
9. Jammu & Kashmir Nil Nil
10. Jharkhand Nil Nil
11. Karnataka 30 (i) College Road PO, Nippani
(ii) Gokak Raviwarpet PO
(iii) Belgaun Dharwad Road PO
(iv) Athani Bus Stand PO
(v) Sirsi Sahayadri Colony PO
(vi) Haliyal Bazar
(vii) Vijinapura Industrial Complex,
Bangalore
(viii) D. Temple, Davangere
(ix) Old Town, Holalakere PO
(x) Chowkipet, Davangere
(xi) Bhavanti Street PO
(xii) R.M. Yard PO, Chitradurga
(xiii) K.T.J. Nagar, Davangere
(xiv) Huliyal Road PO
(xv) B.P . Extension, Chitradurga
(xvi) Hosdurga Fort
(xvii) Vidyaranyapuram, Mysore
(xviii) Nanjumalige, Mysore
(xix) Kantharaj Urs Road, Mysore
(xx) APMC Yard, Chitradurga
(xxi) Nehru Road, PO
(xxii) Nanjagud Bazar PO
(xxiii) Meghalapet PO
(xxiv) Byrasandra PO, Bangalore
(xxv) Bagalkot Town PO
(xxvi) Rajajinagar North PO, Bangalore

57
12 3 4
(xxvii) Rajajinagar 6th Block PO,
Bangalore
(xxviii) Seppings Road, Bangalore
(xxix) H. Siddaiah Road, Bangalore
(xxx) Cottonpet PO, Bangalore
12. Kerala 3 (i) Guruvayur NDSO
(ii) Mundavathur NDSO
(iii) Srirampet NDSO
13. Madhya Pradesh 28 (i) Guna AB Road, SO
(ii) Kamlaganj SO
(iii) Gwalior Mandhavganj SO
(iv) Indore Barwall Chowki SO
(v) Indore Jail Road, SO
(vi) Indore Mills SO
(vii) Indore Shrinagar SO
(viii) Barwaha Jawahar Marg SO
(ix) Burhanpur Itwara SO
(x) Burhanpur Mahajana Peth SO
(xi) Jhanda Chowk, Barwani SO
(xii) Khargone Collectorate SO
(xiii) Nepanagar Labour Camp SO
(xiv) Paharsingpura SO
(xv) Tagore Colony SO, Khandwa
(xvi) Neemuch Mandi SO
(xvii) Rampuria Bara Bazar SO
(xviii) Ratlam New Road SO
(xix) Ashta Budhwara  SO
(xx) Budhni R.S. SO
(xxi) Narsinghgarh Town SO
(xxii) Sarangpur Mandi SO

58
12 3 4
(xxiii) Sehore Sugar Factory SO
(xxiv) Agar Bazar SO
(xxv) Khchrod Town SO
(xxvi) Shujalpur Station Road SO
(xxvii) Hotel Chandela SO
(xxviii) PTC Nawgaong
14. Maharashtra 11 (i) Phalton Road
(ii) L.J. Road
(iii) Chinckpokhli
(iv) Navajivan
(v) S.B. Marg
(vi) Sewri Naka
(vii) N.S. Bureau
(viii) Govt. Colony
(ix) Phule Market
(x) Colaba South
(xi) S.V . Press SO
15. North East Nil
16. Orissa 14 (i) Liploy NDTSO
(ii) Ranibagicha NDTSO
(iii) Sadhepall NDTSO
(iv) LET NDTSO, Rourkela
(v) M.S. Marg NDTSO, Rourkela
(vi) Sector 8 NDTSO, Rourkela
(vii) Khetrajpur Market NDTSO
(viii) G.M. College NDTSO
(ix) Sakhigopalnath NDTSO
(x) Motiharan NDTSO
(xi) Railway Colony, Jharsuguda
NDTSO

59
12 3 4
(xii) Bargarh Panchayat College
NDTSO
(xiii) Bargarh Road RS NDTSO
(xiv) Barpali Bazar NDTSO
17. Punjab 2 (i) Nada BO
(ii) Mataur BO
18. Rajasthan 14 (i) Ind. Area, Bharatpur EDSO
(ii) Hope Circus, Alwar NDTSO
(iii) R.R. College,  Alwar
Abu Bazar NDTSO
(iv) Abu Bazar SO
(v) Kuchman City
(vi) Bansur Bus Stand
(vii) Sheopur BO
(viii) Shopping Centre JWR NDTSO
(ix) Kartarpura NDTSO
(x) Nagar Bus Stand
(xi) Jail Road, Bikaner
(xii) Paras NDTSO
(xiii) Bundi City NDTSO
(xiv) Dehra BO
19. Tamil Nadu 21 (i) Erode Fort NDTSO
(ii) Vazhai Thottam NDTSO
(iii) Marapettai NDTSO
(iv) Pollachi RS NDTSO
(v) Kumbakonam South NDTSO
(vi) Pattukkottai Housing Unit
NDTSO
(vii) Lalbahadur Nagar NDTSO
(viii) Venugopalapuram NDTSO

60
12 3 4
(ix) Mannargudi Cutcherry NDTSO
(x) Thandavankuppam NDTSO
(xi) Neyveli Block 27 NDTSO
(xii) Vriddhachalam West NDTSO
(xiii) Nagapattinam City NDTSO
(xiv) Nagapattinam Beach NDTSO
(xv) Pushpanagar NDTSO
(xvi) Bharathi Road NDTSO
(xvii) Papanasam North NDTSO
(xviii) Tirukoyilur bus Stand NDTSO
(xix) Vijayapuram NDTSO
(xx) Usman Road SO
(xxi) Tambaram South SO
20. Uttar Pradesh 1 Birhana PO
21. Uttaranchal 1 A.D. Pharmacy NDSO Dehradun
22. West Bengal Nil
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (No. 7)
Technology Upgradation
The Committee note that the ‘Expert Committee on Excellence’ in
Postal Services has emphasised the need for the induction of technology
in various Postal mail and agency functions with a view to transform
the traditional Postal Services into a modern high technology service.
The Committee are happy to note that the Department has taken the
recommendations of the Expert Committee in the right spirit and has
allocated 79% of its 10th Plan Budget towards modernisation and
upgradation of technology. In the implementation process the
Department have started installing Multi Purpose Counter Machines,
Satellite money order network with VSATs and ESMOs in the Post
Offices. The Department have also introduced electronic franking

61
machines in large offices, computerized saving banks operation, postal
life insurance operations and has improved stamps and seals in a
phased manner.
The Committee further note that in the wake of economic
liberalisation and competition, the Department have set up separate
directorates for promoting PLI, Business Development and Parcel and
Logistics. More than 500 Head POs have been placed in the LAN
environment upto X Plan. During X Plan the Department has a
proposal to link these POs and also the set of new POs to be
computerized through virtual private network to a centralized data
centre. The Department has computerised 506 Head Offices, 1266 Sub
POs and 69 Centres etc. apart from taking care of core postal
transactions, such as booking of registered articles, money orders,
acceptance of bills. These machines are also used in various financial
services including savings bank operations. The Committee further not
that a pilot project for satellite Money Order Scheme—SATMO was
executed in the VIII Plan by installing VSATs in POs which is a quick
transmission of MOs instead of traditional mode of payment/
transmission of money order, but this facility has not made much
headway as only 10% of the MOs are transmitted through VSATs. The
Committee feel that there has been dismal feedback regarding the
reliability of the VSAT transmission facility and desire that the
Department should take concrete steps to popularise and streamline
the scheme so that VSATs are utilized to their optimum capacity.
Action taken by the Government
Computerisation of Post Offices
The Department of Posts started computerising its post offices from
the early 1990s. The objective of computerisation and networking of
post offices is to improve the quality of service.
The Government has approved a plan for induction of computers
in 845 Head Post Offices (HPOs), 6861 large Sub Post Offices (SOs),
22 Postal Accounts Offices (PAOs) and 245 major Postal Administrative
Offices (AOs) during the 10th Five Year Plan with a financial outlay
of Rs. 836.27 crore. The scheme was approved by CCEA in January
2004.
The Department has been able to utilise most of the funds allocated
in 2004-05 for computerisation and networking of post offices. An
amount of Rs. 116.53 has been spent for computerisation of post offices

62
in the financial year 2004-05. During 2004-05, 839 HPOs, 1533 SOs,
34 AOs and 19 PAOs have been computerised.
In 2005-06, the Department proposes to computerise more than
3400 Sos. By obtaining special permission from the Ministry of Finance,
the Department has placed purchase order at DGS&D rate contract for
supplying computers and peripherals in respect of 2860 post offices
for the year 2005-06. On finalisation of the new DGS&D rate contract
for computers, the Department will computerise the balance post offices
as envisaged in the Annual Plan for 2005-06.
Money Order Transmission through VSAT Network
Money orders intended for destinations outside the district of origin
are required to be transmitted through the VSAT network. The
technology inducted in the 8th Plan was upgraded to provide for
High Speed Transmission technology in the 9th Plan. This technology
took time to stabilise due to certain teething problems, which, in turn,
caused service problems. These problems have since been sorted out
and efforts are underway to optimise this network, and ensure speedy
delivery of money orders. The functioning of the VSAT system is being
monitored on a daily basis at the Circle and Directorate levels.
A latest version of the VSAT money order software (version 4.2)
has been provided to Circles, which has special provisions to enable
effective monitoring and provide value additions. The critical areas
resulting in complaints about VSAT money orders have also been
identified and corrective action initiated. One of the main problems
was in respect of non-receipt of acknowledgements. In 2003-04,
complaints on account of non-receipt of acknowledgements were 54%
of the total money order complaints. The concerted action taken in
this regard has resulted in drop in percentage of complaints on this
account to 47% in 2004-05.
Currently, on an average, 60,000 money orders are transmitted
through VSAT Network of 150 VSAT stations and 1350 Extended
Satellite Money Order stations. However there have been occasions
when the quantum of Money Orders sent through VSAT have touched
95,000/day thereby confirming the system’s ability to handle the
projected volume of traffic.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter-I)

63
Recommendation (No. 11)
Franchising
The Committee have been informed that the Department has a
proposal for introducing franchising as a strategy for future expansion
of the network. This model will focus on unemployed youths in rural
areas, while in the urban and semi-urban areas the scheme will cover
the retired employees of the Department among other eligible
categories. Such POs will be centred around basic postal services,
including value added services, bill collection facilities as well as
retailing services on behalf of other organisations. The concept of
franchising has evolved because the whole gamut of services could
not be provided in the PSSKs which dealt with limited services ranging
from stamp and stationary sale to registration of letters only. Further,
space is a major constraint in newly emerging urban areas where post
offices are not justified as per norms. Franchising would help revenue
earning to the Department on the one side as well as giving
employment to youth in these areas.
As regards the rural areas the department have stated that it will
help cater to segments, which do not justify a post office on population
and income norms, despite fulfilling distance norms. It would speed
up the computerization process in the rural areas because the franchisee
could avail of credit facilities from institution and also from other
resources like USO Fund of the DoT, the provision of urban facilities
in rural areas (PURA) scheme which will otherwise take a long time
if the DoP goes about it on its own.
The Committee are informed that the proposal of franchising is
before the Ministry of Communications & I.T. (DoP) for approval. The
Committee are happy that the DoP has shown great interest in the
scheme and is finding out ways to earn more revenue and get out of
the deficit by thinking purely on commercial areas. The Committee at
the same time desire that DoP in coordination with DoIT should explore
the avenues of setting up of Franchisee Post Offices in Information
Kiosks in the States. In this connection, the Committee would not put
in a word of caution that before taking a plunge into franchising the
DoP should weigh all the pros and cons in this regard. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the views of the Department before
they actually go in for implementing the scheme.

64
Action taken by the Government
The final response of Department of Information Technology to
this Department’s proposal to use post office as one of the nodal
points for its community service delivery centres is awaited. The draft
guidelines however indicate that there is no provision to include post
offices in this scheme except where no other alternative is available.
The Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th Plan also speaks of using post
offices for further e-governance initiatives. The Department recognizes
the fact that harnessing technology in these rural post offices will
enhance their capability to provide services that are relevant to the
needs of customers (e.g. information needs, speedier and more efficient
financial services etc.) and thereby enhance the revenues. This is also
a crucial factor in developing a self-sustainable model in franchising
postal services. Hence, these aspects are all being taken into
consideration when formulating the franchise model, and will be
finalized only after consultation with Ministry of Law etc., wherever
required. The Department will appraise the Committee of the Scheme
once it is firmed up.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paras 21 and 22 of Chapter I of the Report)

65
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
18 July, 2006 Chairman,
27 Asadha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

66
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, 30 June, 2006 from 1100 hours to
1240 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Dr. P .P . Koya
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Sohan Potai
7. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Motiur Rahman
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took the following Draft
Reports for consideration:
(i) ** ** **
(ii) ** ** **

67
(iii) ** ** **
(iv) ** ** **
(v) Draft Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning and Expansion of
Postal Network’ relating to the Department of Posts.
3. The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft Reports with
some amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to the House in light of the
factual verifications received from the concerned Ministries/
Departments on a day convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

68
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTIETH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 3, 8, 10, 13, 15 & 16 to 20
Total : 11
Percentage : 55%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 2, 9, 12 & 14
Total : 04
Percentage: 20%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 4 to 7 & 11
Total : 05
Percentage : 25%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. : Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil