CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
2. The Forty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It
contained 29 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos:- 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 19, 23, 24, 25, 26,
28 & 29.
Total: 18
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para Nos:- Nil.
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Para Nos:- 1, 18, 20, 22 & 27
Total: 05
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are
of interim nature:
Para Nos:- 7, 10, 11, 13, 14 & 21
Total: 06
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
and final action taken replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter–V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early
date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Plan allocation and utilization
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
6. In their Forty-Third Report the Committee observed that during
the years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 the Annual Plan allocations for the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting were lesser as compared to
non-Plan allocations. The Committee also observed that the main
reasons for reduced Plan allocations in the abovesaid years were due
to the inability of the Ministry to optimally utilize the allocated funds
as well as the failure on the part of Prasar Bharati to generate adequate
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR). In the light of the
above findings, the Committee urged upon the Ministry to identify
the weaknesses in the system, plug the loopholes and make serious
efforts to optimally utilize the Annual Plan allocations during the
Eleventh Plan Period.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows:-
“For the Annual Plan 2006-07 the Ministry had initially proposed
to the Planning Commission a Direct Budgetary Support (DBS)
amounting Rs. 1467.83 Crore. However, after discussions at various
stages, the Planning Commission finally allocated Rs. 538 Crore as
DBS for Annual Plan 2006-07. Similarly, for Annual Plan 2007-
2008, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had proposed
a DBS outlay of Rs. 1777.90 Crore as against which the Planning
Commission allocated Rs. 475 Crore. This Ministry is making all
out efforts to ensure that the Plan outlay is utilized to the fullest
extent. A system of regular monitoring and review of Plan Schemes
has been put in place.”

3
8. The Committee note that during the years 2006-2007 and
2007-2008, against the proposed Direct Budgetary Support of Rs. 1467.83
crore and Rs. 1777.90 crore respectively, the actual corresponding
allocations to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting were
Rs. 538 crore and Rs. 475 crore. In their earlier Reports the Committee
had found that one of the main reasons for reduced allocation of
budgetary support to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
has been the inability of the Ministry to fully utilize the allocated
funds. As a matter of fact, the Planning Commission has a very
valid ground in curtailing the originally proposed budgetary support
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in view of the
Ministry’s continuous shortfalls over the years in utilizing even the
reduced allocations. In other words, the Ministry stand a good chance
of getting an enhanced budgetary support if they utilize the allocated
funds to the optimum extent. Therefore, the Committee once again
impress upon the Ministry to optimally utilize the Annual Plan
allocations and the system of regular monitoring and review of the
Plan Schemes, as has reportedly been put in place by the Ministry,
should be effectively operated to achieve the purpose.
II. Special Package for the North East Region
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee observed that although
more than the required amount was available with Prasar Bharati for
implementation of Phase-I of the Special Package for the North East
Region, both AIR and Doordarshan chose to implement lesser number
of projects. Not satisfied with the plea of low cost of equipment which
resulted in under utilization of allocated funds, the Committee felt
that more number of projects should have been identified by AIR and
Doordarshan to ensure optimum utilization of funds earmarked for
the Special Package.
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows:—
“All India Radio : Phase-I was approved in Jan, 2002 towards the
end of 9th Plan at a cost of Rs. 24.8 crore for improvement and
expansion of AIR services in the North-East including Sikkim and
Island Territories. AIR projects approved under Phase-I included
6 projects namely, 10 KW FM Transmitters at Port Blair, Itanagar
and Kohima and upgradation of existing uplinking facilities to
digital system at Itanagar, Shillong and Guwahati. These projects
were completed by 2003-04 as scheduled, except the 10 KW FM
Transmitter project at Kohima where an interim set up of

4
1 KW FM Transmitter was provided. Installation of permanent set
up of 10 KW FM Transmitter at Kohima is also in progress. Staff
sanction for operation and maintenance of FM Transmitters is,
however, still awaited.
Doordarshan: Special package for NE States & Island Territories,
which was considered by the EFC in its meeting held on 31.01.02,
inter alia , included a large number of Schemes for expansion and
improvement of Doordarshan services and the outlay involved in
the package for Doordarshan schemes was Rs. 470 crore. During
the EFC meeting, it was decided that there was a need to look at
the fresh technology option for coverage of uncovered areas and
that the revised proposal be brought after finalization of 10th Plan
outlay. Only four schemes of Doordarshan viz. upgradation of
5 Nos. of 1KW HPTs; 160 Cable headends; 2 satellite earth stations
and satellite video phones costing Rs. 47.52 crore were approved
for implementation under Annual Plan 2002-2003. All the above
four schemes have since been completed. Total expenditure incurred
on these schemes is Rs. 33.25 crore. Expenditure is less as compared
to approved outlay due to less expenditure on equipment because
of lower cost.”
11. The Committee note that under Phase-I of the Special Package
for the North-East Region, six Projects were approved for the All
India Radio for setting up of Transmitters and upgradation of existing
uplinking facilities to digital system. Although five projects have
been completed by 2003-2004 as scheduled, the 10 KW FM Transmitter
Project at Kohima is yet to be completed. The Ministry’s contention,
that staff sanction for operation and maintenance of FM Transmitters
is still awaited, should not be construed as a valid reason for AIR
not completing the Project. In the opinion of the Committee prudence
requires that AIR should complete the targetted project at Kohima
on top priority basis. The matter of staff sanction for operation and
maintenance of FM Transmitters may also be pursued vigorously at
the appropriate level.
12. The Committee note that only four schemes of Doordarshan
at a cost of Rs. 47.52 crore were approved for implementation under
Annual Plan 2002-2003, consequent upon the decision taken during
the EFC meeting to look at the fresh technology option for coverage
of uncovered areas. All the above four schemes have since reportedly
been completed with an expenditure of Rs. 33.25 Crore. The lower
expenditure has been attributed to lower cost of equipment. What
the Committee tried to emphasize in their earlier Report was that

5
more schemes/projects should have been identified for effective as
well as optimum utilization of the allocated funds under the Special
Package. In other words, even after accomplishing the earmarked
schemes/projects within the given time frame, if Doordarshan/All
India Radio are left with sizeable unspent amount due to lower cost
of equipment, they should thrive to identify some more important
projects for coverage of the uncovered areas under the Special
Package. The Committee desire that measures should be taken
accordingly during the Eleventh Five Year period so that funds
allocated in the Annual Plans under the Special Package for the
North East Region are properly utilised.
III. Special Package for Jammu and Kashmir
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
13. In their Forty-Third Report, the Committee were dissatisfied to
find that Phase-I of the Special Package for J&K which was approved
as early as in 1999-2000 was still to be implemented fully as the
construction of transmitters at Kupwara and Amritsar was yet to be
completed and operationalised. Further, viewing seriously the undue
delay in finalizing Phase-II of the J&K Special Package on account of
inter-ministerial differences, the Committee impressed upon the Ministry
to follow up the Scheme with other concerned ministries and finalise
the same at the earliest.
14. The Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:—
“All India Radio : Special Plan for improvement and expansion
of radio coverage in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir was approved by the
Government in 1999-2000. Installation of all
the 12 Projects included in the Special Plan
has been completed. These are Kathua,
10 KW FM Transmitter (Replacement of 6 KW),
Rajouri, 10 KW FM Transmitter, Srinagar,
300 KW MW Transmitter (Replacement of
200 KW), 20 KW MW Transmitters at
Kupwara and Naushera, 6 Relay centres
with 1 KW MW Transmitters at Khalsi,
Drass, Tiesuru Diskit, Nyoma and Padum
and Kargil (200 KW MW Transmitter). All
Projects have been commissioned except
those at Padum, Nyoma and Diskit.

6
Doordarshan: Special J&K Plan was approved by the
Government in 1999. All the Projects
envisaged under this Plan have already been
implemented. At two places viz. Kupwara
and Amritsar the transmitters are
functioning in interim set up with
temporary towers. Construction of
permanent tower at Kupwara has almost
been completed and the transmitters at
Kupwara are expected to be commissioned
on full power shortly. Work of construction
of tower at Amritsar is in progress and is
expected to be completed during 2008.
There had been delay in availability of land
at Amritsar.
J&K Special Package Phase-II is being submitted to CCEA for
approval shortly.”
15. The Committee note that installation of all the 12 Projects
included in the J&K Special Plan for improvement and expansion
of radio coverage in the State of Jammu & Kashmir have been
completed by AIR. However, out of the 12 Projects already installed,
3 projects at Podum, Nyona and Diskit are yet to be commissioned.
Similarly, for two Doordarshan Projects at Kupwara and Amritsar,
transmitters are functioning still in an interim setup with temporary
towers. Taking into consideration the strategic importance that the
Government of India accord to J&K and the approval of the Special
Plan way back in the Ninth Five Year Plan period, the Committee
impress upon the Ministry/Air/DD to complete and commission the
remaining Projects under the J&K Special Package without further
delay. The Committee further desire that the Special Package
Phase II, which has been inordinately delayed and still is to be
submitted to the Cabinet for approval, be finalised at the earliest.
IV . Construction of Staff Quarters by Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
16. In their earlier Report, observing the tardy progress of
construction of staff quarters by Prasar Bharati at four metro cities
and 11 other places and the consequential lower fund utilization thereof,
the Committee impressed upon Prasar Bharati to expedite the
construction work of the staff quarters in view of the urgency involved
and the welfare of the employees of Prasar Bharati.

7
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“All India Radio : The expenditure incurred under Staff quarters
during the year 2006-07 is Rs. 10.66 crore against SBG of Rs. 10.00
crore, thereby exceeding the allocations made. Total expenditure
under this sub-head against the approved outlay of Rs. 40.00 crore
in respect of All India Radio is Rs. 16.01 crore. The lower utilization
during the 10th Plan period is mainly because of delay in getting
the approval of local bodies at Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai and
Kolkata. The provisions made for staff quarters during 2007-08
will be utilized and it is likely that additional amount may be
required as the construction are already in full swing at Delhi.
The works at Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata are likely to be taken
up shortly. The present position of construction of staff quarters at
four metros and other places is given below:
(i) Staff quarters at Kingsway Camp, Delhi: Construction of
590 nos. staff quarters at Kingsway Camp, Delhi has been
sanctioned. There are old quarters at the site, most of which
are occupied by the staff. The construction of quarters has
been taken up in 2 phases due to the site conditions. In the
first phase 323 nos. of quarters are under construction on
the site at the open space and by demolishing the vacant
quarters. The first phase is nearing completion and the target
date is July/August, 2007. After the existing staff occupying
the old quarters is shifted to newly constructed quarters,
the old quarters will be demolished and construction of
remaining quarters will start under phase II. Some of the
quarters are proposed to be constructed at Todapur site
which requires change of land use. The issue has already
been taken up with DDA and Ministry of Urban
Development but approval is still awaited.
(ii) Staff quarters at Mumbai: Quarters are to be constructed at
Borivelli site at Mumbai. Building plans are awaiting
approval of local body.
(iii) Staff quarters at Kolkata: The staff quarters were initially
planned at Baishnavghat site but the local body approval
not received as it required change of land use. Staff quarters
are now planned at Patuli site. Building plans are already
submitted to local body. Approval is awaited.
(iv) Staff quarters at Chennai: Staff quarters are planned to be
constructed at Guindi site. This required change of land
use approval of which was received from the local body in

8
April, 2006. Building plans have been submitted to the local
body and are awaiting approval.
(v) Staff quarters at other stations: 108 nos. of staff quarters
were planned at 6 AIR stations namely Vadodra, Ranchi,
Leh, Mysore, Puducherry and Patna. Construction of these
quarters is complete.
Doordarshan: The Scheme for construction of staff quarters for
Prasar Bharati staff approved by the Government in December,
2004 at a cost of Rs. 160 crore, inter alia , includes construction of
Doordarshan staff quarter at 15 places. Out of the 15 places, staff
quarters at 4 places of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai are
common for AIR and Doordarshan staff. Construction of staff
quarters at Delhi is in progress and is to be taken up in the
remaining 3 cities.
Out of the remaining 11 places, construction of staff quarters at
3 places viz. Lucknow, Hissar and Jaipur has already been
completed. Status of construction of quarters at the remaining
8 places is given below:
(a) Allahabad — W ork is at advanced stage of
completion.
(b) Varanasi — W ork is at advanced stage of
completion.
(c) Bhawanipatna — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(d) Sambalpur — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(e) Trichur — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(f) Itanagar — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(g) Patna — Tenders have been re-invited by CCW.
(h) Bangaluru — Tenders have been received by CCW &
are under scrutiny.”
18. The Committee observe that the scheme for construction of
staff quarters for the employees of Prasar Bharati approved by the
Government in December, 2004 at a cost of Rs. 160 crore inter alia

9
includes construction of Doordarshan staff quarters at 15 places out
of which staff quarters at 4 places i.e. Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and
Chennai are common for AIR and Doordarshan staff. The Committee
further observe that against the approved outlay of Rs. 40 crore for
construction of staff quarters by AIR, the actual expenditure by the
end of the Tenth Plan period has been Rs. 16.01 crore only. The low
utilization of the approved outlay has been mainly attributed to
delay in getting the approval of local bodies at the abovesaid four
Metros. Although the actual expenditure by Doordarshan vis-à-vis
the Tenth Plan outlay in this regard has not been furnished to the
Committee, there must have been shortfalls in utilization of funds
as is evident from the tardy progress of the construction of
Doordarshan staff quarters. The Committee express their serious
concern to find that staff quarters at 8 places besides the 4 Metros
are yet to be completed. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati to
consider the plight of the employees with utmost seriousness and
tackle all the procedural delays promptly and prudently to facilitate
the construction of staff quarters at the remaining places at an early
date, ensuring thereby optimum utilization of the Plan outlays.
V. Expansion of FM Services
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
19. In their Forty-Third Report, the Committee observed that
against the Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 11.45 crore for continuing schemes
and Rs. 153.60 crore for new schemes for the expansion of FM Services,
the actual expenditure by AIR was Rs. 8.36 crore and Rs. 27.46 crore
respectively as on 31 December, 2006. The Committee further observed
that out of the approved target of commissioning 120 FM Stations
during the Tenth Plan Period, only 22 Stations were completed or
nearing completion while the remaining 98 projects were carried
forward to the Eleventh Plan period. In view of the above, the
Committee recommended that the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting as well as All India Radio should make concerted efforts
to speed up the implementation process and achieve both physical
and financial targets earmarked for the Scheme during the Eleventh
Plan Period.
20. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“Against the SBG of Rs. 13.01 crore allocated during 10th Plan for
Continuing Schemes and Rs. 176.60 crore for New Schemes, the
actual expenditure up to 31st March, 2007 is Rs. 8.84 crore and

10
Rs. 45.43 crore respectively. The utilization being 77.21% in
Continuing Schemes and 29.58% in New Schemes.
While taking note of Committee’s observations, it is stated that
the main reasons which had hampered the implementation of FM
projects during 10th Plan were:
1. Procurement proposal for 28 Nos. of 10 KW FM Transmitters
was cleared by Ministry in October, 2006 (against the original
proposal for 33 Nos.) Advance AT for procurement was
placed in December, 06 but the firm did not deposit
Performance Guarantee. Therefore, order has been cancelled.
Now, fresh tenders have been invited and are due for
opening shortly.
2. Proposal for pre-dispatch inspection of 6 Nos. of 20 KW
FM Transmitters at manufacturer’s place was cleared by
Ministry in August, 2006. Transmitters have since been
received and installation in progress.
3. Approval of 19 numbers of new stations with 1 KW FM
Transmitters, 5 KW FM Transmitter at Silchar and 10 KW
FM at Gangtok included under phase-II of North East
Special Plan was received in May, 2006. Sites for these
Centres are being identified with the help of State
Governments. Procurement of 1 KW FM Transmitters is also
in progress. Action for implementation of 5 KW FM
Transmitter at Silchar and 10 KW FM Transmitter at Gangtok
is in progress.
4. Delay in offer of sites and demand notes from State
Governments. Besides, cost of sites in some cases is very
high like Jamnagar (Rs. 67 lakh), Maldah (Rs. 35 lakh),
Tamluk (Rs. 2.34 crore), Motihari (Rs. 25 lakh) and Nellore
(Rs. 68 lakh).
5. Besides above, it may be mentioned that proposals for any
new Projects which involve creation of posts are not being
approved as a number of Projects are already lying
unutilized due to non-availability of O&M staff.”
21. The Committee note that against the Budgetary Support of
Rs. 13.01 crore allocated during the Tenth Plan period for Continuing
Schemes and Rs. 176.60 crore for New Schemes under expansion of
FM services, the actual expenditure by the end of the Plan period
has been Rs. 8.84 crore and Rs. 45.43 respectively. The shortfalls in

11
Schemes have been attributed to delay in getting sites and demand
notes from the State Government, high cost of sites, non-deposit of
Performance Bank Guarantees by the firms, etc. The Committee feel
that these are procedural rigmaroles and bound to be experienced
quite often when implementing schemes/projects. What is required
to deal with such problems is advance planning, timely action and
proper coordination with other agencies. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry/AIR should take measures accordingly so that the
98 Projects carried over to the Eleventh Plan period are accomplished
on time and with optimum fund utilisation.
22. The Committee find that according to the Ministry, proposals
for new Projects which involve creation of posts are not being
approved and a number of projects are already lying unutilized due
to non-availability of operation and maintenance staff. The Committee
are really surprised at such a paradoxical situation. On the one hand,
the Ministry are taking up new schemes/projects for implementation
while on the other, similar schemes/projects are non-functional, even
after completion, due to want of operation and maintenance staff.
The Committee are of the firm view that this problem should be
addressed to in all its implications and suitable corrective action
taken accordingly.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Tenth Plan Performance
Recommendation (No. 2)
The Committee note that the total Tenth Plan proposed allocation
to the three sectors of the Ministry, viz. Information, Films and
Broadcasting Sector was Rs. 5130 crore. Against this, the actual
allocation made for the Five Annual Plans 2002-2007 was Rs. 4381
crore and the total expenditure upto 28th February, 2007 was Rs. 2741.09
crore. The percentage of the total Plan expenditure of the Ministry
upto 28th February , 2007 in respect of 10th Plan outlay was 53.43. The
Plan expenditure in all the three sectors namely, Information, Film
and Broadcasting were 58.63%, 58.41% and 62.86% respectively over
the total allocation for the Five Annual Plan periods. The figures speak
for themselves bringing out the dismal performance of the Ministry in
utilization of Plan allocations and achievements of targets. Taking note
of the unsatisfactory trend in the utilization of funds under the Plan
allocation, as early as in 2004-2005, i.e. in the beginning of the third
year of the Plan, the Committee had in their 4th Report on Demands
for Grants 2004-2005 cautioned the Ministry to take corrective steps to
arrest the trend, which does not seem to have been taken heed of.
Without mincing words, the Committee would like to place on record
their anguish about the functioning of the Ministry and their capability
to effectively fulfill the wide mandate given to them in respect of
information, education and entertainment in the specific fields of print
and electronic media and films. What dismays the Committee is that
the Ministry does not seem to have made any serious internal
assessment to identify the root causes leading to abysmally low
utilisation of Plan funds. The Committee are of the firm view that
such state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue in a Ministry
assigned with the responsibility of information and broadcasting which
is a very socially sensitive and vital sector. There is an emergent need
to bring about greater efficiency and revitalize the three key sectors of
information, films and broadcasting with a view to ensuring better
results during the current 11th Plan. They, therefore, recommend that
a concrete plan of action for improved performance in the new Plan
period be drawn with specific strategy for each sector in consultation

13
with different Wings/Units under the Ministry. This should also be
communicated to all the Wings under the Ministry and their strict
compliance ensured at all levels through regular review and monitoring.
The Committee would like to be informed of the measures taken by
the Ministry in the above context.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been noted. In
respect of 11th Five Year Plan for I & B sector, Planning Commission
had set up a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(I&B), comprising of senior Government officials and non-officials/
experts in the field for making an in-depth study of the status and
future programmes of various sectors of this Ministry, Four Sub-Groups
were formed to assist the Working Group. The Working Group finalized
its reports and submitted them to the Planning Commission. The
Ministry was allocated only Rs. 475 crore in the Plan side in the
annual Plan 2007-2008. The 11th Plan proposal of the Ministry has not
yet been finalized by the Planning commission. However, a system of
monitoring to review the Plan Schemes/Projects regularly at the
implementing level and the Ministry level has been put in place so as
to ensure that the objectives envisaged in the Plan are achieved.
Sd/-
(R.C. Misra)
Additional Secretary & FA
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 4/3/2007-PC (Vol. III) dated 5.6.2007]
Tenth Plan Performance
Recommendation (No. 3)
The Committee note with concern that a number of schemes/
projects chosen for implementation during the 10th Plan were dropped
while formulating the Plan Outlay for the first year of the 11th Plan.
This included important schemes like modernization of Photo Division;
Information, Communication, Technology (ICT) activities in hilly/tribal/
desert/sensitive and border areas and training of human resources
development by song & Drama Division; modernization and
replacement of obsolete equipments of the Films Division; induction
of new technologies like Internet Radio Broadcasting, Digital
Broadcasting, etc. by All India Radio; induction of IT enabled
multimedia by Doordarshan; etc. Although the 11th Plan has not been
finally approved, it is a clear indication that the schemes had remained
on paper during the 10th Plan period and have not seen the light of

14
the day. Undoubtedly, it implies bad planning and poor implementation
of schemes prevalent in the Ministry that definitely calls for a radical
change. The Committee also feel concerned that several major projects
which were part of the 10th Plan have not been completed and are
being carried forward to the 11th Plan. Digitalisation and automation
of Prasar Bharati, setting up of Transmitter under J&K Special scheme
and NE Special Package, construction of Soochna Bhawan in New
Delhi, Directorate of Film Festival’s Film Festival Complex, etc. are a
few among such projects. While on the one hand several projects were
either not taken up or were delayed, on the other hand, there were
serious shortfalls in the utilization of Plan allocations. These facts
further reinforce the Committee’s observations made earlier about the
Ministry’s unsatisfactory approach to the planned activities in this vital
sector. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take corrective
measures in all these spheres with a view to reversing these negative
trends and improving the overall performance of the Ministry during
the 11th Plan period.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been noted with
due care. Some of the Schemes, which were dropped by the Planning
Commission while finalizing the Annual Plan 2007-2008, have been
again proposed for inclusion in the 11th Plan. The system of monitoring
and review of Plan Schemes/Projects has been further activated in the
Media Units as well as in the Ministry. The performance of all Media
Units and Sectors is regularly reviewed at the level of Secretary (I&B).
This Ministry is making all out efforts to ensure that Schemes/Projects
are implemented successfully within time targets set.
Sd/-
(R.C. Misra)
Additional Secretary & FA
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 4/3/2007-PC (Vol. III) dated 5.6.2007]
Thrust Areas of Eleventh Plan
Recommendation (No. 4)
The Committee note that the Approach Paper of the Planning
Commission for the 11th five Year Plan has found that the
entertainment and media services sector is expected to grow at a
compound annual growth rate exceeding 19% during the 11th Plan
period. The indications are that the growth level will be about 42% in

15
Television, 19% in films, 4% in radio, 2% in music, 31% in print media,
2% in live entertainment and 3% in advertising. The Working Group
set up by the Planning Commission on Information and Broadcasting,
while formulating its recommendations, has taken a view that the
growth potentiality of the sector needs to be captured through
appropriate policy environment. According to the Ministry some of
the new proposals included in the 11th Plan proposals are conversion
of Indian Institute of Mass Communication into International Media
University, setting up of Institute of Mass Media Studies, setting up of
Global Film School, holding of National Digital Festival and setting
up of National Centre of Excellence for Gaming and Special Effects.
The Working Group had also recommended starting of an international
channel with public-private partnership to project India’s global
presence and its soft power for which an outlay of Rs. 500 crore @Rs.
100 crore per annum in the 11th Plan might be provided as Government
contribution. This proposal is stated to be under the consideration of
a Working Group under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary to the
Prime Minister. In the meantime, the Ministry have approved an
amount of Rs. 0.97 crore for the year 2007-2008 for the Scheme. The
Committee trust that the findings of the Planning Commission and
the recommendations of the Working Group would be pursued with
utmost sincerity by the Government. They suggest that the Ministry
should look into the need to create appropriate policy environment to
sustain the projected growth in the entertainment and media services
sectors. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific action
taken by Government in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
Ministry of I&B attaches a great deal of importance and priority
to these Schemes/Projects and is of strong conviction that these
Schemes/Projects will be implemented successfully during the 11th
Plan period.
Sd/-
(R.C. Misra)
Additional Secretary & FA
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 4/3/2007-PC (Vol. III) dated 5.6.2007]
Information Sector
Recommendation (No. 5)
National Press Centre (NPC)
The Committee notes that Press Information Bureau’s Scheme for
setting up the National Press Centre (NPC) was initiated as early as

16
in the 8th Plan (1992-1997). It is distressing to find that despite the
land being allotted at 3, Raisina Road, New Delhi initially in September
1994 and at 7, Raisina Road subsequently in November-December, 2001
and the foundation stone for the project having been laid by two
Prime Ministers on 1st October, 1994 and 5th December, 2001 the project
has been in the doldrums during the span of three consecutive Five
Year Plans. The reasons advanced for justifying the slippage, viz.
procedural delays at different stages and the need for obtaining
clearances from statutory bodies, etc. are not tenable as these are the
usual formalities required to be completed for any projects of this
nature. Not only has the undue delay deprived the nation of the
advantage of a world class National Press Centre, it has also exposed
the lack of proper mechanism in place within the Ministry to monitor
implementation of Plan Schemes and optimum utilization of scarce
resources allocated for their execution. The Committee had deplored
the delay in setting up of the National Press Centre in their Fourth
Report on demands for Grants (2004-2005) and thirty Second Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-2007). They regret to note that despite
the Committee pursuing the project so vigorously, there has hardly
been any tangible progress. While placing on their serious displeasure
at the way the entire project has been inordinately delayed the
Committee stress that at least henceforth stringent measures should be
taken to ensure speedy completion of the remaining formalities before
handing over of the plot to NBCC for completion of the project within
the stipulated 18 months.
Action taken by the Government
The Plan Scheme for “Setting up of National Press Centre’ (NPC)
at New Delhi was started in the 8th Five Plan (1992-1997). However,
as noted above by the Committee, the plot was re-allocated at 7, Raisina
Road in November-December, 2001. The Press Information Bureau has
been vigorously pursuing and closely monitoring the progress of the
work with NBCC, to whom the work of construction of the building
was awarded by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on 16.2.2006.
The NBCC obtained the approval for demolition of the existing building
at the proposed site from NDMC after getting the No Objection
Certificates issued by CPWD and Directorate of Estates in this regard,
and completed demolition of the existing building by 15.5.2007.
NBCC had submitted the architectural plans of National Press
Centre to NDMC on 24.2.2006 or approval. As the site of the Project
was under a selected area, namely, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road
Institutional Area, the same could not be finalized in isolation and

17
was subject to approval of Urban design scheme or Rajendra Prasad
Road Institutional Area by NDMC/DUAC. Since then, NBCC has been
following up the preparation of the Master Plan for RP Institutional
Area by CPWD and its approval by NDMC and DUAC. As on 1.5.2007
the Master Plan prepared by CPWD has been submitted to NDMC. It
is expected that after due scrutiny, the Master Plan will be sent to
DUAC for approval which is expected to be received shortly. Thereafter
NBCC shall prepare the revised drawing for NPC based on the
approved overall scheme and submit the same to NDMC for approval.
After initial scrutiny, the proposal will be forwarded to DUAC/Fire
Deptt./DCP (Licensing) for their approval. After getting approvals from
all these Authorities, NDMC will release the approved drawings.
It may be submitted that various statutory approvals are required
to be obtained before construction of NPC can be started. These
approvals are to be given by the agencies concerned viz. DUAC, NDMC
etc. as per their own procedures over which PIB has no control. It is
also submitted that there has been to avoidable delay on the part of
PIB and the matter has been continuously pursued. NBCC/PIB will
actively pursue to get the aforesaid approvals and make all efforts to
ensure that the Project is completed within the stipulated 18 months
from the start of the construction.
Sd/-
(Stuti Kacker)
Joint Secretary (P&A)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 23/14/2007-Press, Dated 26.6.2007]
Recommendation (No. 6)
International Media University
The Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) has been able
to establish itself as an Institute of repute in the field of communication,
teaching, training and research. Notwithstanding the various long-term
and short-term courses offered by it to meet the specific needs of the
industry, Government and Public Sector, its performance in the area of
research and evaluation studies and collaboration with Regional Centres
of learning has been quite unimpressive with the utilization of allocated
funds during the 10th Plan period for various Schemes. The under-
utilization of allocations for the Scheme, Research and Evaluation
Studies, is stated to be on account of the vacant faculty positions.
During the examination of Demands for Grants (2006-07), the
Committee were informed that steps were being taken to fill up the

18
vacant position in the Research Department of the Institute. The vacant
posts do not seem to have been filled up and neither have subsequent
vacancies been filled up. The Committee also note with concern that
despite the tall claims and the available funds, hardly has any progress
been made in entering into collaboration with Regional Centres of
learning for courses in mass communication in order to make available
the Institute’s expertise through the existing centres. The dismal
performance of the Institute in these spheres raises doubts about the
capability of the institution to expand its operations beyond the existing
framework. The Committee were informed that a proposal has been
worked out to convert the IIMC into International Media University
which is to be approved by the Planning Commission. After upgrading
the skills and profile of the Institution, the proposed University is
expected to cater to the training and research needs of third world
countries in the area of journalism and mass media. When enquired
about the courses that will be offered to the students by the University,
there seemed to be no clarity in this regard. With the advancement
being made by the media and entertainment industry throughout the
world, it is imperative that a set of degree as well as diploma courses
in tune with the changing needs of the industry will have to be
designed by the institute before being upgraded as an International
University. the Committee desire that prompt measures be taken for
bringing about overall improvement in the functioning of the Institute
and also for commencing preparatory work for its conversion into an
International University.
Action taken by the Government
The reasons for shortfall in Research and Evaluation Studies and
Collaboration Scheme during 10th Plan period are as follows:
1. Research and Evaluation Studies
Many research studies undertaken by IIMC during the 10th Plan
period were sponsored and financed by various Ministries/sponsors,
which engaged the time and efforts of the limited available manpower
in the Research unit of IIMC. These sponsored projects were generating
Revenue for the Institute and, therefore, with the limited manpower
some of the Research Projects could not be undertaken. The expenditure
of studies conducted out of Plan grant depends on the size and area
of study. Most of the studies conducted by the Institute were of shorter
duration but provided useful inputs for conducting Institute’s academic
programmes. Besides this, the Research Department of IIMC is headed
by a Professor (Research). The post of Professor (Research) is lying

19
vacant since 1.4.2004 and, therefore, with the existing manpower it
was not possible to utilize all the funds allocated as per the Budget
Estimates.
2. Collaboration with Regional Centres of Learning
The reason for shortfall in physical as well as financial terms in
the collaboration scheme was due to poor response of Regional
Centers/Universities for collaborative arrangements with them. The
Institute made all possible efforts within the available resources and
manpower, to finalize collaborations with a number of Universities.
But, except in the case of Nagaland University, none of the others
came forward to finalize collaborations and sign an agreement/MOU
with IIMC. Hence due to poor response from Regional Centres/
Universities, the Scheme has been discontinued after completion of
10th Plan.
3. Action Taken by IIMC to fill up the vacant posts
All direct recruit vacancies in IIMC are reported in the Annual
Direct Recruitment Plan (ADRP) of the Ministry for getting them
cleared by the Screening Committee. As soon as they are cleared, action
for filling up through advertisements is taken at IIMC. 4 Posts cleared
by the Screening Committee have been advertised and screening process
is completed. Selection Committees are being constituted to select the
candidates for 2 posts. For the remaining two posts due to non-
availability of the suitable candidates, necessary action is being taken
to re-advertise.
4. Action taken/proposed to be taken by IIMC to design a set of
Diploma and Degree Courses in tune with changing needs of
the Industry
The Institute proposes to constitute a High Powered Committee,
with the approval of appropriate authorities, to finalize the subjects
and syllabus to be taught in each training course, nomenclature of
courses and number of courses to be conducted at each level. It is
also proposed to organize workshops/seminar with the participation
of eminent academicians and media practitioners etc. to discuss the
needs of media industry for trained manpower, with reference to the
changing media scenario and for setting up a New Media University
in the country.
The proposal for converting IIMC into International Media
University has been taken up with the Planning Commission for
allocation of funds.

20
5. Steps being taken for converting IIMC into International Media
University during the 11th Plan period
(I) IIMC approached the UGC with a request to grant Deemed
University Status to the IIMC.
(II) Action is being taken to create the necessary physical
infrastructure such as:
• Construction of additional classrooms
• Additional faculty rooms
• Hostels
• Expansion of Library facilities
• Canteen facility
•P ress expansion
• Computer school etc. by inviting detailed estimates from
the CCW
(III) Similarly for creation of additional posts, proposals are being
made and submitted for consideration of the competent authorities.
(IV) As mentioned above at point 4, the Institute proposes to
introduce relevant UG/PG/Research Degree Courses. Their
nomenclature, subjects to be taught, syllabus etc. are to be decided
after conducting the workshops/discussions with the experts/
Recommendation of the Committees.
Sd/-
(Stuti Kacker)
Joint Secretary (P&A)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 23/13/2007-IP&MC, dated 19.7.2007]
Film Sector
Recommendation (No. 8)
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC)
The National Film Development Corporation Ltd. (NFDC) was
established with the distinct objective of promoting growth of the
Indian film Industry and fostering excellence in cinema. As stated, the
primary mandate of NFDC is to plan, promote and organize an
integrated and efficient development of the Indian Film Industry.

21
Viewing from this perspective, the overall performance of NFDC and
its achievements in financial terms and physical output over the years
has been, to say the least, dismal. Admittedly, for more than three
years of the 10th Plan period, NFDC was merely acting as an agent
for procuring films for DD and as producer of petty advertisements
for DAVP , activities which were in fact intended to be peripheral ones
meant to generate some additional revenue. The Corporation was
reportedly so cash starved on account of locking up of inventory of
resources in films which remained uncompleted and an arbitration
with Doordarshan involving roughly Rs. 30 crore that even the plan
funds at its disposal could not be put to proper use. Astoundingly, the
Corporation had been saddled with litigation involving Doordarshan
although both entities come under the administrative control of the
same Ministry. All these factors led to the sad spectacle of the
Corporation settling down for peripherals forgetting its main mandate.
The Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry cannot
absolve itself of the responsibility for remaining a mute spectator for
a long time when a tiny Public Sector unit like NFDC was almost
gasping for breath. The Committee have reasons to believe that the
performance of the Corporation at that period of time deteriorated,
admittedly, on account of poor management. At this stage, the
Committee can only express their serious displeasure about the
callousness of the Ministry in monitoring the performance of NFDC
and the inaction of the Corporation’s management. They trust that
having learnt lessons from the past experience, concerted efforts will
now be made for restoring the Corporation to its past glory.
Action taken by the Government
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC)
During the 10th Plan, NFDC had a Scheme called “Production of
Films—Own, Co-production and Subsidy Scheme” which was financed
entirely through internal resources without any Plan support from the
Government. As such, during the 10th Plan period the  revenue
generation activity of the Corporation was marketing of Doordarshan’s
commercial time and the Corporation was planning to use the internal
generation of revenue for film production activity. However, because
of the drastic fall in the margin out of the revenue from the marketing
of commercial time the Corporation was starved of resources for film
production. The marketing of the commercial time of Doordarshan
had to be discontinued in Sept., 2003.
The dispute with DD was mainly concerning the sharing of revenue
on the marketing of commercial time which was referred to arbitration

22
and the Corporation could successfully conclude the same and get rid
of liability of Rs. 30 crore from the books of accounts. With the financial
assistance of Rs. 4.77 crore extended by the Ministry, in 2006-07 the
Corporation could meet the working capital requirement and restart
the activities related to the production of films. The Corporation could
manage to complete one pending film in Tamil, “SASANAM” and
released it in April 2006. In spite of the adversities the Corporation
could manage to produce 14 films during the 10th Plan period.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 202/6/2007-F (C), dated 31.7.2007]
Film Sector
Recommendation (No. 9)
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) (Continued)
The Committee have been informed that the new management of
the Corporation has embarked upon a number of new initiatives viz.
mooting the proposal for infusion of additional funds and enhancement
of its share capital, co-production of films, production of films in
regional languages by first time filmmakers, etc. In keeping with its
original mandate, NFDC has also undertaken a number of measures
for creating a marketing and distribution network for films through
negotiations with distributors and exhibitors for distribution deals,
e-mail marketing and publicity campaigns and participation in various
film festivals. NFDC is also rightly focusing on promoting India as a
filming destination for foreign filmmakers in collaboration with Ministry
of Tourism under the Incredible India Brand. Apart from the working
capital loan of Rs. 19.77 crore extended by the Ministry during
2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the Corporation has proposed infusion of
additional funds and enhancement of its share capital. A token
provision of Rs. 10 lakh has been made in the Annual Plan 2007-2008
for equity enhancement. Against the proposed 11th Plan allocation of
Rs. 60 crore for the scheme to support, films in regional languages,
provision made in the Annual Plan 2007-08 is only Rs. 3 crore. The
Committee welcome the new initiatives. Notwithstanding the optimism
raised on account of the latest moves by NFDC, which of course are
still at the nascent stage as of now, the Committee’s feeling is that
those might not be translated into reality unless drastic measures are
taken for infusion of funds and revamping of the Corporation. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that no efforts should be spared in

23
pursuing these initiatives and proposals to their logical conclusion so
that NFDC will able to establish itself as a leader in fostering excellence
in cinema and promoting culture and understanding through the audio-
visual media.
Action taken by the Government
As the Corporation was operating with a low capital base of
Rs. 14 crore, which is insufficient to meet the present cost of budget
for making a film, the Corporation has projected a fund requirement
of Rs. 60 crore during 11th Plan period to pursue film production
activities. This Ministry is proposing Rs. 30 crore in the 11th Plan
under the scheme ‘Film Production in various Regional Languages’.
To rejuvenate the functioning of the Corporation, the following
new initiatives have been taken by the NFDC:
I. Production
(i) A new Co-production Scheme has been announced wherein
30% of the budget is brought in by the filmmaker, another
30% by the Corporation and 3rd party financing 40%. Two
Co-production Agreements have already been finalized and
the 2nd Edition of the Co-production is under finalization.
(ii) In or der to encourage the regional filmmakers, the
Corporation proposes to finance upto Rs. 2 crore to the first
time filmmakers from each region.
II. Marketing
(i) Domestic Theatrical Distribution
In the changed scenario of coming up of multiplexes and the digital
form of the theatrical distribution, the Corporation proposes to tie up
with leading distribution companies having chain of multiplexes to
undertake distribution of films of the Corporation.
(ii) Export
With a view to enhance the distribution overseas, the Corporation
proposes to participate in major international film festivals like Cannes
Film Market, American Film Market, MIPCOM and MIPTV . The
Corporation also undertakes the marketing of independent filmmakers
production on commission basis.

24
(iii) National Film Circle
The Corporation has strengthened the National Film Circle by
typing up with various Regional Film Circles and the membership of
National Film Circle has grown up multifold.
III. Other activities
With a view to promote India as film destination the Corporation
is in dialogue with tourism Ministry under the Incredible India brand
and also proposes to set up a separate cell attached to the Delhi
Region office to coordinate the various clearances required by foreign
producers.
IV . Capital Infusion
The Corporation has requested for enhancement in its authorized
share capital and paid up capital to Rs. 50 crore. Steps have been
initiated to first enhance the Corporation’s authorized share capital.
Subsequently, steps would be taken to increase its paid-up capital by
converting the working capital loan extended to the Corporation in to
equity as also infusing fresh funds. This would be carried out by
seeking  Cabinet approval for NFDC’s re-structuring. It is submitted
that all this would enhance the net worth of NFDC, which has been
considerably eroded with the passage of time as equity was last infused
in 1995-96 for Rs. 25.00 lakh only. The Corporation is making all out
efforts to rejuvenate its functioning to achieve the primary mandate of
production of films and hopes to make a major contribution to the
film industry in the years to come.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B, O.M. No. 202/6/2007-F(C), dated 31.7.2007]
Film Sector
Recommendation (No. 12)
Museum of Moving Images (MOMI)
The Committee note that setting up of Museum of Moving Images
(MOMI) by Films Division is a project that was conceived during the
10th Plan and continuing in the 11th Plan with hardly any progress
other than the MoU signed with the National Building Construction

25
Corporation (NBCC) for preparation of Detailed Project Report.
Intended to be an entertaining and educational museum that will depict
the history of Indian cinema through audio-visual presentation and
display of important artifacts and at the same time educate film makers
and film students through seminars and workshops, the Committee
view it as a prestigious and unique institution in the film sector and
attach much significance to it. The MOMI being a novel venture, the
Committee desire that depiction of specific details, provision of facilities
and achievement of aims of objectives should be spelt out clearly
without leaving any room for ambiguity. While deprecating the delay
in its implementation, the Committee stress that the project should be
taken up in right earnest and its timely completion ensured.
Action taken by the Government
Keeping in view the objectives of the proposed Museum, the
Ministry through the Films Division entered into an agreement with
National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd. for preparing a
Detailed Project Report. Towards this, the services of Director of
American Museum of the Moving Image, New York, the USA, which
is the only other Museum in the world with comparable size and
contents, were also taken for conceptualisation. The Architectural
concept and Design of the Project has been approved and the
preparation of the Detailed Project Report by National Buildings
Construction Corporation Ltd. is under way. Every effort will be made
to ensure that the project progresses as per a scheduled time-table.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/02/2007-F(A), dated 12.7.2007]
Films Sector
Recommendation (No. 15)
Exports in Films
The Committee note that the Working Group set up by the
Planning Commission has recommended that Government should make
a roadmap with specific strategies double the export earning of Films
sector by the end of the 11th Plan. Projection based on the current
trend is that of a growth rate of overseas box office receipts at a

26
compounded annual growth of 18% on the basis of which overseas
box office receipts are expected to rise from Rs. 700 crore approx. In
2007 to Rs. 1600 crore in 2011. Apart from the routine efforts by the
Ministry, there is no integrated approach towards promotion of exports
of films as the Indian film industry is in private sector and the export
performance is dependent on individual efforts. In view of this, there
is a proposal to create an Export Promotion Council (EPC) for the film
industry. As this is expected to be a significant move for boosting film
exports, the industry associations have been asked to set up EPC which
could then seek Government support provided by the Department of
Commerce under various schemes. Annual Plan 2007-08 has provided
Rs. 3.82 crore to the Directorate of Film Festival under the scheme,
Export Promotion through Film Festival in India and abroad. The
proposal under the scheme for the year include organizing of
International Film Festival of India, participation of Indian films in 45
foreign film festivals in different countries and selection of 21 feature
and 21 non-feature films. The Committee are of the firm view that
Indian films enjoy an edge over several other countries and, therefore,
exports should receive focussed attention of the Government. They,
therefore, desire that while ensuring proper utilization of allocated
resources and meeting the set physical targets, the proposal for setting
up Export Promotion Council for the film industry should be pursued
vigorously as a thrust area.
Action taken by the Government
In the Plan, Govt. has recognised the need for focused attention
towards the promotion of Indian films vis-a-vis increase in export of
Indian films. Under the Plan Scheme, viz. “Participation in film Market
in India and Abroad”, Govt. has allocated Rs. 2.20 crore during
2007-08 towards increasing visibility and awareness about Indian films
in foreign film markets. This is in addition to the Plan Scheme of the
Directorate of Film Festival of Rs. 3.82 crore for Annual Plan 2007-08
for export promotion through participation in film festivals. The
endeavour would receive a further fillip after the setting up of Export
Promotion Council by the film industry . This Ministry is pursuing
vigorously with the film industry for submitting the proposal for setting
up of the Council. Once the Council is set up, it would be entitled to
receive funds from Govt. of India for promotion of Indian films in a
systematic and organised manner in untapped markets of the world.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B, O.M. No. 106/05/2007-F(I), Dated 31.5.2007]

27
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 16)
(i) Prasar Bharati
Digitalisation of Archives of Prasar Bharati
The Committee note that All India Radio has completed the process
of converting its analog archives of 43,000 tapes collected up to
November, 2001 into digital format. For approximately 10,000 tapes
collected thereafter, approval has been given by the CEO/Director
General, AIR for digitalization, which is yet to be taken up. Although
the process of digitalization had already been started in Doordarshan
since 2004, it is yet to pick up momentum. On account of constraints
of space experienced by Doordarshan, it has been decided to move
the Archives to CPC in the Asian  Games village after shifting DD
News from there to Mandi House. In their 42nd Action Taken Report
relating to Demands for Grants (2006-2007), the Committee had
recommended that efforts should be made by the Ministry for obtaining
required funds to procure equipments for establishing professional and
digitalized Archives in Doordarshan. The Committee trust that, as
assured by the Secretary , Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
and the CEO, Prasar Bharati, digitalization of Archives in AIR and
Doordarshan would be taken up on priority basis and completed
without further delay.
Action taken by the Government
DD-Archives has already started digitization of its holdings in the
limited space available in Akashwani Bhawan. 4300 hours—7500 tapes
have been digitized and the work is continuing in full swing. There
is a proposal of shifting the archives to Central Production Centre
(CPC) after the News vacates its space. The space will be redesigned
according to the specific requirements of archives. DD-Archives is also
acquiring a server based Media Asset Management Equipment which
is presently at the stage of evaluation.
The 2nd Phase of digitization of 10,000 analogue tapes containing
the recordings of Spoken Words and Music programmes has been
started by the Central Archives from April, 2007 as per the standard
format of digitization. Besides, the Central Archives has also taken an
initiative to digitize the archival recordings preserved in various

28
libraries of All India Radio Stations. A comprehensive plan in this
regard is being prepared for preservation of archival recordings, viz.
identification and cataloguing, cleaning and quality enhancement,
digitization in uniform format, creation of proper storage facilities,
electronic transmission of such materials among regional archives as
well as from Regional Archives to Central Archives and vice-versa. For
this, major technical equipments like computers, server, CD writer,
player, label printer, CTRs, etc. will be required. For that, necessary
estimated funds are being projected for sanction by the competent
authority.
Safety and Security are very essential part of digitization for which
installation of biometric system in the Central Archives and storing of
digitized material in fire resistance cabinets are under the process of
purchase.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o  I&B, O.M. No. 18/2/2007-BC-IV , dated 29.6.2007]
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 17)
Prasar Bharati
Digitalisation of Archives of Prasar Bharati (Continued)
The Committee further note that the archives holdings of Prasar
Bharati contain recordings of people, events, speeches, etc which are
of immense historical value. These are very rare and valuable assets
which are available exclusively in the Archives of Prasar Bharati. The
Committee do not see any reason why these recordings cannot be
produced and marketed commercially through different marketing
outlets in the country and abroad. Presently DVDs and CDs produced
by AIR and Doordarshan are sold only through the counters at their
centers and during special events like Film Festivals. It has been stated
that efforts are being made to market them through the wide network
of post offices in the country . They recommend that Prasar Bharati
should seriously consider commercial production and extensive
marketing of its archival holdings.

29
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati is a rich treasure trove of video recordings covering
40 years of broadcasting television programmes. A series of focused
efforts is being made in consolidating this rich resource and creating
a strong digital asset resource library available for all interested users.
Basically this will also serve all the DD-Channels by giving re-purposed
quality software. The DVD/VCD Project is also in full swing. High
quality performances, theatre works, serials, documentaries, and also
programmes based on arts and crafts have been identified for
commercial release in the form of DVD etc. DD-Archives has planned
to market them through various outlets in addition to DD and AIR
outlets. Already there are a number of shops which are buying these
products on retailers’ discount and seeling through their outlets. The
MOU with India Post will also be finalized soon. In addition to all
these efforts, DD-Archives will participate in the new digital
technological revolution by introducing IPTV video on demand and
other such prospective revenue earning activities depending on the
technological and infrastructural resources and budgeting. Since 2003,
All India Radio Central Archives has released music albums under the
banner of ‘Akashvani Sangeet’. So far AIR has released 42 albums and
approximately 20 to 25 albums are expected to be released by the end
of March 2008. These albums are available at the sales counters of
AIR Stations and also with retail music shops.
As a marketing strategy, discount is being offered on MRP of all
AIR/Doordarshan Archival releases. A special discount is given during
fairs, festivals and music concerts in addition to bulk buyers and
retailers.
There have been efforts to attract the Public Sector Units, which
have resulted in getting the bulk orders from some of the leading
companies. AIR has also initiated efforts to co-brand its Archival
products by Nationalised Banks and other Corporate offices. Under
this scheme, the front inlay cover of album carries logo and message
as given by Corporate office or Bank. ONGC showed keen interest in
co-branding the Archival products. On their request, AIR produces
CDs of Hindustani Classical music, which have been used by them
for gifts purpose to corporate sectors and also for propagation of their
Company. A handsome revenue was earned by All India Radio by
this venture.
1. All India Radio is also taking initiative for the extensive
distribution of Akashvani Sangeet’s albums. A leading and

30
reputed music company, INRECO (Indian Record
Manufacturing Co., Chennai) has come out with the proposal
for the distribution of AIR products in India and abroad.
The matter is under process.
2. AIR is also working on the marketing of Archival Products
through Indian Postal Department. Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) in this regard is being examined by
the legal cell of AIR.
3. AIR is also considering actively the ‘On-line’ sales of AIR
Products for their wider distribution.
4. All India Radio and Doordarshan are working jointly to
produce Audio-Visual presentation of AIR Archival
recordings in DVDs and VCDs in a creative and aesthetic
manner. To begin with, under this new venture some
selected audio recordings of AIR Archives have been handed
over to Doordarshan Archives for their visualization.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 18/2/2007-BC-IV , dated 29.6.2007]
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 19)
Prasar Bharati
Special Package for North East
Similarly, the way the Ministry have been dragging their feet in
the process of approval of Phase II of the Special Package for North
East is equally a cause of serious concern to the Committee. It is
unimaginable that the Government would require about four years to
formulate and approve a small scheme like NE Special Package which
is practically meant for upliftment and speeder development of that
Region. Even after formal approval of Phase II of the NE Package was
given in May, 2006, nothing concrete seems to have been done so far
to ensure timely implementation of the package except that AIR has
planned to acquire sites for 19 Nos. of 1 KW FM Transmitter projects
during the year. The Annual Outlay under the Special Package for
2007-08 for Doordarshan is Rs. 40 crore and for All India Radio it is
Rs. 25 crore. As the Committee are seriously concerned about the
development of North East and are keen that the allocations for the

31
Special Package are utilized to the fullest extent, they would like to
insist that the Ministry gear up for taking up the projects in right
earnest and complete them well within the stipulated time. The
Committee would expect the Ministry to closely monitor
implementation of projects covered under the Special Package on a
regular basis in order to ensure that there are no slippages both in
physical and financial targets.
Action taken by the Government
All India Radio: Approval of Phase-II of NE Package at a cost of
Rs. 143.32 crore was given in the last week of May, 2006. AIR Projects
approved under Phase-II includes:
1. 19 new FM stations—Sites for these stations are being
identified with the help of concerned State Govts. Site at
three places at Changlang, Tuipang and Udaipur have
already been taken over from State Govt. Payment for
Goalpara site also made and is to be handed over by State
Govt. Demand for payment at Bomdila, Kolasib and
Nutanbazar is under process. Sites have also been finalized
for locations at Khonsa, Lumding, Ukhrul and Tamenglong,
and demand notes for cost of sites are being got expedited
from the State Governments. Sites for remaining locations
are being identified. Site cost offered at Daporijo by State
Government is very high. Matter has been taken up with
the State Government. Procurement of FM Transmitters for
these places is under process.
2. Addl. channels with FM Transmitter at existing centres at
Silchar (5 KW) & Gangtok (10 KW)-Transmitters will be
installed at T.V . sites. Procurement of Transmitters is in
progress.
3. DSNG/MSS terminals-Procurement of equipment initiated.
4. Chinsura-1000 KW MW Transmitter (Replacement)-Estimate
for Civil works is under sanction. Procurement of
Transmitters is in progress.
5. Kavaratti-10 KW MW Transmitter (Replacement of 1 KW)-
Procurement of Transmitter is in progress. Local
Administration is to give additional piece of land. Matter is
being pursued by AIR.
6. 100 Watt FM Relay Centres in remote locations (100 places)-
More than 100 places have been finalized with the help of

32
State Governments and finalisation of locations is in
progress. Tenders for purchase of transmitters are under
process.
7. Implementation of Phase II is likely to be completed by
2009-10.
8. Outlay for North East Special Package in the ongoing
Annual Plan 2007-08 is Rs. 25.00 crore (Rs. 22.50 crore under
Capital and Rs. 2.50 crore under Software). All efforts will
be made to utilize the funds made available during the
current financial year.
Doordarshan : Special package (Ph-II) for expansion and
improvement of Doordarshan services in NE region and Island
territories (Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep) was
approved by the Government in May, 2006. Implementation of the
various Schemes is in progress. Four transmitter projects viz. DD1 &
DD News LPTs at Car Nicobar & VLPTs at Swarajgram and Kalighat
have already been completed and commissioned. Installation of interim
HPT set up at Kokrajhar has also been completed and test transmission
started.
All the Schemes being implemented, as part of Special package,
are being monitored very closely on regular basis and every possible
step is being taken to ensure that there is no slippage in physical and
financial targets. Allocated amount of Rs. 40 crore for the Special
package in Annual Plan 2007-08 is expected to be fully utilized.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), dated 2.7.2007]
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 23)
Prasar Bharati
Doordarshan-Digitalisation & Modernization of Production Facilities
Digitalisation and Modernization of production facilities is
undoubtedly a thrust area for Doordarshan for constantly upgrading
and improving its operations. In spite of this, out of the 10th Plan
targets under the scheme, digitalization of only 19 smaller studios

33
have been completed whereas work in six major studio centers at
Jallandhar, Srinagar, Thiruvananthapuram, Bhubaneswar, Bhopal and
Lucknow and 16 smaller studios are only nearing completion. The
scheme included digitalization and modernization of production
facilities, augmentation of existing studio facilities and automation of
Transmitters (LPTs and VLPTs). Against the allocation of Rs. 424.66
crore under Plan (Capital) for the scheme, the actual utilization upto
February, 2007 was only Rs. 295.62 crore which is only 69.61% of the
allocation. The reasons for the low level of utilization are stated to be
delays in availability of site, getting approval, construction of buildings
and towers, procurement of equipment, etc. Mostly these are matters
which should have been foreseen and overcome through regular review
and monitoring of projects instead of allowing them to persist leading
to undue delay in modernization of production facilities and non-
utilization of allocated funds. While expressing their displeasure at the
tardy implementation of the digitalization process, the Committee urge
that prompt measures be taken for completion of the projects identified
under the schemes during fiscal 2007-2008 and also for optimum
utilization of the allocated amount of Rs. 61.43 crore.
Action taken by the Government
During 10th Plan, all the 17 major Studio Centres were targeted to
be fully digitalized and 30 smaller Studio Centres were targeted to be
partially digitalized. Full digitalization of 17 major Studio Centres and
partial digitalization of 30 smaller Studio Centres has been completed
during the 10th Plan period. As regards automation of transmitters,
193 old LPTs (100W) were envisaged to be replaced by new 500 watt
(1+1) automode LPTs during 10th Plan period. Installation of
86 automode LPTs was completed during the 10th Plan period &
7 more CPTs are under installation. Action for procurement of
100 automade LPTs is being taken. As per present indications, these
are expected to be installed in phases during 2007-08 and 2008-09.
All out efforts are being made by Doordarshan to complete the
ongoing schemes of digitalization and modernization at the earliest
possible. Amount allocated for digitalization and modernization in
Annual Plan 2007-08 is Rs. 61.43 crore. The schemes on which this
expenditure is envisaged, are at different stages of implementation
and are expected to be completed during 2007-08. Allocated amount
of Rs. 61.43 crore is expected to be fully utilized.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin), Dated 2.7.2007]

34
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 24)
Prasar Bharati
Doordarshan—High Definition Television (HDTV) and DVB-H
Transmission
The Committee have been informed that the pilot project in High
Definition Television (HDTV), which produces five times more visual
information than a conventional TV picture, has been approved and
included in the draft 11th Plan. Besides upgrading its facilities, the
pilot project is expected to help Doordarshan in its preparedness for
providing feeds of TV coverage of important events of Commonwealth
Games 2010 to foreign broadcasters in HDTV format. A provision of
Rs. 39.20 crore has been made in the approved Annual Plan for 2007-
2008 out of which Rs. 15 crore is for the HDTV pilot project for field
production at Delhi. The proposals covered in the draft 11th Plan
include schemes for setting up HDTV studios and digital transmitters
at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, for relay of HDTV programme
and starting two HDTV Channels on DTH platform. In a sense, the
project attains greater significance in view of the forthcoming
Commonwealth Games. While appreciating the timely decision taken
by the Government for induction of the technology, the Committee
desire that the proposals included in the Plan Scheme be taken up
and implemented promptly.
Action taken by the Government
The schemes for establishment of HDTV studios at Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai along with digital transmitters at these places
for relay of HDTV programmes and putting up 2 HDTV channels on
DTH platform are included in the draft 11th Plan proposals, which are
yet to be approved. Outlay of Rs. 441 crore is proposed for above
schemes.
A Scheme for establishment of HDTV production and post
production facility at Delhi and Mumbai has been formulated and is
being processed for approval of SFC.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), Dated 2.7.2007]

35
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 25)
Prasar Bharati
Doordarshan—High Definition Television (HDTV) and DVB-H
Transmission (Continued)
It has been reported that Doordarshan has also initiated a pilot
project of DVB-H transmission that will make possible to receive TV
signals on mobile phones in the coverage zone of the transmitter. The
project envisaged setting up the facility for DVB-H transmission in the
cities of Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, where digital transmitters
presently exist, involving an estimated expenditure of about Rs. 40
crore. However, the scheme is yet to be formulated and approved. In
view of the constant need for inducting innovative technologies in
electronic media and the need for widening the viewer-ship of
Doordarshan, the Committee desire that the proposal be taken up for
serious consideration so that it could be sent to the Planning
Commission for approval.
Action taken by the Government
Doordarshan’s Pilot Project of DVB-H transmission has since been
completed and commissioned. DVB-H transmission has been started
with effect from 23.5.2007 with 8 Doordarshan channels viz. DD
National; DD  News;   DD Bharati; DD Sports; DD Bangla; DD Punjabi;
DD Podighai and DD Urdu. Transmission can be received within a
range of about 10 Kms. from Akashvani Bhawan, Parliament Street,
New Delhi where the DVB-H transmitter is located, on DVB-H enabled
mobile phones.
Schemes for setting up DVB-H transmission facility in the cities of
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai have been formulated and these are
being processed for approval of SFC.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), Dated 2.7.2007]

36
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 26)
Prasar Bharati
All India Radio: Digitalisation and automation
In AIR too digitalization of production facilities and automation of
studio and transmission facilities for enhancing technical quality of
content and economizing the cost of operation was a major project in
the 10th Plan. In spite of the scheme being taken up right at the
beginning of the Plan period, it is distressing to find that the
expenditure throughout five years of the Plan period has been far
below the allocation leading to an actual utilization of only Rs. 66.46
crore upto February, 2007 against the allocation of Rs. 120.96 crore,
which accounts for a mere utilization of 54.94% of the allocation.
Thereafter, it is not surprising that a number of projects which are
part of the scheme, viz. provision of Hard Disc based System at
109 stations, installation of 21 nos. of Portable MSS Terminals and
installation of Digital Microwave Studio Transmitter Link at Cuddapah,
Vijayawada, Srinagar, Patna, Jodhpur, Chandigarh, Kargil, Kota and
Aurangabad are pending completion. The Committee have been time
and again recommending that the Ministry should adhere to the time
schedules and also strive to utilize the allocations fully. With the new
Plan period having commenced already, they hope that the pending
projects would be completed without any further delay. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the final status of implementation of the
projects and utilization of allocated funds. They also recommend that
the projects identified for the annual Plan 2007-08 should be
implemented within the time frame and optimum utilization of the
Plan funds be made.
Action taken by the Government
Hard Disc Based System at 76 stations of AIR was provided and
commissioned in April 2004 at a cost of approximately Rs. 8.48 crore.
Provision of Hard Disc Based System at 69 more stations of AIR is
also in progress. Advanced AT for the project has already been issued
and the system is likely to be installed and commissioned by September
2007. Provision of Hard Disc Based System at 48 major stations of All
India Radio is also currently in progress. Order for 564 Nos. of
Workstations had already been placed on DGS&D and the systems are
likely to be delivered and networked at these stations by June 2007.
Procurement of other items like sound card and servers are also in
different stages of implementation and the entire scheme is likely to
be functional by December 2007.

37
Twenty one Portable MSS Terminals have already been procured.
Necessary clearance for all the terminals (except for Srinagar) has
already been obtained from DOT and WPC. Activation of these
terminals is under process and is expected to be completed within a
month’s time. MSS terminal procured for  Srinagar is under diversion
since DOT has not issued clearance for Srinagar so far. Purchase order
for Digital Microwave Studio Transmitter Link at  Cuddapah,
Vijayawada, Srinagar, Patna, Jodhpur, Chandigarh, Kargil, Kota and
Aurangabad has already been placed. Necessary clearance from WPC
for these links is awaited. Installation and commissioning of these
equipments will be taken up immediately after receipt of necessary
clearance from WPC.
The expenditure under Digitalization and Automation up to
10th Plan period is Rs. 71.03 crore against SBG allocated amounting to
Rs. 119.16 crore. The utilization works out to 59.61%. Efforts are being
made to complete the Scheme within the current financial year.
Allocation during the year 2007-08 is Rs. 15.00 crore, which is
considered insufficient, and additional demand will be projected at RE
stage.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), Dated 2.7.2007]
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 28)
Prasar Bharati
Private FM Radio
The new policy initiative in the area of Private FM Radio was
initially started in 1999 for attracting private initiative to operationalise
FM radio stations that provide programme of local content and
relevance, improve the quality in reception and generation, encourage
participation of local talent and generate employment. Phase II of the
policy for expansion of FM Radio broadcasting through private agencies
was notified on 13th July, 2005. Thus far, permission has been granted
to 266 private FM channels for starting FM Radio stations, out of
which 58 channels were operationalised till 29th March, 2007.
97 channels which could not be allotted as the bids were low would
be notified again. An amount of Rs. 1145.48 crore was collected as

38
One Time Entry Fee from Phase II licensees and Rs. 27.79 crore as
annual fee during the year 2006-07 till 21st February, 2007. An amount
of Rs. 1 crore has been allocated in the Annual Plan for the purpose
of co-location of 5 new towers. While appreciating the move, the
Committee would like to impress upon the Government to create a
hassle-free environment for the private broadcasters so that more and
more entrepreneurs may be encouraged to join the cause. They also
desire that prompt action be taken for allotment of the remaining
channels so that number of new players may be encouraged to take
up private broadcasting.
Action taken by the Government
Action has already been initiated for re-bidding of 97 channels.
Tender document is being  finalized in consultation with Ministry of
Law in the light of experience gained during bidding held in 2006 for
Phase-II. A few changes are being incorporated so that hassle-free
environment and industry friendly terms and conditions can be created
to attract more and more entrepreneurs to participate in next round of
bidding.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 803/15/2007-FM/162, Dated 30.5.2007]
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 29)
Prasar Bharati
(iii) Community Radio
The Committee note with satisfaction that their Recommendation
No. 15 in the 32nd Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) to allow
local communities and non-profit organizations to set up Community
Radio has been accepted by the Government. As per the initial policy
announced in December, 2002, licenses were to be granted only to
well established educational institutions including IITs and IIMs. The
Committee are hopeful that the change in policy will definitely
encourage many local communities and NGOs to come forward to
start Community Radio Stations which will facilitate integration of
local communities and also help in educating and empowering the
rural masses. From a list furnished to the Committee, it is seen that

39
there are 20 Community Radio Stations which are operational as of
now and 63 Communities/NGOs have been issued letters of Intent for
setting up Station. However, the Committee would like to point out
that unless wide publicity about the facility is given in the rural areas,
especially among the NGOs, small institutions and communities, the
concept may remain confined to a few affluent institutions and NGOs
and may never be taken advantage of by the local communities and
groups for whom it is intended. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
give wide publicity about the concept of Community Radio in the
rural areas of the country. The Committee urge that the Government
should work out a detailed strategy for doing it through various means
like seminars and workshops, advertisements in the media and
awareness programmes targeting Self Help Groups, NGOs, Panchayati
Raj institutions, etc. As the allocation of Rs. 1 lakh for fiscal 2007-2008
is too meager for the purpose, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should strive for getting more funds allocated at the RE stage and in
the subsequent Annual Plans.
Action taken by the Government
Recognizing the potential of the medium towards social
empowerment, the Ministry has decided to give vide publicity to the
new policy on Community Radio. Some of the steps taken and
proposed to be taken are given below:
I. Detailed guidelines, application form and a Public Notice
has been placed on the Ministry’s website: www.mib.nic.in
II. A Public Notice inviting applications for grant of permission
to set up Community Radio station has been issued in
various Newspapers.
III. A workshop titled “National Consultation for practicing and
potential Community Radio operators in India” was held in
Delhi on 6th & 7th March 2007 by this Ministry in
collaboration with UNESCO and other UN agencies. The
purpose was to sensitise the new entrants. NGOs from all
parts of the country and experts in the field participated in
the workshop.
IV . Letters have been sent to Chief Secretaries of the States
requesting them to take necessary steps to sensitise the issue
amongst the masses.
V. “Popularising Community Radio policy among NGOs and
other institutions” has also been made an agenda point in

40
XXVI SIMCON to be held at New Delhi shortly. This will
help in creating awareness among the State Governments
to take further steps in carrying forward the policy to the
Panchayat level through State functionaries.
VI. A training schedule involving workshops and seminars in
different parts of the country is being worked out.
VII. The Ministry is also seeking the help of other institutions/
organizations to hold regional/state level seminars and
workshops on Community Radio. Efforts will be made to
get more funds at RE stage for this purpose. The token
amount is provided so that expenditure head gets created.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M No. 803/15/2007-FM/162, Dated 30.5.2007]

41
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Demands for Grants for 2007-2008
Recommendation (No. 1)
The Committee observe that as per Demand No. 58 in respect of
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation
is for a total amount of Rs. 181.88 crore wherein the Plan section
accounts for Rs. 475 crore and the Non-Plan section for Rs. 1206.88 crore.
Against this, the Budgetary Support for the year 2006-2007 stood at
Rs. 1716.04 crore (Plan Rs. 538 crore + Non-Plan Rs. 1178.04 crore)
which was reduced to Rs. 1660.04 crore at the Revised Estimates stage
to accommodate a higher Non-Plan expenditure of Rs. 1185.04 crore
and a reduced Plan expenditure of Rs. 475 crore. The overall budget
for the year 2007-2008 has, therefore, been increased by Rs. 21.84 crore
over the budgetary provision for the year 2006-2007 which amounts to
an insignificant increase of 1.32%. On a close scrutiny of the data
relating to the Demands for Grants and the utilization of Budgetary
allocations provided to the Committee year after year, it is quite evident
that the main reason for slashing down the Annual Plan allocations in
2006-2007 and 2007-2008 was the inability of the Ministry to utilize
sizeable portion of the funds allocated. This reflects poorly on the
capability of the Ministry to plan and implement the Plan Schemes
and projects. They also notice that another cause for substantial
reduction in the Annual Plan outlay since 2006-2007 is the failure on
the part of Prasar Bharati to provide Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resources (IEBR) for the Plan side on account of their pressing
commitments on the Non-Plan side. The Committee’s examination of
the various activities of the Ministry as commented upon in the
subsequent paragraphs clearly reinforces the Committee’s viewpoint in
this regard. They would, therefore, like to stress that the Ministry
should take a serious note of the recommendations of the Committee
and reorient their role particularly in fulfilling the targets in the 11th
Plan making optimum use of the available funds. The Committee also
urge that Ministry should make serious efforts to identify the weakness
in the system in the light of the experience gained in the past and try
to plug the loopholes so as to effectively utilize the allocated sum of

43
Rs. 475 crore provided in the grants for meeting the Plan expenditure
during the year 2007-2008.
Action taken by the Government
For the Annual Plan 2006-07 the Ministry had initially proposed
to the Planning Commission a Direct Budgetary Support (DBS)
amounting Rs. 1467.83 Crore. However, after discussions at various
stages, the Planning Commission finally allocated Rs. 538 Crore as
DBS for Annual Plan 2006-07. Similarly, for Annual Plan 2007-2008,
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had proposed a DBS
outlay of Rs. 1777.90 Crore as against which the Planning Commission
allocated Rs. 475 Crore. This Ministry is making all out efforts to
ensure that the Plan outlay is utilized to the fullest extent. A system
of regular monitoring and review of Plan Schemes has been put in
place.
Sd/-
(R.C. Misra)
Additional Secretary & FA
[M/o I&B O.M No. 4/3/2007-PC (Vol. III) dated 6.6.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 8 of the Chapter-I).
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 18)
(i) Prasar Bharati
(b) Special Package for North East
The Committee note that Phase 1 of Special Package for North
East which was approved on 31st January, 2002, towards the end of
the 9th Plan, was completed by AIR and Doordarshan during the 10th
Plan period except for 10 KW FM Transmitter at Kohima. However, it
is seen that Prasar Bharati has taken practically the whole of 10th
Plan period to implement the projects included in Phase 1, thereby
defeating the very purpose of the Special Package meant for speedier
development of the North Eastern region. On scrutiny of the annual
allocations, RE and actual expenditure, it is seen that although more
than the required amount was available in the allocation available for
Phase I of the Special Package, both AIR & Doordarshan chose to
implement lesser number of projects. The Committee are not inclined

44
to agree with the justification of low cost of equipment put forward
as the main reason for low level of utilization of allocations for
Phase 1 of the package. They strongly feel that more number of projects
should have been identified by AIR & Doordarshan to ensure optimum
utilization of allocated funds for the special package.
[Para 18 of the Forty-Third Report of Standing Committee on
Information Technology (14th Lok Sabha)
Action taken by the Government
All India Radio : Phase-I was approved in Jan, 2002 towards the
end of 9th Plan at a cost of Rs. 24.8 crore for improvement and
expansion of AIR services in the North-East including Sikkim and
Island Territories. AIR projects approved under Phase-I included
6 projects namely, 10 KW FM Transmitters at Port Blair, Itanagar and
Kohima and upgradation of existing uplinking facilities to digital system
at Itanagar, Shillong and Guwahati. These projects were completed by
2003-04 as scheduled, except the 10 KW FM Transmitter project at
Kohima where an interim set up of 1 KW FM Transmitter was
provided. Installation of permanent set up of 10 KW FM Transmitter
at Kohima is also in progress. Staff sanction for operation and
maintenance of FM Transmitters is, however, still awaited.
Doordarshan: Special package for NE States & Island Territories,
which was considered by the EFC in its meeting held on 31.01.02,
inter alia , included a large number of Schemes for expansion and
improvement of Doordarshan services and the outlay involved in the
package for Doordarshan schemes was Rs. 470 crore. During the EFC
meeting, it was decided that there was a need to look at the fresh
technology option for coverage of uncovered areas and that the revised
proposal be brought after finalization of 10th Plan outlay. Only four
schemes of Doordarshan viz. upgradation of 5 nos. of 1KW HPTs;
160 Cable headends; 2 satellite earth stations and satellite video phones
costing Rs. 47.52 crore were approved for implementation under Annual
Plan 2002-2003. All the above four schemes have since been completed.
Total expenditure incurred on these schemes is Rs. 33.25 crore.
Expenditure is less as compared to approved outlay due to less
expenditure on equipment because of lower cost.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.) dated 2.7.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph Nos. 11 & 12 of the Chapter-I).

45
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 20)
Prasar Bharati
J&K Special Package:
J&K Special Package is yet another crucial scheme devised with a
view to improving and expanding radio and television coverage in
Jammu & Kashmir region. To their dismay, the Committee find that
the Special Package approved as early as in 1999-2000 is yet to be
fully implemented. The work of construction of transmitters at Kupwara
and Amritsar are yet to be completed and operationalised. Significantly,
unlike in other schemes, as far as J&K Special scheme is concerned,
there has been no scarcity of funds as there has been consistent under
utilization of allocated funds and also savings in projects implemented.
The Committee cannot but express their displeasure at the way strategic
and well meaning projects conceived in the overall interest of the
nation are allowed to languish for no reason other than lack of
determination on the part o the implementing agency. They also view
seriously the undue delay in finalizing Phase II of J&K Special package
on account of inter-Ministerial differences at the stage of project
formulation. As the second Phase of the package has been considerably
delayed, the Committee would impress upon the Ministry to follow
up the scheme with the concerned Ministries and have it finalized at
the earliest. They expect the Ministry to ensure timely planning and
implementation of the package so the people of the region are not
deprived of the consequent benefit of the scheme.
Action taken by the Government
All India Radio : Special Plan for improvement and expansion of
radio coverage in the State of Jammu and Kashmir was approved by
the Government in 1999-2000. Installation of all the 12 Projects included
in the Special Plan has been completed. These are Kathua, 10 KW FM
Transmitter (Replacement of 6 KW), Rajouri, 10 KW FM Transmitter,
Srinagar, 300 KW MW Transmitter (Replacement of 200 KW), 20 KW
MW Transmitters at Kupwara and Naushera, 6 Relay centres with
1 KW MW Transmitters at Khalsi, Drass, Tiesuru Diskit, Nyoma and
Padum and Kargil (200 KW MW Transmitter). All Projects have been
commissioned except those at Padum, Nyoma and Diskit.
Doordarshan: Special J&K Plan was approved by the Government
in 1999. All the Projects envisaged under this Plan have already been

46
implemented. At two places viz. Kupwara and Amritsar the transmitters
are functioning in interim set up with temporary towers. Construction
of permanent tower at Kupwara has almost been completed and the
transmitters at Kupwara are expected to be commissioned on full power
shortly. Work of construction of tower at Amritsar is in progress and
is expected to be completed during 2008. There had been delay in
availability of land at Amritsar.
J&K Special Package Phase-II is being submitted to CCEA for
approval shortly.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), dated 2.7.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 15 of the Chapter-I).
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 22)
Prasar Bharati
Construction of Staff Quarters by Prasar Bharati
The Committee note that construction of staff quarters by Prasar
Bharati which was approved in December, 2004 has been carried
forward to the 11th Plan. The project envisaged construction of staff
quarters at four metro cities and 15 other places for employees of
Prasar Bharati by March, 2007. However, out o f the total number of
600 quarters to be constructed in Delhi, only 323 are expected to be
ready during 2007-08. Only in two places the construction work has
been completed, whereas in 8 places the construction work is in
progress. In the other metro cities and five other places the work is
yet to begin for want of clearance from local bodies, etc. As against
the total approved cost of Rs. 215 crore for the project, the expenditure
incurred upto February, 2007 is only Rs. 33.77 crore. Going by the
target of march 2007 for completion of construction, the progress
achieved is totally unimpressive more so in the ace of the deadline
given to Prasar Bharati employees by the Ministry of Urban
Development to vacate their Government accommodation latest by
November, 2007. Realizing the urgency involved and keeping in view

47
the welfare of the employees of Prasar Bharati, the Committee would
like to impress upon Prasar Bharati to expedite the construction work
so that its employees may not be put to undue hardship for want of
accommodation.
Action taken by the Government
All India Radio : The expenditure incurred under Staff quarters
during the year 2006-07 is Rs. 10.66 crore against SBG of Rs. 10.00
crore, thereby exceeding the allocations made. Total expenditure under
this sub-head against the approved outlay of Rs. 40.00 crore in respect
of All India Radio is Rs. 16.01 crore. The lower utilization during the
10th Plan period is mainly because of delay in getting the approval of
local bodies at Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata. The provisions
made for staff quarters during 2007-08 will be utilized and it is likely
that additional amount may be required as the construction are already
in full swing at Delhi. The works at Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata
are likely to be taken up shortly. The present position of construction
of staff quarters at four metros and other places is given below:
(i) Staff quarters at Kingsway Camp, Delhi: Construction of
590 nos. staff quarters at Kingsway Camp, Delhi has been
sanctioned. There are old quarters at the site, most of which
are occupied by the staff. The construction of quarters has
been taken up in 2 phases due to the site conditions. In the
first phase 323 nos. of quarters are under construction on
the site at the open space and by demolishing the vacant
quarters. The first phase is nearing completion and the target
date is July/August, 2007. After the existing staff occupying
the old quarters is shifted to newly constructed quarters,
the old quarters will be demolished and construction of
remaining quarters will start under phase II. Some of the
quarters are proposed to be constructed at Todapur site
which requires change of land use. The issue has already
been taken up with DDA and Ministry of Urban
Development but approval is still awaited.
(ii) Staff quarters at Mumbai: Quarters are to be constructed at
Borivelli site at Mumbai. Building plans are awaiting
approval of local body.
(iii) Staff quarters at Kolkata: The staff quarters were initially
planned at Baishnavghat site but the local body approval
not received as it required change of land use. Staff quarters
are now planned at Patuli site. Building plans are already
submitted to local body. Approval is awaited.

48
(iv) Staff quarters at Chennai: Staff quarters are planned to be
constructed at Guindi site. This required change of land
use approval of which was received from the local body in
April, 2006. Building plans have been submitted to the local
body and are awaiting approval.
(v) Staff quarters at other stations: 108 nos. of staff quarters
were planned at 6 AIR stations namely Vadodra, Ranchi,
Leh, Mysore, Puducherry and Patna. Construction of these
quarters is complete.
Doordarshan: The Scheme for construction of staff quarters for
Prasar Bharati staff approved by the Government in December, 2004
at a cost of Rs. 160 crore, inter alia, includes construction of Doordarshan
staff quarter at 15 places. Out of the 15 places, staff quarters at 4
places of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai are common for AIR
and Doordarshan staff. Construction of staff quarters at Delhi is in
progress and is to be taken up in the remaining 3 cities.
Out of the remaining 11 places, construction of staff quarters at 3
places viz. Lucknow, Hissar and Jaipur has already been completed.
Status of construction of quarters at the remaining 8 places is given
below:
(a) Allahabad — W ork is at advanced stage of
completion.
(b) Varanasi — W ork is at advanced stage of
completion.
(c) Bhawanipatna — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(d) Sambalpur — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(e) Trichur — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(f) Itanagar — Work is in progress and likely to be
completed during 2007-08.
(g) Patna — Tenders have been re-invited by CCW.
(h) Bangaluru — Tenders have been received by CCW &
are under scrutiny.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), Dated 2.7.2007]

49
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 18 of Chapter-I)
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 27)
Prasar Bharati
All India Radio—Expansion of FM Services
Yet another sphere where the projects have been lagging behind
the schedules and utilization of allocations over the years has been
abysmally low is in the implementation of the schemes for Expansion
of FM Services. This has been engaging the attention of the Committee
in the past. Both in the 32nd Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
and its Action Taken (42nd) Report the Committee had expressed their
serious displeasure at the way proposals meant for Expansion of FM
Services have been languishing for years together. It is seen at the end
of the 10th Plan period that against the Plan outlay of Rs. 11.45 crore
for continuing schemes and Rs. 153.60 crore for new schemes for
Expansion of FM Services, the actual expenditure up to 31st December,
2006 was Rs. 8.36 crore and Rs. 27.46 crore respectively, the utilization
being 73.01% in continuing schemes and as low as 24.32% in new
schemes. Obviously, the trend of achievements in the physical targets
is disheartening with 120 out of the proposed 133 FM Transmitter
projects getting approval and only 22 of them having been completed
or are likely to be completed shortly. The remaining 98 projects have
been carried forward to the 11th Plan, many of which are still at the
very initial stages of implementation. What startles the Committee is
that the gloomy scenario in the implementation of projects for
Expansion of FM Services in AIR has been continuing unabated, despite
the conviction voiced by the Ministry that “it (FM Radio) is another
area which is growing very fast”. The Committee hope that at least
from now, the Ministry and the AIR will take up the challenge and
make concerted efforts to speed up the implementation process for the
scheme, clear the backlog and also focus on achieving the physical
and financial targets set for the 11th Plan period.
Action taken by the Government
Against the SBG of Rs. 13.01 crore allocated during 10th Plan for
Continuing Schemes and Rs. 176.60 crore for New Schemes, the actual
expenditure up to 31st March, 2007 is Rs. 8.84 crore and Rs. 45.43

50
crore respectively. The utilization being 77.21% in Continuing Schemes
and 29.58% in New Schemes.
While taking note of Committee’s observations, it is stated that
the main reasons which had hampered the implementation of FM
projects during 10th Plan were:
(1) Procurement proposal for 28 Nos. of 10 KW FM Transmitters
was cleared by Ministry in October, 2006 (against the original
proposal for 33 Nos.) Advance AT for procurement was
placed in December, 06 but the firm did not deposit
Performance Guarantee. Therefore, order has been cancelled.
Now, fresh tenders have been invited and are due for
opening shortly.
(2) Proposal for pre-dispatch inspection of 6 Nos. of 20 KW
FM Transmitters at manufacturer’s place was cleared by
Ministry in August, 2006. Transmitters have since been
received and installation is in progress.
(3) Approval of 19 numbers of new stations with 1 KW FM
Transmitters, 5 KW FM Transmitter at Silchar and 10 KW
FM at Gangtok included under phase-II of North East
Special Plan was received in May, 2006. Sites for these
Centres are being identified with the help of State
Governments. Procurement of 1 KW FM Transmitters is also
in progress. Action for implementation of 5 KW FM
Transmitter at Silchar and 10 KW FM Transmitter at Gangtok
is in progress.
(4) Delay in offer of sites and demand notes from State
Governments. Besides, cost of sites in some cases is very
high like Jamnagar (Rs. 67 lakh), Maldah (Rs. 35 lakh),
Tamluk (Rs. 2.34 crore), Motihari (Rs. 25 lakh) and Nellore
(Rs. 68 lakh).
(5) Besides above, it may be mentioned that proposals for any
new Projects which involve creation of posts are not being
approved as a number of Projects are already lying
unutilized due to non-availability of O&M staff.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 6/9/2006-B (Fin.), dated 2.7.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 21 & 22 of the Chapter-I).

51
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Photo Division
(Recommendation No. 7)
From the figures furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note
that in 2006-07 the Direct Budgetary Support to the Photo Division at
BE stage was Rs. 125 lakh which was raised to Rs. 155 lakh at RE
stage, but the utilization up to 31st December, 2006 has been Rs. 69.42
lakh only. Against this, it is surprising to note that in the year 2007-
08 the DBS has been slashed down to a meager amount of Rs. 2 lakh
although the allocation proposed by the Ministry was to the tune of
Rs. 55 lakh. The Committee have gathered an impression that in the
fast changing scenario in the information sector, the role of Photo
Division is fast eroding. In this context, the Committee welcome the
move of the Ministry to merge the Photo Division with the Press
Information Bureau (PIB) at the regional and field levels with a view
to facilitate synergy and coordination between the two units and
enabling easy and prompt access to the huge reservoir of photographs
available at the disposal of the Photo Division. However, such a merger
at the headquarters has not been done. The Photo Division has a huge
repository of photographs for which the digitalization process is
reportedly almost complete and they are being made available online
in the PIB’s website. Although the services provided by the Division
are basically meant for media units of Central and State Governments,
non-publicity organizations and the general public besides the press,
at the field level it caters mainly to the needs of the press desiring
visuals for use along with news reports. With a view to synergize the
operations and facilitate single window approach for the services
provided by the Ministry , the committee are of the strong view that
the Government should seriously consider the possibility of merging
the Photo Division with PIB. In the Committee’s view, merging of the
Ministry’s media unit for visual support with the Information Bureau
will equip the merged unit to cater to the information needs of the
Government Departments, the press and the public more effectively,
besides facilitating optimum utilization of the rich repository of
photographs at its disposal.

52
Action taken by the Government
As against the Budget Estimates of Rs. 125.00 lakh under Plan,
which was enhanced to Rs. 155.00 lakh at R.E. stage, Photo Division
made an expenditure of Rs. 146.14 lakh during the financial year
2006-07. As regards the Annual Plan 2007-08 of Photo Division, two
schemes have been approved by the Planning Commission and a token
provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh for each Scheme has been made. These
Schemes would be implemented during the Annual Plan 2007-08 with
suitable augmentation of funds.
The recommendation of the Committee for merger of Headquarter
of Photo Division with PIB, has been noted for further examination.
Sd/-
(Stuti Kacker)
Joint Secretary (P&A)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 10/8/2007-MUC, dated 25.7.2007]
Film Sector
Recommendation (No. 10)
Children’s Film Society of India (CFSI)
The Committee have been engaging their attention on the low
utilization of funds and poor performance in physical targets by the
Children’s Film Society, India (CFSI) for quite sometime. Against the
10th Plan allocation of Rs. 1759 lakh for the most important continuing
scheme, ‘Film Production’, which includes production, dubbing
subtitling and purchase o films, the actual utilization up to 31st
December, 2006 has been stated to be only Rs. 983.05 lakh which
works out to only 55.89% of the allocation. The physical achievement
by the Society for making feature films was 22 as against a target of
29, for short films it was 10 against a target of 12,  for doubling it
was 31 against a target of 70, for subtitling it was 24 against a target
of 43 and for purchase of films 7 against a target of 19. Further as
against a target of reaching out to 207 lakh children audience, only
166 lakh children were covered under the scheme, ‘Exhibition of films
in municipal school’. The same reasons, viz. non-availability of suitable
stories/scripts, Directors not sticking to schedules, non-availability of
child artistes, technicians and location of shooting, etc. are being
advanced before the Committee every time which is an indication of

53
lack of seriousness and determination of the part of CFSI to overcome
the constraints and achieve the target. Not surprisingly, the Planning
Commission has shifted the scheme ‘Film Production’, from Plan to
non-plan without making any allocation for fiscal 2007-08 although an
amount of Rs. 1173 lakh was proposed. With the meagre non-plan
allocation of Rs. 42 lakh for CFSI in 2007 which is also to be utilized
to meet day to day expenditure of the Society, the targets have been
sliced down to production of 5 feature films and 2 short films, dubbing
of 14 films, subtitling of 10 feature and 2 short films and purchase of
3 films. Considering the level of allocation and the lack of will prevalent
in CFSI, even these targets seem to be too ambitious. The Committee
are of the firm view that with the increasing rise in the corrupting
influence of media on children, the mandate of CFSI to provide children
and young people with value based entertainment through films attains
greater importance. They, therefore, express their serious displeasure
at the way the physical and financial performance by CFSI consistently
fell below the targets and the lack of initiative on the part of the
society to overcome the bottlenecks. In the opinion of the Committee,
shifting the scheme, ‘Film Production’ for Plan to Non-Plan and non-
allocation of specific funds for it, would not only adversely affect the
scheme itself but also would make the very existence of the Society in
fructuous. The Committee, therefore, recommend that need for adequate
funds for the scheme should be taken up at the RE stage.
Action taken by the Government
In the 11th Plan, the Plan Scheme pertaining to Children’s Film
Society of India, viz., ‘Film Production’ consisting of various sub-
schemes like Film Production, Film Festival, Modernisation and
Augmentation of equipment and Animation and Script Writing
workshops was transferred from Plan to Non-Plan. However, Finance
Ministry has now written that in schemes, which are continuing Plan
Schemes, the Ministry has to review its allocations under Plant o absorb
the liabilities of such Schemes through re-appropriations wherever
possible. Hence, the Ministry will have to review the allocations of its
various Plan Schemes to identify funds for re-appropriation. The
recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. H-11013/02/2007-F(A), dated 12.7.2007]

54
Film Sector
Recommendation (No. 11)
Children’s Film Society of India (CFSI)
A major project of CFSI i.e. the CFSI Film Complex at Hyderabad
which envisaged construction of in-house facilities for all aspects of
filmmaking and initially mooted in the 9th Plan, continued to remain
a non-starter in the 10th Plan and has now been continued in the 11th
Plan. Despite the State Government of Andhra Pradesh having allotted
about 10 acres of land in Jubilee Hills area for setting up the building
complex, there has been a stalemate on account of the insistence of
the State Government to have a film training institute there instead of
production facilities, as proposed by CFSI. Discussions at the level of
the Chief Minister and the Chief Secretary of the State have not yielded
any result. In the context, the Ministry have not been able to set any
time frame for completion of the project as further progress is directly
linked to MoU to be signed with the State Government. It is astonishing
to find that there has been no clear understanding between the Ministry
and the State Government regarding the nature of the CFSI Film
Complex even after the land for the project was allotted by the State
Government. The Committee desire that the project, having languished
during the last two Plan periods, should receive the top most attention
of the Ministry and every effort should be made to sort out the matter
with the State Government and take the project to its logical conclusion.
Action taken by the Government
Children’s Film Society of India (CFSI)
The Children’s Film Complex proposed to be constructed at
Hyderabad will be utilised by Children’s Film Society of India and
the Ministry of information & Broadcasting for not more than 15 days
in two years during the biennial International Children’s Film Festival.
For the remaining part of the year, it is the State Government of
Andhra Pradesh which will be utilising the Complex. Hence the
demand of the State Government that this Ministry should pay for the
day to day maintenance and running of the complex is unjustified.
Keeping this in view, they have been asked to submit a suitable model
regarding the upkeep and maintenance of the complex. However, in
spite of lapse of more than nine months, State Government has not
responded till date. However, Ministry is pursuing the matter at higher
levels.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. H-11013/02/2007-F(A), Dated 12.7.2007]

55
Films Sector
Recommendation (No. 13)
National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special
Effects
The Committee have been informed that in places like Kerala,
Andhra Pradesh and Goa, sizeable investment is being done in the
areas for animation, gaming and special effects. A Committee, set up
to identify new opportunities in the areas of Information,
Communication and Entertainment where the State needs to play a
pro-active role highlighted the need for generating, on an average, at
least 3000 trained personnel every year for the animation and gaming
sector. The special effects sector is also expected to grow at similar
levels indicating a consistent need for trained manpower. This would
require appointment of a consultant. Since it requires state-of-the-art
technology, highly skilled manpower and huge investment,
Government’s share for setting up the Centre on a public-private
partnership basis is expected to be approximately Rs. 75 crore. While
the proposal awaits approval for inclusion in the 11th Plan, a budgetary
allocation of Rs. 10 lakh has been proposed for the year 2007-08. In
view of the significance attached to setting up of the Centre in the
context of growing demands of skilled manpower in the areas of
Animation, Gaming and Special Effects, the Committee recommend
that the project be pursued and implemented at the earliest.
Action taken by the Government
As recognition towards the need of trained manpower for the
Animation, Gaming and Special Effect Sector, Govt. attaches high
importance for setting up of the Centre for Excellence for Animation,
Gaming and Special effects on Public/Private Partnership. Accordingly,
Planning Commission has been approached for inclusion of the Scheme
with an estimated cost of Rs. 75 crore in the 11th Five Year Plan. ‘In
principle’ approval of the Planning Commission is yet to be received.
The Govt. notes the recommendation of the Standing Committee and
would be pursuing for the setting up of the Centre in right earnest.
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 106/05/07-F(I), Dated 31.5.2007]

56
Films Sector
Recommendation (No. 14)
Digitalisation of Films
It is needless to highlight the importance of digitalization of films
of historical importance preserved in the archives of Films Division.
When the Committee pointed out that Mumbai, where the Film
Archives is situated, is not the right place for preservation of films
because of humidity conditions, the Secretary, Ministry of information
and Broadcasting, conceding to the observation, informed the
Committee that storage facility with air-conditioned vaults was being
constructed at National film Archives of India, Pune for shifting the
Archives there. Efforts were stated to be on war footing to digitalise
about 8100 films preserved in the Archives by march 2007 as part of
Phase I of the Digitalisation process in order to check further
deterioration in the films and work has been completed in respect of
5,000 odd films. These films are also being put on the website so that
people could access the information. In Phase II of the Digitalization
process, it was proposed to concentrate more on restoration of the
original material and upgrading the sound system by calling for original
track from wherever possible, as the quality has deteriorated and
become harsh and sharp in historically important films of 40s and 50s.
However, the Committee are constrained to note that against a
proposed allocation of Rs. 25 crore in the 11th Plan for the scheme,
viz. ‘Digitalisation of Archive Films’, no provision at all has been made
in the Annual Plan 2007-2008. The Ministry have assured the Committee
that the matter would be taken up with the Planning Commission as
part of the 11th Plan proposals. In view of the urgency involved in
restoration and preservation of films of historical importance, the
Committee stress the due priority be accorded to the scheme for
digitalization of archive films and adequate allocations be made for it
so that Phase II of digitalization could be taken up and completed
with the urgency it deserves.
Action taken by the Government
The Plan Scheme ‘Digitalisation and Web Casting of Films
Division’s films’ is an important Plan Scheme of the Films Division in
which all the records available in the archives of Films Division are
proposed to be converted into digital format for better preservation.
Towards this, an amount of Rs. 350.00 lakh has been allocated in the
Annual Plan 2007-08. While all the 8100 films available in the archives
have been categorised into ‘Most Precious’, ‘Precious’, and ‘Normal’

57
categories, nearly 5000 films have already been digitised. Digitalisation
of the remaining films is likely to be completed within the first half
of the 11th Five Year Plan after which only the current and new films
will remain to be digitised.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. H-11013/02/2007-F (A), Dated 12.7.2007]
It may be added that there has been no provision made by the
Planning Commission in the first year (2007-08) of the 11th Plan
towards “Acquisition and Digitalization of the Archive Films’. The
matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission for inclusion,
as part of the Schemes meant for the remaining period of the 11th
Plan, an amount of Rs. 25 crore towards “Acquisition and Digitalization
of the Archive Films’. If approved, the work of digitalization will
commence from 2008-09 onwards on the basis of allocation.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 814/12/2006-F(C), Dated 20.6.2007]
Sd/-
(V .B. Pyarelal)
Joint Secretary (Films)
Broadcasting Sector
Recommendation (No. 21)
Prasar Bharati
Shortage of Manpower
The Committee note that the Achilles’ heel hindering optimum
utilization of the infrastructure build by Prasar Bharati is the acute
shortage of manpower being experienced by AIR and Doordarshan.
Doordarshan has reportedly commissioned 194 projects without any
staff sanction. Additional 251 projects, which include 20 studio centers,
have been commissioned for which only partial staff sanction is
available. Two studios at Calicut and Rajouri are technically ready and
yet to be commissioned for want of staff. Further, 53 LPTs are relaying
only partial transmission due to non-availability of adequate staff. In
All India Radio, 30 projects have been commissioned without
sanctioning Operation & Maintenance staff. 8 projects are technically
ready, but could not be commissioned as staff is yet to be sanctioned.
According to the Ministry, redeployment of staff has been done to the
maximum possible extent and it is no more possible to provide staff
by way of redeployment. While the Committee are in agreement with
the austerity measures initiated by the Government in general, they
feel that in the case of a corporation like Prasar Bharati, the question

58
of recruitment of manpower would have to be viewed separately
keeping in view the unique nature of its role and working. With
projects scattered all over the country, it is not possible to operate and
maintain the projects without the minimum number of Operation &
Maintenance staff. It perturbs the Committee that with several of the
completed projects having been not commissioned on account of
shortage of staff, the very objective for which scarce resources were
invested is being defeated. Lying idle for a long time, the installed
projects face the danger of turning obsolete and unusable. Having
failed to convince the Ministry of Finance about the need to sanction
additional staff for its operations, the Ministry have taken up the matter
of urgent requirement of additional staff for commissioned projects as
a separate item and a term of reference for the Group of Ministers.
having taken a close look at the entire situation, the Committee have
arrived at the inevitable conclusion that a solution has to be found to
help Prasar Bharati fully operationalise all the completed projects in
order to the masses with full benefits of the mass media. The
Committee stress that the matter be pursued vigorously at the highest
level so that an amicable solution could be found for meeting the
requirements of manpower in Prasar Bharati.
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati is facing severe shortage of staff due to which the
commissioned Stations/Offices are not fully operational. The requisite
staff for new Projects has not been sanctioned. However, Stations and
Offices are being run by redeployment of staff from the existing Offices.
The matter has been referred to the Group of Ministers for their
consideration and recommendation. Follow up action will be taken
after receipt of the recommendation of GoM.
Sd/-
(Zohra Chatterji)
Joint Secretary (B)
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 1604/07/2007-BA(E), Dated 15.6.2007]
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

59
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th November, 2007 from
1630 hrs. to 1815 hrs. in Committee Room No. G-074, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and
adopted the following Draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained
in their Forty-Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) relating to the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting.
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above said Draft Reports and present the same to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

60
APPENDIX II
[Vide Paragraph No.5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
FORTY-THIRD REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos : 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 19,
23, 24, 25, 26, 28 & 29.
Total :18
 Percentage: 62.06%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Sl. Nos : Nil
 Total : Nil
 Percentage : Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Sl. Nos : 1, 18, 20, 22 & 27
 Total : 05
 Percentage : 17.24%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are of interim nature:-
Sl. Nos : 7, 10, 11, 13, 14 & 21
 Total : 06
 Percentage : 20.69%

FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 5.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 173
Price : Rs. 68.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Government ..................................... 41
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 42
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 51
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2007-08)
held on 30.11.2007 .................................................... 59
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Forty-Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 60

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
13. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
**15. Prof. Prem Kumar Dhumal
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
27. Shri Motiur Rehman
28. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
*31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
* Nominated w.e.f. 24 August, 2007.
** Nominated w.e.f. 5 October, 2007 vice Vishnu Deo Sai ceased to be member of this
Committee w.e.f. 30 August, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology,
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-First Report on Action Taken
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ relating to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Forty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The
Department furnished Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report on 13 August, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 30 November, 2007.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Forty-Third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

51
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)
