5
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty-Eighth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Problems of Hardware and Software and Requirements of IT Industry’]
FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)
FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty-Eighth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Problems of Hardware and Software and Requirements of IT Industry’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.12.2004


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government. ..................... 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 38
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 40
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature. .................. 49
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2004-05)
held on 25.11.2004 ................................................................... 50
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Thirty-Eighth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Committee .......................................................................... 52

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Executive Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Thirty-Eighth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Problems of Hardware and Software and requirements of IT industry”
relating to the Department of Information Technology.
2. The Thirty-Eighth Report was presented to  Hon’ble Speaker on
17.09.2002. The Report was also presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2002. The Department furnished Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report on 20.01.2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 25.11.2004.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eight Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Problems of Hardware and Software and
Requirements of IT industry” pertaining to the Department of
Information Technology.
2. The Thirty-Eight Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on
17.9.2002. It was also presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2002 and was
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha the same day. It contained 17
Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as under.
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 78, 79, 81, 82
& 84
Total : 13
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph No. 80
Total : 1
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 36, 77, & 83
Total : 3
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to them at an early
date.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of its recommendations.
A. LOW EXPENDITURE ON IT
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
6. In their Thirty-Eighth Report the Committee were seriously
concerned to note the Central Government’s very low expenditure on
IT despite the country’s unique and competitive software advantage
i.e. best in quality but lowest in cost, as per a study of the World
Bank. The Committee regretted to observe that Government
Departments could not take advantage of quality software products
manufactured in the country as the Government had been expending
very little on introduction of IT in Government Offices. Observing that
apathy and inaction of the Government in this regard were contrary
to its proclaimed role of a ‘proactive facilitator’, the Committee
recommended that the Government should allocate a sizeable amount
every year to each Department for promotion of IT, should it wish to
make the industry more vibrant. The Committee also recommended
the Government to closely monitor the actual expenditure on IT by
different Ministries/Departments as earmarked for them and thereafter
take suitable corrective measures wherever warranted.
7. The Department, in its Action Taken Notes has stated that in
the National Action Plan on E-Governance, emphasis has been towards
providing efficient and convenient services to Citizen and Businesses
and in this context deployment of IT is being considered only as a
means towards this and not an end in itself. For the Mission mode
Projects, DIT has advised Line Ministries/Department to project their
budgetary requirements under the specially created budget head for
IT.

3
8. The Committee are disappointed with the apathetic attitude
of the Department. A simple advice to the line Ministries/
Departments to project their budgetary requirements for IT will not
yield any results unless and until the Department plays its professed
role of a ‘pro-active facilitator’ to perfection. This, the Committee
feel, can be done if each Ministry/Department is encouraged to utilize
2-3% of its budgetary provision on IT in accordance with the
guidelines of the Planning Commission.
The Committee are well aware that deployment of IT for
providing efficient and convenient services to Businesses and citizens
is only a means and not an end in itself. Instead of leaving things
to various Central Government/State Government agencies, the
Department should truly act as a ‘pro-active facilitator’ so that quality
software products manufactured in the country are taken advantage
of and the ultimate aim of making India an IT superpower is
achieved.
B. INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE LEASED CIRCUITS (IPLC) SERVICE
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
9. In their earlier Report the Committee had observed that out of
the total software exports of Rs. 28,350 crore during the year 2000-
2001, STPI units, through their 100 per cent reliable and efficient wide
band HSDC facilities, had accounted for about 71 per cent i.e.
Rs. 20,051 crore. Due to STPI’s reliable and stable datacom services,
Companies/Units registered with it were desirous of having datacom
connectivity from STPI itself, but as per DoT’s instructions, these
companies had to take the datacom link from VSNL. The Committee
were at loss to find any justification for such restrictions. The
Committee opined that instructions of DoT would have been
appropriate in case of switched/commercial voice where the IPLC was
connected to PSTN both on Indian and International sides. The
Committee impressed upon DIT take up the matter with DoT and
also at other appropriate level so that STPI which had been rendering
magnificent service towards software exports, could truly act as a ‘single
window interface’ for the exporting units/companies.
10. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:—
“Software Technology Parks of India, an Autonomous Society under
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Communications

4
and Information Technology has been given a special dispensation
from the Government of India to own, operate and maintain
International Gateways for providing High Speed Data
Communication (HSDC) facilities to Software Exporters in the
country. Software Technology Parks of India has been given license
vide letter No. 220-4/98-PHC dated 13th March, 1999 for the same.
The license is valid for a period of fifteen years i.e. up to 31.3.2014.
Besides this STPI has also obtained the Class “A” ISP license.
STPI has set-up 39 centres all over the country with state of the
art technical infrastructure facilities. STPI centres have had a
catalytic effect in the growth of software exports from the
surrounding regions. STP Scheme, which is a 100% export oriented
scheme, has attracted many entrepreneurs in the area of IT software
and services sector. More than 3500 units are exporting under STPI
umbrella contributing to more than 80% of the total software
exports from the country.
The most important contribution of STPI to the software-exporting
sector is that of providing dedicated High-Speed Data
Communication (HSDC) services. STPI has designed, developed
and set up state-of-the-art HSDC Network called Soft NET for
software exporters, which is available to software exporters at
internationally competitive prices.
Local access to International Gateways at STPI centres is provided
through Point-to-Point and Point-to-Multipoint microwave radios
for the local loop which has overcome the last mile problem and
enabled STPI to maintain an up time of nearly 99.9%. The terrestrial
cables (fibre/copper) are also used wherever feasible. As of today,
STPI is rendering it’s services to nearly 150 customers for
International Private Leased Circuit and more than 450 customers
for Internet leased lines.
STPI has been providing one stop solution to the IT software and
service export industry segment as a part of single window
mechanism, enabling software exporters to have hassle free business
environment. IT enabled services has emerged as one of the
potential area for the software and service export with potential to
generate large scale employment for educated and unemployed
youth. Call Centre has emerged as one of the most preferred IT
enabled services.

5
Generally Call Centres require the connectivity of International
Private Leased Circuits (IPLC) lines with the Public Switch
Telephone Network (PSTN) at foreign end. STPI, under its current
telecom licenses, can provide only data connectivity. Earlier during
the monopoly regime of VSNL, STPI was not allowed to provide
voice based IPLCs as international voice communication was a
monopoly of VSNL.
The New Telecom Policy’ 99 envisaged the opening up of the
International long distance service to the private operators. The
Government of India has opened the International Long Distance
Service since 1st April, 2002 without any restriction on the number
of operators. Under the ILDO license private operators can provide
international voice connectivity.
With the changing telecom scenario of the country and participation
of private players such as M/s Bharti, M/s Data Access, M/s
Reliance and M/s VSNL the telecom services have become highly
competitive with sharp reductions in tariffs and value added
services.
STPI had requested DoT for permission to offer voice based IPLC
services to call Centres and software exporters to be a truly one
stop shop for the software exporting community of the country.
DoT has commented that the private players had invested in the
procurement of license (ILDO) and hence permitting STPI to
provide voice based IPLCs cannot be justified. STPI was asked to
get ILDO license for the provisioning of this service. The cost of
ILDO license (Rs. 50 crores) was high as STPI does not want to
venture into minutes traffic business like the other ILDO players.
Investment in the license fee just for the provisioning of voice
based IPLC services was not economical for STPI.
In view of this STPI has initiated to process of ‘Strategic Business
Alliance’ with an ILDO operator so as to provide this service to
software exporters and call centres. The matter was put up to the
Governing Council of STPI and an agreement has been drafted
which would be entered into with the ILDO operators.
Currently STPI is providing around 250 Mbps of bandwidth to
software exporters and call centres. This connectivity is only for
data due to the licensing restrictions. With the tie-up, STPI will be

6
able to cater to the bandwidth demand of call centres and software
exporters for voice connectivity. This will enable STPI to retain
and extend its customer based and be truly one stop shop for the
software exporting community of the country”.
11. The Committee would like to be continuously apprised of
the outcome of all the ‘Strategic Business Alliances’ entered into by
STPI so as to provide various services including voice based
International Private Leased Circuits (IPLC) service to software
exporters and call centres.
C. AVAILABILITY OF TELEPHONE TRANSMISSION AND OTHER
FACILITIES
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
12. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that IT enabled
services, a new area, which encompassed data processing, medical
transcription, call centres, support services through telephone or Internet
etc. had a huge opportunity for growth as it had been creating ample
job opportunities. The Committee, learnt that in the overall Software
Industry, around 2.2 million jobs would be created by the year 2008
and IT enabled services would account for half of that. The revenue
generation by the same year would be around Rs. 18,000 crore ($20
billion). The biggest advantage of this Industry was that a large number
of simple graduates or even lesser qualified than that could get a job
there, which was most unlikely in the Software Industry. But
unfortunately, the curriculum in the colleges/universities was not
equipped to meet the requirements of this industry . The industry
representatives like CII/FICCI/ASSOCHAM were taking initiatives
together with the universities in this regard and the Committee would
like the Department of Information Technology to associate itself also
in the matter. Further, the other requirements like uninterrupted
availability of telephone, transmission and other facilities should be
taken up at appropriate levels in view of the Industry’s tremendous
potential for employment generation.
13. The Department have replied that the Department of
Information Technology (DIT) is closely associated with industry
Associations like CII, NASSCOM etc. to understand the problems in
relation to quality manpower generation to serve the needs of IT &
IteS industries. The Task Force on HRD in IT set up for this purpose

7
is examining all the issues and will recommend cohesive action plan.
DIT is also promoting IteS through DOEACC which in association
with DONER has launched a 2 months course in IT Enabled Services
(Call Centres) at its 4 DOEACC Centres in the North Eastern Region
at Guwahati, Tazpur, Imphal and Aizawl. Further the courses are also
being implemented in Sikkim in association with DIT, Government of
Sikkim and DONER, New Delhi. Based on the experience, the
programme may be replicated at other DOEACC Centres at
Aurangabad, Calicut, Chandigarh, Gorakhpur, Kolkata, Srinagar/
Jammu.
14. In view of the Department’s conspicuous silence over the
uninterrupted availability of telephone, transmission and other
facilities, the Committee would like to reemphasize that the
Department should take up the matter at the appropriate levels, and
go all out to facilitate this sunrise industry as such basic facilities
are indispensable for the growth of the IteS Industry.
D. GUARANTEE OF PROPER COMMUNICATION, POWER SUPPLY
ETC.
Recommendation (Para No. 77)
15. In their Thirty-Eighth Report the Committee were perturbed to
note that India’s Hardware Industry which was well diversified and
capital intensive had been under pressure for survival due to
infrastructural constraints, inverted tariff structure, lack of investment,
lack of strong engineering and design base, inadequate R & D facilities
etc. The Committee were further anguished to observe that although
India had the ability to manufacture significant components like mother
boards, terminals, printers, UPS etc. yet the policy environment had
not been conducive to manufacture these items inside the country. The
constraints experienced by the indigenous industry primarily included
high customs duty on raw materials and capital goods, high excise
duty and sales tax, octroi on IT products and inadequate infrastructure
like power, road etc. besides a plethora of other constraints. The
Committee further noted that as a result of the efforts made by the
Department in impressing upon other concerned Ministries/
Departments the problems being faced by the Hardware Sector, some
fiscal incentives were extended for the betterment of that sector.
Although the incentives extended to the Hardware sector had helped
the industry to some extent, yet it had falled short and could not

8
create the desired impact, as admitted by the Department. The
Committee, therefore, recommended for a major paradigm of the policy
regime which should encompass flexible Duty/Tax structure, freedom
and hassle free environment to the manufacturers, guarantee of proper
communication and uninterrupted power supply and moreover speed
of business including man, material and decision making process so
that there is sufficient inducement and competitive advantage for
investment in the Indian Hardware Sector.
16. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have replied as
under:—
“Further to the initiatives already undertaken by DIT and
discussions held with Department of Revenue and Department of
Commerce, the following measures have been proposed to
encourage the hardware sector in the country:
(i) Further rationalization of tariffs on raw materials and capital
goods.
(ii) Lowering of excise duty on IT and Electronics goods.
(iii) Introduction of full VAT.
(iv) Modification in EHTP scheme to permit DTA sales towards
counting of fulfilment of export obligation. Partially it has
been implemented already.
(v) Simplification of customs procedures through EDI already
under implementation in phases.
(vi) Computerization of Central Excise Department.
(vii) Working of Customs Departments (clearances) for 365 days
which has already been implemented at major ports.
The factors such as guaranteed communication, uninterrupted
power supply, speed of doing business for having competitive
advantage are true for all sectors of industry and Government has
initiated some steps in this direction.”
17. The Committee are pleased to note that over and above the
initiatives already undertaken by the Department of Information
Technology, some additional incentives, as enumerated above, have
been proposed to be granted for improvement of the Hardware sector.

9
However, the Committee still feel that the policy environment needs
much more to be conducive to the manufacturer, more so, in view
of the zero per cent duty which will become effective w.e.f. 2005
under the WTO agreement.
Basic infrastructure e.g. guaranteed communication, uninterrupted
power supply, speed of business for having competitive advantage
are Government responsibilities to create a prosperous State and a
thriving business climate. The involvement of other Ministries/
Departments is as much essential as that of the Department of IT.
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress in this sector and
therefore, would like to know in concrete terms the measures initiated
by the Government to assure the same to the struggling industry in
order to make it competitive and vibrant.
E. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE GOVERNMENT AND THE INDUSTRY
Recommendation (Para No. 79)
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee found that the role of
industry towards R & D activities had also not been very encouraging.
The industry’s contention was that in order to invest in R & D, there
had to be significant volumes in the country and industry perforce
would get attracted to invest in R & D where they saw returns. The
Committee felt that the industry had to play an equally important
role as that of the Government to promote the R & D activities. In
other words, while the industry expected the Government to display
a trust based facilitator attitude by way of creating a conducive
manufacturing environment, the Committee expected the industry to
display exemplary focus on domestic hardware growth by way of
investing significantly in hardware design and manufacturing, building
world class quality levels on hardware and thereafter focusing on
exports. As there was a greater need for bringing the industry
requirements and the research that had been taking place in the
Government side and the industry side in perfect harmony, both the
Government and the industry had to ensure that the hardware industry
not only survived but flourished also like the software industry.
19. In their Action Taken Notes the Department have stated as
under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee will be taken up with
industry associations and industry to see how far Government-
industry-academia/R&D labs cooperation can be leveraged to make

10
the IT industry, including IT software, to become competitive and
higher value added products and services can be produced in the
country.
Towards the above, industry involvement in DIT R&D activities
will be increased. Already, the Working Groups constituted by DIT
for selection of R&D projects for fundings, have a representative
from the industry so that the needs of the industry are not lost
sight of while funding R&D projects. Also, the projects which are
directly usable by the industry are partially sponsored by the
industry.
Given that Indian IT hardware sector lost its early mover
advantage, which Far East got, we need other long term strategies.
One of them is to take the design route in areas like: Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI)/Systems on a Chip (SOC). Embedded
systems design and R&D services. This would help us come back
into next generation production in the country, taking partial
advantage of growing domestic market. Other measures (fiscal,
infrastructural, financing, VC funding) are also equally important.
For the above, DIT is also, and has been, investing in creation of
specialized manpower of relevance to industry as in VLSI design.
DIT is also initiating programs in emerging/sun-rise industries like
bio-informatics, nano technology and quantum computing R&D
and manpower development. These will help industry in good
time.”
20. The Committee feel that the Department should interact much
more closely with all the Industry associations in order to shape the
policy adequately before the zero duty regime of the WTO comes
in. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
efforts made by the Department, in consultation with the industry
associations, to enable the Hardware industry to flourish.
F. INDIA VS CHINA
Recommendation (Para No. 83)
21. In their Thirty-Eight Report the Committee had observed that
PC penetration per 1000 people was 13.2 in China whereas it was
only 6.2 in India. Similarly, internet user base was 22.5 million in

11
China and a meager 2.5 million in India. Likewise in basic and cellular
phones per 100 people, China was way ahead of India. The Committee
found that China’s success had been due to large domestic consumption
led by the Government itself, unique package of investment and tax
incentives, high competition among the local Governments for attracting
hardware industry related investments, high investments in
infrastructure sector, flexible labour laws and linking of access to
domestic market with condition of local manufacturing. The Committee
believed that it would be worth to make a proper study of the
development-model of IT industry in China, more so when the Indian
hardware industry was battling for survival.
22. The Department, in their Action Taken Notes, have stated that
the study on hardware industry by Ernst and Young and sponsored
by DIT/MAIT covers the development model in China. It has also
been stated that China has gone aggressively to make their hardware
industry competitive in the world whereas India is moving slow in
this direction. The package of fiscal incentives recommended to Ministry
of Finance and Department of Commerce by DIT are not accepted in
toto and as a result the Hardware Industry suffers and is unable to
compete.
23. The Committee are not convinced that fiscal incentives are
the sole criteria to make the Indian hardware industry competitive
and vibrant. Over a period of time a number of fiscal incentives
like rationalization of tariff on raw materials and capital goods,
lowering of excise duty on IT and Electronic goods, introduction of
full Value Added Tax (V AT) etc. have been extended to the hardware
industry. Sadly, the industry is still not internationally competitive.
The Committee are of the opinion that fiscal incentives in
conjunction with freedom and hassle free environment to the
manufacturers, speed of business, proper communication, power
supply, strong engineering and design base, adequate R&D facilities
etc. are the key to a successful and competitive hardware IT industry.
The onus, therefore, lies with the Department of Information
Technology, it being the nodal Department, to impress upon the
other concerned Government Departments/Ministries to remove all
impediments that the Indian hardware industry has been
encountering so that it becomes aggressively competitive like its
Chinese counterpart.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 35)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Indian Software
Industry has been performing consistently well and today it represents
one of the most successful business models that has managed to sustain
high growth and competitiveness, despite adversaries. It is heartening
to learn that the software driven IT industry is today on top of India’s
national agenda as instrument and means for lifting India’s economy .
The turnover of the industry has grown from Rs. 24,350 crore in 1999-
2000 to Rs. 3760 crore in 2000-2001 and further to Rs. 48,135 crore in
2001-2002. Software exports from the country were worth Rs. 17,150
crore in the 1999-2000, Rs. 28,350 crore in 2000-2001 and Rs. 36,500
crores in 2001-2002. Similarly, domestic software revenue has also grown
from Rs. 7,200 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs. 9,410 crore in 2000-2001 and
further to Rs. 21,634 crore in 2001-2002. For the year 2002-2003, it has
been anticipated that the total size of the Industry, exports and domestic
market would increase to Rs. 60,700 crore, Rs. 35,800 crore and
Rs. 13,200 crore respectively. Moreover, the Industry has generated
92,000 new jobs and provided indirect employment to over 2.5 lakh
people during the year 2001-2002. However, amid such a satisfying
performance the Committee is constrained to observe that India’s share
in the world’s software trade has been a meagre two per cent. Secondly,
the Government’s expenditure on IT has been very low vis-a-vis other
countries in the world. In view of the fact that it would be extremely
difficult to sustain exports in the absence of a strong and stable
domestic industry, the Committee impresses upon the Government to
make all out efforts for encouraging use of IT in a big way. It should
take more initiative for e-governance in the fields of education,
agriculture, health care etc. It would go a long way in not only
maintaining the momentum of software growth but also making India
a true IT Superpower.
Action Taken by Government
— Planning Commission guidelines advise usage of 2 to 3% of
the budget provision of Central Ministries/Departments for
programmes/scheme relating to Information Technology.
12

13
—A  minimum agenda for E-Governance has also been drawn
up for implementation by the Central Ministries/
Departments (Annexure-I).
— National Informatics Centre (NIC) has been providing
computer based E-Governance support and has established
a Nationwide ICT Network (NICNET)— with Gateway
nodes in all Central Government Departments, State/UT
Secretariats (28+7) and about 600 Districts Administrations.
— Department of Information Technology has taken up
replication of successful projects on e-governance such as
Land Records, Registration and Transport in different States
on a pilot scale (Details are Annexure-II) in conjunction with
Line Departments/State Governments concerned and NIC.
— Department of Information Technology jointly with
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances
(DAR&PG) have formulated a National Action Plan for
E-Governance covering the following components:
• Core E-Projects
• Core Infrastructure
• Integrated Services Projects
• Support Infrastructure
• Core Policies
• Human Resource Development/Training
•T echnical Assistance
•A wareness & Assessment
•O rganisational Structures (NEGC, NISG, State EGCs, EG
Standards Institutions, NIC)
• R&D
Government has accorded endorsement to the National
E-Governance Action Plan for its overall programme content,
implementation approach and governance structures. Financial outlays
would be on the basis of specific proposals/projects approved by the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.

14
Certain Mission Mode Projects have also been identified which are
to be taken up a priority basis as per details at Annexure-III. Pursuant
to this, Department of Information Technology has advised the
concerned Line Ministries/Departments to take up their implementation
and approach Planning Commission with specific projects/proposals
for necessary budget allocation.

K. SRINIVASAN ÿÙ¡ŸÊ ÷ﬂŸ
Pr. Adviser (PC & Admn.) Ÿß¸ ÁŒÀ‹Ë-vvÆ ÆÆv
Tel. No. : 2371 4388 PLANNING COMMISSION
YOJANA BHAVAN
NEW DELHI-110 001
D.O. No.. : H-11016/32/97-PC Dated : April 24, 1998
Dear Shri Ravindra Gupta,
The Expert Group on “Computerisation of the Information on
Personnel and Citizens Services” in its report had recommended
inter alia  that the Ministries should have a Five Year Plan for
Information Technology and each Ministry/Department must allocate
2-3 per cent of its Budget for spending on IT so that there is an
increase in the availability of funds for training in IT and acquisition
of hardware, software as well as for the development of software
maintenance. The said recommendation of the Expert Group was
approved by the MOS (PP) and Cabinet Secretary.
2. The matter has been examined in the Planning Commission and
it is felt that the above recommendation of the Expert Group may be
accepted in principle. Planning Commission, therefore, requests you to
make a provision of 2-3 per cent of your Ministry/Department’s Plan/
Budget for programmes/schemes relating to Information Technology.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K. Srinivasan)
Shri Ravindra Gupta,
Secretary,
Department of Electronics,
C.G.O. Complex,
New Delhi.
15

ANNEXURE-I
MINIMUM AGENDA FOR E-GOVERNANCE IN THE
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS OF THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(i) (a) Each Ministry/Department must provide PCs with
necessary software upto the Section Officer level.
(b) LAN must also be set up.
(ii) (a) 100% training of all staff who have access to and need
to use computers for their office work should be ensured.
(b) For this purpose, inter alia , Ministries/Departments
should set up or share Learning Centres for decentralized
training in computers as per the guidelines issued by
the MIT.
(iii) Each Ministry/Department should start using the Office
Procedure Automation software developed by NIC with a view
to keeping a record of receipt of dak, issue of letters, as well
as movement of files in the department.
(iv) Pay roll accounting and other house-keeping software should
be put to use in day-to-day operations.
(v) (a) Notices for internal meeting should be sent by email to
the officers;
(b) Similarly, submission of application for leave and for
going on tour should also be done electronically;
(c) Ministry/Department should also set up on-line notice
board to display orders, circulars etc. as and when
issued.
(vi) Ministries/Departments should use the Web-enabled Grievance
Redressal Software developed by Department of AR & PG.
(vii) Each Ministry/Department should have its own website.
(viii) All Acts, Rules, Circulars should be converted into electronic
form and, along with other published material of interest or
16

17
relevance to the public, should be made available on the
internet and be accessible from the Information and Facilitation
Counter.
(ix) (a) The websites of Ministries/Departments/Organisations
should specifically contain a section in which various
forms to be used by citizens/customers are available.
The forms should be available for being printed out or
for being completed on the computer itself and then
printed out for submission.
(b) Attempts should also be made to enable completion and
submission of forms online.
(x) The Hindi version of the content of the websites should be
developed simultaneously, as far as possible.
(xi) Each Ministry/Department would also make efforts to develop
packages so as to begin electronic delivery of services to the
public.
(xii) Each Ministry/Department should have an overall IT vision
or strategy for a five year period, within which it could
dovetail specific action plans and targets (including the
minimum agenda) to be implemented within one year.

ANNEXURE-II
PILOT PROJECT ON REPLICATION OF E-GOVERNANCE
PROJECTS IN VARIOUS STATES
States Land Records Registration Transport
Kerala Yes Yes Yes
West Bengal Yes Yes Yes
Sikkim Yes
Tripura Yes Yes
Punjab Yes Yes Yes
Haryana Yes
Goa Yes Y es Yes
Madhya Pradesh Yes
Tamil Nadu Yes
Himachal Pradesh Yes Yes Yes
Chhattisgarh Yes
Uttaranchal Yes Yes Yes
NCT Delhi Yes
Gujarat Yes
Orissa Yes
Rajasthan Yes
Assam Yes
Jharkhand Yes
18

19
ANNEXURE-III
MISSION MODE PROJECTS
S.No. Mission Mode Projects Line Ministries/Departments
Central Government
1. Income Tax MoF/CBDT
2. Passport Visa & Immigration Project MoEA/MoHA
3. DCAI DCA
4. Insurance DoBanking
5. National Citizen Databse MoHA/RGI
6. Central Excise Revenue/CBEC
7. Pensions DOPT & Exp.
8. Banking DoBanking
State Government
1. Land Records MoRD
2. Road Transport MoRT&H
3. Property Registration MoRD
4. Agriculture Deptt. of Agriculture
5. Treasuries MoF
6. Municipalities MoUD
7. Gram Panchayats MoRD
8. Commercial Taxes MoF
9. Police (UTs initially) MoHA
Integrated Services
1. EDI (E-Commerce) MoC & I
2. E-Biz DoIPP/DIT
3. Common Service Centres DIT
4. India Portal DIT and DAR & PG
5. EG Gateway DIT

20
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 37)
The Committee notes that the National Tax Force on IT and
Software Development and NASSCOM-MC Kinsey study has set a
total market target of 87 billion US dollars for Software and IT services
by the year 2008—the break up being $ 38.5 billion for IT services,
$ 19.5 billion for software products, $ 19 billion for IT enabled services
and $ 20 billion for E-business. Similarly, the exports target has been
fixed at 50 billion US dollars out of which $ 23 billion has been fixed
for IT services, $ 8 billion for software products, $ 15 billion for IT
enabled services and $ 4 billion for E-business. In order to meet the
aforesaid targets, a number of measures have been initiated which the
Committee considers to be small steps in right direction. The Committee
trusts that must more initiatives will be devised in consultation with
captains of Information Technology Industry. Further, the Committee
learns that if India achieves 50 billion US dollars software exports by
the year 2008, it would contribute more than one-third of the total
exports of the country and 7 percent of India’s GDP will be contributed
by software alone. Not only that, India will be a net foreign exchange
earner and more than 22 lakh jobs will be created. Therefore, it becomes
all the more important for the Government to accelerate growth and
development of this sector so that not only the targets set for the year
2008 are achieved but the country also takes full advantage of the
opportunities that come in its way through the information revolution
all over the world.
Action Taken by Government
1. Government of India has taken necessary steps for the
growth of Software industry and to counter the backlash
against outsourcing from India. National Association of
Software & Service Companies (NASSCOM), Ministry of
External Affairs and the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) have jointly initiated steps to counter the
backlash and Bills being introduced by various US States
against outsourcing of jobs.
2. Procedural issues for clarifications/simplification of tax laws
have been taken up with the Ministry of Finance by DIT as
part of the pre-budget exercise.
3. A ‘Task Force on Human Resource Development (HRD)’
under the Chairmanship of Shri F.C. Kohli is looking into
the aspects of HRD in IT.

21
4. Exports to other countries in Japan, EU, Middle East and
ASEAN is being encouraged so as not to depend on USA.
Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion
Council (ESC) and NASSCOM are making all efforts in this
direction with full support of DIT.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 38)
The Committee observes that additional manpower requirement
would be around 2.2 million by the year 2008 and in order to meet
the same, the Task Force on Human Resource Development on IT, in
its interim Report, has made several recommendations like development
of IT faculty and curriculum, strengthening of computing and
networking facilities, digitization and modernization of libraries, use
of IT in administrative services, etc. to ensure adequate supply of
manpower for the IT sector. While the responsibility of the
implementation of these recommendations has been vested with the
Ministry of Human Resource Development, the Department of
Information Technology has been concentrating mainly on the non-
formal sector i.e. children joining IT courses after schooling. The
Committee feels that the Department has a larger role to play in making
available the required manpower that just concentrating on the non-
formal sector. There should be closer and more intense interaction
between the Ministry of Human Resource Development and the
Department of Information Technology with a view to increasing the
availability of quality IT manpower and helping the software services
sector to increase its productivity and move up the value chain, thereby
enabling the country to capture larger share of global market of IT
Software and services.
Action Taken by Government
With a view to maintain India’s competitive advantage and
continuous growth in supply of quality manpower, the Government
has constituted a Task Force on ‘Human Resource Development in
Information Technology’. The main objective of the Task Force is to
prepare a long term strategy for significantly increasing the number of
well trained IT professionals in line with economic projections. The
Task Force is headed by Shri F.C. Kohli, Former Dy. Chairman, Tata
Consultancy Services and has members from academia, industry and
Government. There are eight Terms of Reference of the Task Force to
cover the projected global IT sector growth trends during 10th and

22
11th Plans assess numerical gap between global demand and supply
of manpower in different segments of IT industry, strategy for
enhancing the institutional capacity in formal and non-formal education
sectors, identify emerging areas, design, standards and define a common
test for BPO skills, optimum deployment of non-IT professionals in IT
enabled services and R&D and to suggest fiscal policy measures to
maximize private sector participation in HRD activity.
Non-formal education has always been a major tool in meeting
the needs of professionals who missed out on normal education, as
well as to provide learning opportunities to students who cannot gain
access to the formal school/college system. This implies that a graduate
in non-IT field, wishing to specialize in IT, will look at Non-Formal
Sector of education rather than Formal Sector of Education/Distance
Education for upgrading their skills, as it would not be possible for
them to join regular courses without leaving their jobs. This
responsibility has been assigned to DOEACC, an autonomous society
under the Department.
There is a close interaction between Department of IT and Ministry
of Human Resource Development for conferring both academic as well
as professional equivalence, of DOEACC courses.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 39)
The Committee is concerned to note that by the year 2003 there
would be severe shortage of teachers to the extent of approximately
10,000 whereas the number of students in different IT courses would
be around 2,25,000. IT is a matter of serious concern. In view of the
same, the Department has initiated steps towards online and distance
education in order to bridge the gap. The Committee feels that it is a
step in right direction. Further, the Department should work in unison
with the Ministry of Human Resource Development  to make good
the shortfall of teachers as far as possible in view of the fact that
there could hardly be any substitute for quality classroom teaching.
Action Taken by Government
The Department of Information Technology (DIT) is continuing to
support the development of course content for distant learning as well
as e-learning tools to facilitate web based learning.
Active cooperation and interaction between DIT & Ministry of
Human Resource Development exists. The Task Force on HRD in IT
is looking into all the issues including shortage of teachers, in IT
education.

23
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 40)
The Committee is glad to note that the two units of National
Centre for Software Technology (NCST) which have been set up at
Navi Mumbai and Bangalore at a cost of Rs. 11.5 crore each are
operating as Centres for Excellence in software technology and related
Computer Sciences and have developed their repletion as the National
Laboratory for software technology. Being a premier R&D institution,
NCST has developed software in the areas of intelligent computing,
visual computing, Internet technology, on-line education etc. It produces
around 150 Researchers every year by offering four diploma level
programmes. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that
such Centres for Excellence have been set up at only two places in the
country. Secretary, DIT’s statement that opening such centres in other
places depends on the response of the States as the interest level and
computer saviness varies from person to person and State to State is
not at all convincing in view of the fact that no efforts whatsoever
have apparently been made by the Department to ascertain the response
of different States in this regard. Possibilities should be explored
earnestly to set up such state-of-the-art R&D Centres in other places
also by the Central Government so that the young aspirants at other
parts of the country are also provided opportunities nearer to their
homes. No State should be denied such facilities.
Action Taken by Government
In order to provide enhanced focus to Research & Development,
the Department of Information Technology merged the Societies doing
Research & Development in the area of Electronics & Information
Technology under the brand name of Centre for Development of
Advanced Computing (C-DAC). These include:
1. Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC),
Pune
2. Centre for Development of Advanced Computing C-DAC,
Bangalore
3. Electronics Research & Development Centre of India
(ER&DCI), Calcutta
4. Electronics Research & Development Centre of India
(ER&DCI), Trivandrum

24
5. Electronics Research & Development Centre of India
(ER&DCI), Noida
6. National Centre for Software Technology (NCST), Bombay,
and
7. Centre for Electronics Design & Technology of India (CEDTI),
Mohali
In addition, DIT has also got other societies such as, SAMEER,
Media Lab Asia, ERNET etc. to conduct research in their own
specialized areas. Semiconductor Complex Limited (SCL), a Public
Sector Undertakings of DIT is also doing R&D in the area of VLSI
design technology. Many of these centres are also conducting high end
training programmes in different areas of Electronics & IT. In addition
to this, based on the receipt of R&D proposals from the organizations,
Department has also been funding Research & Development at
recognized Education and Research institutions across the country. The
conduct of R&D through the support provided by the DIT is well
spread across the country.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 41)
The Committee appreciates but out of the total software exports of
Rs. 28,350 crore during the year 2000-2001, STPI units, through their
100 per cent reliable and efficient wide band HSDC facilities, have
accounted for about 71 per cent i.e. Rs. 20,051 crore. Due to STPI’s
reliable and stable datacom services, Companies/Units registered with
it are desirous of having datacom connectivity from STPI itself, but as
per DOT’s instructions these companies have to take the datacom link
from VSNL. The Committee is at loss to find any justification for such
restrictions. Such instructions of DoT would have been appropriate in
case of switched/commercial voice where the IPLC is connected to
PSTN both on Indian and International sides. The Committee would
like to impress upon DIT take up the matter with DOT and also at
other appropriate level so that STPI which has been rendering
magnificent service towards software exports, can truly act as a ‘single
window interface’ for the exporting units/companies.
Action Taken by Government
Software Technology Parks of India, an Autonomous Society under
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Communications

25
and Information Technology has been given a special dispensation from
the Government of India to own, operate and maintain International
Gateways for providing High Speed Data Communication (HSDC)
facilities to Software Exporters in the country. Software Technology
Parks of India has been given license vide letter No. 220-4/98-PHC
dated 13th March, 1999 for the same. The license is valid for a period
of fifteen years i.e. up to 31.3.2014. Besides this STPI has also obtained
the Class “A” ISP license.
STPI has set-up 39 centres all over the country with state-of-the-
art technical infrastructure facilities. STPI centres have had a catalytic
effect in the growth of software exports from the surrounding regions.
STP Scheme, which is a 100% export oriented scheme, has attracted
many entrepreneurs in the area of IT software and services sector.
More than 3500 units are exporting under STPI umbrella contributing
to more than 80% of the total software exports from the country.
The most important contribution of STPI to the software-exporting
sector is that of providing dedicated High-Speed Data Communication
(HSDC) services. STPI has designed developed and set up state-of-the-
art HSDC Network called Soft NET for software exporters, which is
available to software exporters at internationally competitive prices.
Local access to International Gateways at STPI centres are provided
through Point-to-Point and Point-to-Multipoint microwave radios for
the local loop which has overcome the last mile problem and enabled
STPI to maintain an up time of nearly 99.9%. The terrestrial cables
(fibre/copper) are also used wherever feasible. As of today, STPI is
rendering it’s services to nearly 150 customers for International Private
Leased Circuit and more than 450 customers for Internet leased lines.
STPI has been providing one stop solution to the IT software and
service export industry segment as a part of single window mechanism,
enabling software exporters to have hassle free business environment
IT enabled services has emerged as one of the potential area for the
software and service export with potential to generate large scale
employment for educated and unemployed youth. Call Centre has
emerged as one of the most preferred IT enabled services.
Generally Call Centres require the connectivity of International
Private Leased Circuits (IPLC) lines with the Public Switch Telephone
Network (PSTN) at foreign end. STPI, under its current telecom licenses,

26
can provide only data connectivity. Earlier during the monopoly regime
of VSNL, STPI was not allowed to provide voice based IPLCs as
international voice communication was a monopoly of VSNL.
The New Telecom Policy’ 99 envisaged the opening up of the
International long distance service to the private operators. The
Government of India has opened the International Long Distance
Service since 1st April, 2002 without any restriction on the number of
operators. Under the ILDO license private operators can provide
international voice connectivity.
With the changing telecom scenario of the country and participation
of private players such as M/s Bharti, M/s Data Access, M/s Reliance
and M/s VSNL the telecom services have become highly competitive
with sharp reductions in tariffs and value added services.
STPI had requested DoT for permission to offer voice based IPLC
services to call Centres and software exporters to be a truly one stop
shop for the software exporting community of the country. DoT has
commented that the private players had invested in the procurement
of license (ILDO) and hence permitting STPI to provide voice based
IPLCs cannot be justified. STPI was asked to get ILDO license for the
provisioning of this service. The cost of ILDO license (50 Crores) was
high as STPI does not want to venture into minutes traffic business
like the other ILDO players. Investment in the license fee just for the
provisioning of voice based IPLC services was not economical for STPI.
In view of this STPI has initiated to process of ‘Strategic Business
Alliance’ with an ILDO operator so as to provide this service to
software exporters and call centers. The matter was put up to the
Governing Council of STPI and an agreement has been drafted which
would be entered into with the ILDO operators.
Currently STPI is providing around 250 Mbps of bandwidth to
software exporters and call centers. This connectivity is only for data
due to the licensing restrictions. With the tie-up, STPI will be able to
cater to the bandwidth demand of call centers and software exporters
for voice connectivity. This will enable STPI to retain and extend its
customer base and be truly one stop shop for the software exporting
community of the country.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I)

27
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 42)
The Committee learns that the major impact of the global
slowdown, especially US economy, is likely to be on the business of
on-shore development. This transitory recession may turn out to be a
blessing in disguise as the clients in the USA could be more interested
in off-shore development and they may find out-sourcing their work
in India more attractive due to quality and cost-effectiveness. The
Committee feels that it is the most opportune time for the Government
to come out with some concrete measures to ensure that the USA
creates an environment to give the Indians, who have come back from
the United States due to global slowdown, an opportunity in India
itself. It is also euqally important for the Government to facilitate the
Software companies to exploit the hitherto untapped or under tapped
markets in other countries in Europe and Asia Pacific regions.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The figures
of software exports from India, including IT related services to various
countries during the last three years are as under:—
Year Country Software Total software
exports exports
(US$ Billion) (in US$ Billion)
2000-2001 US/Canada 3.71 6.2
EU 1.33
Other Countries 1.16
2001-2002 US/Canada 4.91 8.0
EU 1.79
Other Countries 1.30
2002-2003 US/Canada 6.13 10.0
EU 2.19
Other Countries 1.38
The data above clearly indicates that India’s software export to
various countries including USA has been growing steadily which may

28
be attributed to several factors including outsourcing of work by US
companies to cut costs.
Several steps, as are deemed appropriate from time to time are
taken to explore the possibility of exploiting the hitherto untapped or
under-tapped markets in other countries in Europe and Asia Pacific
region.
NASSCOM, ESC, the IT industry associations take several steps
for promoting IT exports with the main objective of achieving the
target of software export of US$ 50 billion by 2008.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 43)
The Committee observes that IT enabled services, a new area, which
encompasses data processing, medical transcription, call centres, support
services through telephone or Internet etc. has a huge opportunity for
growth as it has been creating ample job opportunities. The Committee
learns that in the overall Software Industry, around 2.2 million jobs
would be created by the year 2008 and IT enable services would
account for half of that. The revenue generation by the same year
would be around Rs. 81,000 crore ($17 billion). The biggest advantage
of this Industry is that a large number of ordinary graduates or even
lesser qualified can get a job there, which is most unlikely in the
Software Industry. But unfortunately, it is stated that the curriculum in
the Colleges/Universities is not equipped to meet the requirements of
this industry. The industry representatives like CII/FICCI/ASSOCHAM
are stated to be taking initiatives together with the Universities in this
regard and the Committee would like the Department of Information
Technology to associate itself also in the matter. Further, the other
requirements like uninterrupted availability of telephone, transmission
and other facilities should be taken up at appropriate levels in view
of the Industry’s tremendous potential for employment generation.
Action Taken by Government
Department of Information Technology (DIT) is closely associated
with industry Associations like CII, NASSOCM etc. to understand the
problems in relation to quality manpower generation to serve the needs
of IT & IteS industries. The Task Force on HRD in IT set up for this
purpose is examining all the issues and will recommend cohesive action
plan. DIT is also promotion IteS through DOEACC. DOEACC in

29
association with DONER has launched at 2 months course in IT
Enabled Services (Call Centres) at its 4 DOEACC Centres in the North
Eastern Region at Guwahati, Tazpur, Imphal and Aizawal. Further the
courses are also being implemented in Sikkim in association DIT,
Government of Sikkim and DONER, New Delhi. Based on the
experiences, the programme may be replicated at other DOEACC
Centres at Aurangabad, Calicut, Chandigarh, Gorakhpur, Kolkata,
Srinagar/Jammu.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 78)
The Committee notes that a lot of companies have been doing
R&D work in India as a result of which some outstanding products
like ‘Simputer’—a simple computer designed to take IT to rural masses;
‘high station’—a simple e-mail device, have been developed which
have become quite popular. Further, a number of medium and small
entrepreneurs have been doing outstanding work in optical network
and low cost communication. The Department on its part has been
trying to encourage these entrepreneurs through a method called
“moving up the value chain” with the Government as the facilitator.
Nevertheless, these small and medium entrepreneurs should be
encouraged in terms of creating technology incubation centres.
However, the Committee is perturbed to note that focused R&D efforts
have not received the desired attention and momentum as has been
admitted by the Secretary, DIT. It is really shocking that the country’s
tremendous potential in terms of expertise talent and brain, although
recognized the world over, have not been properly utilized for research
and development projects and the Department appears to be still on
thought process. The matter is more alarming due to the fact that
during the year 2002-03, the actual allocation for R&D activities has
been Rs. 113.30 crores against a proposed outlay of Rs. 454.53 crores.
Due to such reduced budgetary allocation, core R&D activities would
be curtailed as has been stated by the Department. In view of the fact
that the quality of innovation would ultimately make the country
competitive and self-sufficient especially in Hardware, it is high time
the Government put in place the research priorities of the industry in
a time-bound and articulate manner, create a conducive atmosphere
for investment in R&D, extend all possible help and assistance including

30
sufficient budgetary support to enrich the research activities and thrive
to make it a long term objective.
Action Taken by Government
1. The Department of Information Technology has set up several
autonomous organizations like C-DAC, STQC, NCST, SAMEER,
ER&DCI, CEDTI, etc. to address the requirements of different
sectors of information technology in a focused manner. Recently
some of the Societies doing R&D in different sectors of IT have
been merged under the Umbrella of C-DAC in order to provide
synergy and focus.
2. “Moving up the value chain” has been identified as a major
initiative for DIT to work closely with IT industry through a
broad set of action point such as:
(i) A proposal to set up Technology Incubation Centres at IITs
and premier educational institutions to help students and
faculty at these institutions in setting up technology start-
ups has been prepared.
(ii) DIT is also considering to provide facilitation support to IT
industry in filing international patents.
(iii) A Division has been set up in DIT to provide enhanced
focus to help the industry in moving from software services
to software product development.
(iv) The National Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry
(NFSIT) set up by the DIT in association with SIDBI and
IDBI is also providing Venture Capital Funding to the
Industry for product development.
3. As against a budgetary allocation of Rs. 113.30 crores for R&D
activities in 2002-03, the project and likely allocation of funds for
R&D activities in 2003-04 is expected to be Rs. 272 crores.
4. R&D in IT, Electronics and convergence have been delineated as
a separate groups to put greater focus on R&D components of
DIT.
5. DIT have initiated following two projects with Indian Institute of
Sciences, Bangalore for development of Simputer:
(i) “Simputerisation of IISc Campus” by Society for Innovation
and Development, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

31
(ii) “Simputer Productization, Training and Application
Development” by Centre for Electronics Design and
Technology (CEDT), Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 79)
The Committee find that the role of industry itself towards R&D
activities has also not been very encouraging. Their contention is that
in order to invest in R&D, there have to be significant volumes in the
country and industry perforce would get attracted to invest in R&D
where they see returns. The Committee feels that the industry has to
play a significant role and supplement Government efforts to promote
the R&D activities. In other words, while the industry expects the
Government to display a trust based facilitator attitude by way of
creating a conducive manufacturing environment, the Committee
expects the industry to display exemplary focus on domestic hardware
growth by way of investing significantly in hardware design and
manufacturing, building world class quality levels on hardware and
focusing on exports. As there is a greater need for bringing the industry
requirements and the research that has been taking place in the
Government side and the industry side in perfect harmony, both the
Government and the industry have to ensure that the hardware
industry not only survives but flourishes also like the software industry.
Action Taken by Government
1. The recommendation of the committee will be taken up
with industry associations and industry to see how far
government-industry-academia/R&D labs cooperation can be
leveraged to make the IT industry, including IT software, to
become competitive and higher value added products and
services can be produced in the country.
2. Towards the above, industry involvement in DIT R&D
activities will be increased. Already, the Working Groups
constituted by DIT for selection of R&D projects for
fundings, have representatives from the industry so that
the needs of the industry are not lost sight of while funding
R&D projects. Also, the projects which are directly usable
by the industry are partially sponsored by the industry.
3. Given that Indian IT hardware sector lost its early mover
advantage, which Ear East got, we need other long term

32
strategies. One of them is to take the design route in areas
like: Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)/Systems on a Chip
(SOC). Embedded systems design and R&D services. This
would help us come back into next generation production
in the country, taking partial advantage of growing domestic
market. Other measures (fiscal, infrastructural, financing, VC
funding) are also equally important.
4. For the above, DIT is also, and has been, investing in
creation of specialized manpower of relevance to industry
as in VLSI design.
5. DIT is also initiating programmes in emerging/sun-rise
industries like bio-informatics, nano technology and quantum
computing R&D and manpower development. These will
help industry in good time.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 81)
The Committee noted that the Consumer Electronics Sector
comprising Audio-Video products i.e. Transistors, Televisions etc.
accounts for 40 per cent of the total hardware production of the country.
It is appreciable to learn that the achievement in this sector has been
90 per cent during the Ninth Five Year Plan although there have been
some slippages in the year 2000-01 when the achievement has been
Rs. 11,700- crore against the target of Rs. 13,000 crore. What is more
encouraging is that out of the total production worth Rs. 11,700/-
crore during 2000-01, three leading indigenous companies have
accounted for 55 per cent that year and on an average the market
share of these three would be around 40 per cent at any given point
of time. However, stiff competition from MNCs, lack of investment,
lack of industry clusters and high incidence of duties and taxes have
put this sector in a disadvantageous position. The Committee feels
that indigenous industry must learn how to be competitive; however,
if and when dumping is resorted to by the MNCs, the Government
must intervene to protect the indigenous manufacturers, as was also
assured by the Secretary, DIT. It is stated that the Indian industry
does no longer require protection, as admitted by the representative of
FICCI, ASSOCHAM and CII. What it needs badly is facilitation from

33
the Government in terms of provision of a flexible duty regime,
promotion of clusters etc. what is needed to be looked into that there
may not be indiscriminate to the state of our domestic industry, which
is suffering from serious constraints and is not able to expand as it
needs to. The Committee believes that if a level playing field is
provided to the Indian Industry it would attract investment, make the
industry competitive and thus, the existing market share of the Indian
companies would increase.
Action Taken by Government
To protect indigenous manufacturers from dumping by MNCs, the
Government has set up an Anti-dumping Cell in the Department of
Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, which is very active.
Overall tax incidence in Consumer Electronics is about 35%. Compared
to this, the Chinese Industry is subject to VAT of 17%. High taxation
in India is facilitating grey market to flourish and also nurturing growth
of the Industry in the unorganized sector. High product prices are
hindrance to growth of the market. To encourage the growth of
consumer electronics industry, reduction in the overall tax incidence is
being recommended. In order to provide a level playing field to the
Industry, Government is taking a number of measures such as
rationalization of Tariff, lowering of customs duty on capital goods,
promotion of SEZs, modification in EHTP Scheme, etc.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 82)
The Committee notes that by the year 2008, the total equipment
requirement would be worth 160 billion US Dollars, the break-up being
$100 billion for strategic and professional electronics. The estimated
requirement of equipment to be met indigenously would be $120 billion
estimated requirement of components would be $60 billion and
estimated requirement of components to be met indigenously would
be $39 billion. Similarly, investment requirement for components and
equipments would be $13 billion and $3 billion respectively. The
Committee wonders whether under the existing scenario i.e. rigid duty/
tax regime, inadequate infrastructure, lack of strong engineering and
design base, absence of R&D, reluctance of the Industry in investing
in Hardware etc. the above mentioned targets by the year 2008 would
ever be achieved. Needless to say, these bottlenecks have to be dealt
with a sense of urgency and priority so that the above targets do not
remain illusory.

34
Action Taken by Government
As mentioned earlier, steps have been initiated in consultation with
Department of Revenue and Department of Commerce so as to remove
the bottlenecks and provide healthy and conducive environment for
the growth of hardware industry in India. The Working Group on IT
for the Tenth Five Year Plan has revised the targets for the hardware
sector and are given below:
(Rs. in Crores)
Sector 2001-02* 2006-07** CAGR%
Consumer Electronics 12,700 30,000 18
Industrial Electronics 4,550 5,800 5
Computer H/W 3,500 10,000 20
Communication & Broadcasting 4,500 8,400 11
Strategic Electronics 1,800 2,800 8
Components 5,700 12,000 15
Total 32,750 69,000 15
 *Terminal year of Ninth Five Year Plan
**Terminal year of Tenth Five Year Plan
The year-wise estimated production in various hardware sectors
during the Tenth Plan (Realistic Scenario) is enclosed as Annexure-I.

ANNEXURE I
ESTIMATED PRODUCTION IN VARIOUS SECTORS OF
HARDWARE DURING THE TENTH PLAN (REALISTIC
SCENARIO)
(Rs. in Crores)
Sector 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 CAGR%
Consumer Electronics 15,400 18,200 21,500 25,400 30,000 18
Industrial Electronics 4,700 4,900 5,200 5,400 5,800 5
Computer H/W 4,800 5,700 6,900 8,400 10,000 20
Communication & Broadcasting 5,600 6,100 6,900 7,600 8,400 11
Strategic Electronics 2,100 2,200 2,400 2,600 2,800 8
Components 6,900 7,900 9,100 10,600 12,000 15
Total 39,500 45,000 52,000 60,000 69,000 15
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 84)
To sum up, so far as the problems of Software, IT enabled services
and Hardware and the requirements of IT industry are concerned, the
Committee finds that although Software Industry has been doing
consistently well despite the global recession, yet the domestic software
market has relatively been small; there is dearth of teachers, Institutions
like NCST have been confined to only two places etc. So far as IT
enabled services are concerned, curriculum in Colleges/Universities
have not been adverting to the requirements of this Industry. In
Hardware, there are constraints galore in terms of duties, taxes, lack
of investment in R&D and others. The biggest constraint that is slowing
down growth in all the three sectors is inadequate communication
infrastructure. The Government has to look into all these aspects
urgently and the industry has to come forward to invest in Hardware
design and manufacturing and build world class quality levels on
Hardware. All possible encouragement should be extended to small
and medium entrepreneurs who have brought out innovative products
35

36
like ‘Simputer’, ‘high station’. Moreover, the Academic Institutions
should volunteer to have joint development with industry on
technologies besides focusing on Hardware Projects incubation and
developing IPR oriented curriculum. The Committee trusts, with such
combined efforts from the Government, Industry and Institutes, India
can attain its long cherished vision of a true IT Superpower.
Action Taken by Government
The Communication infrastructure has improved substantially over
the last few years. Steps have been taken by the Department of
Telecommunications in this direction. The current status of achievements
between 2nd September, 2001 to 1st September, 2002 is given below:
1. VPT (Village Public One every 5 minutes (90,626
Telephones) VPT’s added)
2. Mobile Phone One every 10 seconds (32.52 Lakh
Subscribers)
3. WLL (Limited Mobility) One every minute (4.94 Lakh
Subscribers)
4. Optical Fibre One Kilometre every 5 minutes
(1.22 Lakh R Km. added)
5. Telephone Penetration Teledensity goes up from 3.5 to
4.5 per 100 population
6. S.T.D. Tariffs down by 62%
7. I.S.D. International Long Distance open
to competition. Prices fall by 40%
8. Internet Telephony Now Opened
9. Coverage in Remote Areas Mobile Services now permitted in
Jammu & Kashmir and North East
As a result of the pro active measures initiated in the area of
Telecom and IT, Internet connections have grown from 0.14 million in
March, 1998 to 3.3 million in June, 2002. The estimated Internet user
base is 16.5 million and likely to increase exponentially. Broad Band
access technology such as ADSL, 802.11 b, a & g Cordect etc. are
being promoted by the Government. The ISM Band of 2.4 GHz using
bluetooth and 802.11b technology equipment has been delicensed for

37
use within the single contiguous campus of an individual duly
recognized institutions.
Societies under DIT viz. SAMEER and ER&DCI are involved in
the design and development of Hardware. DIT also supports financially
the design and development projects by SMEs. Media Lab Asia has
taken up lead in development of technology/products for masses in
its programme including the financial assistance for development of
Simputer. With these steps, India will be in a position to achieve its
cherished dream of one of the hardware suppliers in the world.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 80)
The Committee is constrained to note that for computers and
peripherals, a production target of Rs. 17,850/- crore was fixed for the
year 2001-2002 whereas the actual production of these items has been
of the order of Rs. 3,400 crore only . Although during the years
1999-2000 and 2000-2001 the growth rate of the Hardware Industry
was 11 per cent and 9 per cent respectively which was much above
the average growth of the overall Indian industry, yet the Hardware
industry has been grossly under performing so far as the ten years
targets set by the Task Force in 1998 are concerned. Such under
performance has been attributed to carry over the targets since 1998
and fixation of hardware targets almost at par with software targets.
The Committee is unable to accept these reasons for shortfall of targets
in computers and peripherals as it feels such targets have been grossly
unrealistic. In view of the reported absence of an environment that
allows sufficient inducement for the manufacturers. Without addressing
the basic constraints faced by the Hardware manufacturers, the
Department cannot hope to achieve the targets. Further, in order to
curb the menace of grey market which had an adverse effect on the
achievement of targets in computers and peripherals, the duty
differences between components and finished goods should be fixed
at 10 per cent, as suggested by the industry, so that the people who
import computer components and assemble them for selling are not at
disadvantage against those who are importing computers as a whole.
Such a move would definitely help the organized sector’s scope
vis-a-vis the grey market so far as the production of computers and
peripherals is concerned.
Action Taken by Government
Hardware industry has been passing through a critical phase
because of various problems as mentioned at para 77 above and signing
of Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) of WTO in 1997. The
38

39
production was much below the target in the Ninth Plan. DIT has
been proposing a package of incentives to the Ministry of Finance
(MoF) as recommended by the National Task Force on IT & SW
development set up by the PMO in May, 1998. MoF did not accepted
the package and have been providing in piece meal thus delaying the
revival and time was lost in the process. However, the situation is
improving every year since the general environment for manufacturing
is improving. Computers & Computer peripherals are covered under
ITA-1 of WTO and the duty on these would be zero% in 2005. The
duty on major inputs such as ICs, microprocessors, storage devices,
CDTs and deflection parts of CDT are already at zero% parts under
HS 8473.30 are at 5%, Computers and peripherals are at 15% duty.
Presently, the differential of 10% is maintained but in 2005, all items
would be at zero% duty being ITA-1 items and it may not be possible
to maintain any differential. With the initiatives taken by the
Government and incentives provided to the hardware industry, it is
expected that demand for computers will pick up and manufacturing
will be viable.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 36)
However, it is matter of serious concern that Central Government’s
expenditure on IT has been very low despite the country’s unique and
competitive advantage in software i.e. best in quality but lowest in
cost as per a study of the World Bank. It is regretted that Government
Departments could not take advantage of quality software products
produced in the country as the Government has been expending very
little on introduction of IT in Government Offices. Apathy and inaction
of the Government in this regard are contrary to its proclaimed role
of a ‘proactive facilitator’. It is imperative that the Government should
come out with innovative ideas to allocate to each Department a
sizeable amount for promotion of IT every year, should it wish to
make the Industry more vibrant. In this context, the Committee would
like the Government to closely monitor the actual expenditure on IT
by different Ministries/Departments as earmarked for them and every
year and thereafter take suitable corrective measures, wherever
warranted.
Action Taken by Government
— In the National Action Plan on E-Governance, emphasis has
been towards providing efficient and convenient services to
Citizen and Businesses and in this context deployment of
IT is being considered only as a means towards this and
not an end in itself.
— For the Mission mode Projects, DIT has advised Line
Ministries/Departments to project their budgetary
requirements under the specially created budget head for
IT.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I)
40

41
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 77)
The Committee is perturbed to note that our Hardware Industry
which is well diversified, highly competitive and Capital intensive has
because of the rapidly changing policy and global dimension been
under pressure for survival. It has also been so due to infrastructural
constraints, inverted tariff structure, lack of investment, lack of strong
engineering and design base and inadequate R&D facilities etc. It is a
matter of serious concern that hardware manufacturing industry is
insignificant and it has so far lost the race against South-East Asian
countries like Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and Taiwan together with
China and Korea which have generated major chunk of World hardware
industry. It has happened so because out of a total size of about
4 billion US dollars, including services, maintenance etc., over $2 billion
worth of components and raw materials were imported. Further, about
80 per cent of the components of a computer were imported and the
rest comprising some keyboards, printers, monitors etc. were
manufactured locally. What hurts is the fact that although India has
the ability to manufacture significant components like mother boards,
terminals, printers, UPS, CD ROMs, floppy discs etc., the policy
environment has not been conducive to manufacture these items in
India. The constraints experienced by the indigenous industry primarily
included high customs duty on raw materials and capital goods etc.,
high excise duty and sales tax, Octroi on IT products and inadequate
infrastructure like power, road, ports etc. besides a plethora of other
constraints which might be the off-shoot of the primary cause. The
Department of Information Technology has started to have been
discussing regularly the issues of concern with all the concerned
Ministries/Departments to impress upon them the problems of
Hardware sector. As a result of such efforts inverted tariff structure is
being gradually rectified and all quantitative restrictions have been
removed on electronics and IT products. Further, a number of measures
like rationalization of Export Promotion Goods (EPCG) scheme,
implementation of Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP)
scheme, establishment of special economic zones, concessional rate of
custom duty for specified raw materials etc. have been undertaken to
promote the Hardware sector. Although the incentives extended to the
Hardware sector have helped the industry to some extent, yet it fell
short and could not create the desired impact, as has been candidly
admitted by the Department.
Therefore, it has become imperative to have major paradigm of
the policy regime which should encompass flexible Duty/Tax structure,

42
freedom and hassle free environment to the manufactures, guarantee
of proper communication and uninterrupted power supply and
moreover speed of business including man, material and decision
making process so that there is sufficient inducement and competitive
advantage for investment in the Indian Hardware Sector.
Action Taken by Government
Further to the initiatives already undertaken by DIT and discussions
held with Department of Revenue and Department of Commerce, the
following measures have been proposed to encourage the hardware
sector in the country.
1. Further rationalization of tariffs on raw materials and capital
goods.
2. Lowering of excise duty on IT and Electronics goods.
3. Introduction of full VAT.
4. Modification in EHTP scheme to permit DTA sales towards
counting of fulfilment of export obligation. Partially it has
been implemented already.
5. Simplification of customs procedures through EDI already
under implementation in phases.
6. Computerization of Central Excise Department.
7. Working of Customs Departments (clearances) for 365 days
which has already been implemented at major ports.
The factors such as guaranteed communication, uninterrupted
power supply, speed of doing business for having competitive
advantage are true for all sectors of industry and Government had
initiated some steps in this direction.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 83)
In this context, the Committee cannot but refer to the position in
which China has overtaken us to a great extent. For example, PC
penetration per 1000 people is 13.2 in China whereas in our country
it is only 6.2. Similarly, Internet user base is 22.5 million in China and

43
a meagre 2.5 million in India. Likewise in basic and cellular phones
per 100 people, China is way ahead of India. The Committee finds
that China’s success has been due to large domestic consumption led
by the Government itself, unique package of investment and tax
incentives, high competition among the local Governments for attracting
Hardware industry related investments, high investments in
infrastructure sector, flexible labour laws and linking of access to
domestic market with condition of local manufacturing. The Committee
believes that it would be worth to make a proper study of the
development-model of IT industry in China, of course in the above
mentioned fields, more so when the Indian Hardware Industry is
battling for survival.
Action Taken by Government
The study on Hardware industry by Ernst and Young and
sponsored by DIT/MAIT covers the development model in China. The
summary of the polices and incentives in China adopted for the HW
sector are enclosed at Annexure-II. China has gone aggressively to
make their Hardware industry competitive in the world. India is
moving slow in this direction. The package of fiscal incentives
recommended to M/o Finance and D/o Commerce by DIT are not
accepted in toto and as a result the Hardware industry suffers and is
unable to compete.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I)

ANNEXURE II
China & Malaysia-
Policies & Incentives
SEZ Policy
• China
•5  major SEZs, 52 high technology zones
• Coastal & South China; Shenzhen-Hong Kong; Xiamen-
Taiwan
• Policy by center; administration by provinces/municipalities
• up to US$ 30 M-SEZ/province; up to US$ 10 M-others
• up to US$ 100 M-center; > US$ 100 M - State council
—p rovinces and SEZs compete with entrepreneurial
spirit
• time frame - 10 to 30 years typical; - max of 20 years
• Categories of businesses - encouraged, restricted, prohibited
• emphasis on exports & employment; shifting to high
technology and higher value addition exports and higher
VA “encouraged”
• Malaysia:
• discourages low level work; US$ 14,600 per employee capital
investment required
• exceptions - >30% VA; >14% technical employees; high
technology
• minimum 80% export required in free industrial zones
44
All concepts, materials and information presented herein are the intellectual property of
Ernest & Young, and are not to be copied, used or distributed in any way without the
express written permission of Ernst & Young

45
China SEZ infrastructure development
• Scale economy for infrastructure due to concentration
• common pool of skilled labour and specialized services
• Infrastructure investment by private sector encouraged
• 15% to 20% investment desired from private sector; FDI
welcome
•A rea development
• land allocation by Government, 65 hectares of agricultural land/
135 hectares of non-agricultural land
• power/water from local utilities if possible; else to be developed
•a rea developers to provide
• buildings, workshops, water/power distribution, sewage
•r oads, railheads, ports with approval from concerned
authorities
• construction for customs, post office, banks, insurance
• build colleges, vocation training schools
• approval of industry by local body; maintenance by area
developer
Shenzhen and Xiamen
•L arge areas : 150 sq. Km of contiguous area
• all land owned by “people”; only usage rights;
• cities with entry/exist controls like a foreign territory
• Shenzhen infrastructure development followed demand
• leveraged proximity to Hong Kong
•c redibility of doing what was promised; endorsed by
incumbents
• world top 10 container ports; 5 million TEU capacity; 420 ships
• 26 municipal departments co-located for single window
approval

46
• approvals in 12 days after submission of documents (weekly
meetings)
• Xiamen infrastructure led demand
• 10 year wait before development took off
• focussed on encouraging Taiwanese investment
• converted military post to trade port
Labour Policy
• Low labour rates; comparable to Indonesia, Thailand
• locally designated minimum wage norms exist
• compensations beyond basic wages; subsidized housing,
medical care
• social security - 20% by companies; 4% by employees
• Shortage of engineers; emphasis on training
• no limits on bringing professionals or technical persons holding
bachelors degree or higher
•T ermination of employment possible
• varies with location, type of company and size
• easier in south China, in small companies and with contract
labour
• labour contract companies present
• unions present; can not be banned
•1  to 2% labor turn over present
Other policies
• Stock and trade present through FTZs
• sale outside the zone on full payment of duty
• trading in China not permitted by foreign companies; Only
through State owned enterprises
• Exit policy
• closure due to poor viability

47
• failure of JV partners to fulfill obligations
• exports and local value addition norms are often
performance factors
• termination at the end of operating period
• Repatriation of profits permitted after
• paying off accumulated losses and payment of taxes
• no restriction for technology transfer fees and royalties
Incentives
• Electronics industry part of encouraged list
• FDI encouraged over domestic-local investors through Hong Kong
• normal tax rates 30%; foreign enterprises 15%
•P referential polices are same
• negotiated and implemented differently; not all benefits
conferred automatically
• simplification of rules and flexibility in implementation and
bending of rules by local authorities to please investors
• Incentive factors
• tax allowances, duty free raw materials, and capital equipment,
direct import rights, preferential allocation of land, RM and
basic infrastructure facilities
Income Tax incentives—China
• Basic IT rate: 15% for foreign companies; normal 33%
• tax exemptions for 10 year minimum tenure as indicated below
• beyond the exemption period 10% tax when export >70% of
turnover
•r einvestment also qualifies for tax refunds
• For manufacturing
•2  year exemption, 3 years 50% for manufacturing companies
• 10 year tenure, exemption from the first profit making year

48
•r einvestment of profits for 5 years qualifies for refund of taxes
on 40% of the amount
• For high technology zones
•2  year exemption, 8 years 50% for high tech zone
•r einvestment for 5 years in high technology qualifies for 100%
refund of taxes on such amount
Other tax incentives - China
•V alue added tax
• basic tax 17%; under revision to 14% with 5% rebate provision
• “local manufacture, local sell” exempted- i.e. as within Shenzhen
• no VAT for permitted capital equipment imported for
encouraged industry
• no VAT on material procured for use in export goods
• Customs duty
• normal average level 16%
• no duty on components and raw materials procured for export
processing
All concepts, materials and information presented herein are the intellectual property of
Ernest & Young, and are not to be copied, used or distributed in any way without the
express written permission of Ernst & Young

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
49

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 25 November, 2004 from
1100 hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room No. G-074, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Sohan Potai
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
12. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
14. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. *** *** ***
50

51
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following draft Reports and adopted the same with certain
amendments/modifications:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its Thirty-eighth Report on “Problems of Hardware and
Software and requirements of IT Industry relating to
Department of Information Technology.
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a weekend Study
Tour to Chandigrah and Amritsar on 17 and 18 December, 2004.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above mentioned Reports to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

ANNEXURE  II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,
78, 79, 81, 82 & 84
Total : 13
Percentage : 76.47%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph No. 80
Total : 1
Percentage : 5.88%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 36, 77, & 83
Total : 3
Percentage : 17.64%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. —Nil—
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
52