49
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRE FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF ADV ANCED COMPUTING (C-DAC)
FORTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)


FORTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRE FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF ADVANCED COMPUTING (C-DAC)
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 3.8.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on ...........................
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ...........................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 171
Price : Rs. 45.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory .............................................................................. 1
II. Organisational Setup .............................................................. 3
(i) Meetings of Governing Council/Committees of
C-DAC .............................................................................. 3
(ii) Strengthening Corporate Office of C-DAC ............. 4
III. Funding of C-DAC ................................................................. 5
IV . Manpower Attrition ................................................................ 6
V. Setting up of Commercial arm of C-DAC....................... 8
VI. High Performance Computing ............................................. 8
(i) Next Generation PARAM Super Computer ............ 8
(ii) Requirement of Supercomputing Resources ............ 10
VII. Grid Computing ...................................................................... 12
VIII. Cyber Security ......................................................................... 13
IX. Multilingual Computing ........................................................ 14
(i) Lack of standardisation and lexical resources ......... 15
(ii) Non-availability of skilled manpower in compu-
tational linguistics ............................................................ 16
X. Education & Training ............................................................. 17
XI. Health Informatics .................................................................. 19
PART II
Recommendations/Observations .......................................... 21

PAGE
(ii)
APPENDICES
I. Organisational setup of C-DAC Headquarters................. 31
II. Organisational setup of C-DAC Regional Centres .......... 32
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-Fourth sitting of the Committee
held on 4 July, 2007................................................................ 33
II. Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth sitting of the Committee
held on 2 August, 2007 ......................................................... 36

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda*
19. Shri Narahari Mahato**
20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
##
21. Shri Ramesh Dube @
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006 in place of Shri Rajnarayana Budholia, MP
(L.S.)
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
## Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February , 2007.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 21st June, 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Vacant#
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
#Vice Shri Vijay J. Darda nominated to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 14 December, 2006

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Forty-Ninth Report on “Functioning
of Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)” relating
to the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology.
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Information Technology and Centre for Development
of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) on 4th July, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 2nd August, 2007.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Information Technology and Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the information in connection with the
examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
2 August, 2007 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

PART I
REPORT
I. Introductory
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) is an
autonomous scientific body of the Department of Information
Technology (DIT). C-DAC is a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. It has been carrying out Research &
Development in Information Technology, Electronics and associated
areas for more than one and half decade. The Committee have been
informed that starting from its initial mission of building indigenous
supercomputers, C-DAC has progressively grown to build an eco-
system and institutional framework for innovation, technology
development, skills, delivery plans, collaboration, partnership and
market orientation in a number of niche areas of national importance
and market relevance in Information & Communication Technologies
(ICT) and Electronics. It endeavors to identify promising ideas, nurture
building of ideas and competencies and convert many of them into
practical tools, technologies, products and services to meet the needs
of Small and Medium Enterprises and other industrial players in the
country and end users in Science and Engineering, manufacturing &
service sectors, government, health, development and strategic sectors.
2. The DIT have informed the Committee that the major activities
carried out by C-DAC across its various Centres and groups can be
broadly classified into following areas:
(i) High Performance Computing/ Super Computing
(Technology, Hardware, Software Products, System Solutions,
Applications, Infrastructure and Facilities, Cyclone
Predictions, etc.);
(ii) Grid Computing  (Disaster Management, Bio-informatics,
Climate modelling, Earthquake engineering, Astrophysics,
EU-India Grid project to integrate European and India
Grids);
(iii) Language Computing  (Technologies, Standards, Products,
Innovations and Market Leadership, Proliferation of Indian
Language Computing in all 22 officially recognized
languages);

2
(iv) Software Technologies  (Competencies, e–governance
solutions, tools for ICT for development deployed in many
villages, R&D in different segments of Computer Science,
Free/Open source software and bundled distribution of
Desktop Linux Operating System—Bharat Operating System
Solutions (BOSS) , Geomatrics and Audio-Visual
Presentations);
(v) Professional Electronics  (Competencies, Technologies and
Leadership at the national level in a number of chosen areas
including power electronics, control systems such as
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Very
Large-Scale Integrated (VLSI) & Embedded systems, Real
time Systems, Broadband & Wireless, Agri-Electronics);
(vi) Cyber Security and Cyber Forensics  (Cyber Security
Technologies, Tools and Solution development, Competencies
and Services of value to both enterprise and strategic/
government users and Research and Training );
(vii) Health Informatics  (deployment of Health Information
System Solutions in hospitals, development and deployment
of Tele-medicine products, Ayusoft solutions, Deployment
of solutions for Oncology in Kerala and blue-print for
deployment plans for nation-wide Oncology network Rural
Health Management Information System for Primary Health
Care); and
(viii) Education & Training  (Finishing Schools –Diploma, Formal
Higher education, and Short Term Executive Programs) to
over 3 Lakh students in contemporary High End Technology
areas: Advanced Computing, VLSI, Embedded systems, etc.
3. The Committee have been informed that C-DAC, today has 11
Centres/Labs across the country as follows:
1. Bangalore–Knowledge Park
2. Bangalore–Electronics City
3. Chennai
4. Delhi
5. Hyderabad
6. Kolkata
7. Mohali
8. Mumbai
9. Noida

3
10. Pune
11. Thiruvananthapuram.
There are about 2200 people working at these locations.
II. Organisational Setup
4. The Committee have been informed that the governance structure
of C-DAC consists of the following three bodies.
(i) Governing Council (GC)
(ii) Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
(iii) Coordination Committee (CC)
The GC, which is the highest decision making body is chaired by
the Minister for Communications and Information Technology. The
Secretary, DIT is Vice-Chairman of the GC. There are 10 other members
consisting of eminent scientists, members of the industry, academia
and Government.
The TAC is chaired by Director General, CSIR and has nine other
members consisting of eminent scientists and researchers from
Government, academia and industry. This Committee provides
technological directions and suggests areas of great importance and
opportunities in the national and international context.
The CC, which is headed by the Secretary , DIT, acts as a single
window, clearing house in respect of interaction between DIT and
C-DAC. It deliberates on policy matters as well as operational and
financial issues on behalf of the GC and DIT for quicker action.
(i) Meetings of Governing Council/Committees of C-DAC
5. The Committee desired to know about the number of meetings
of GC, TAC and CC in last five years. The Department submitted the
following information in this regard:
Sl. No. Council/Committee No. of Meetings held in
last five years
(as on 15 July, 2007)
1. Governing Council 04
2. Technical Advisory Committee
(Set up in January, 2004) 02
3. Coordination Committee
(Set up in January, 2004) 06

4
6. The Committee have been further informed that on December
16, 2002, three organisations viz. Electronics Research & Development
Centre of India (ER &DCI), National Centre for Software Technologies
(NCST) and Mohali Centre of the Centre for Electronics Design &
Technology of India (CEDTI) were merged with C-DAC.
7. When asked as to what were the reasons that prompted the
merger of these organisations, the Department informed that the merger
was based on the recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms
Commission as contained in their third Report which exclusively deals
with autonomous institutions under Government of India. It was
considered necessary to re-structure the societies for achieving the broad
objectives of employment generation, creation of wealth and IT led
economic growth. Interest of national security, societal equivalence,
implication of research in the field of Information Technology on socio-
economic outcomes. Considerations of harnessing economies of scale
in the operation of the societies have also been borne in mind.
8. The organizational set ups of C-DAC headquarters and Centres
are given at Appendices I & II respectively.
(ii) Strengthening Corporate Office of C-DAC
9. In reply to question as to whether any change was required in
the Organisational set ups of Centres/Labs, the Department have stated
that given the nature and spread of the organization, C-DAC
Headquarters (Corporate Office) needs to be strengthened with suitable
staffing at various levels (as is the situation in other such organizations).
This will help it to undertake effectively mission mode programs
leveraging the resources of groups/centres across the country . Besides,
setting up of a commercial arm (as proposed) for tie-up between R&D
and commercialization will help greater effectiveness in lab-to-market
efforts.
10. When asked about the present status of the proposal to
strengthen its Corporate Office, the Department have stated that a
proposal for manpower requirement for Corporate Office was first
presented by C-DAC to the Coordination Committee in its 3rd meeting
held on 23rd June 2005. The proposal included various positions, pay
scales and number of posts for the Corporate Office. In March 2006,
C-DAC was informed that the matter required to be referred to the
Ministry of Finance.

5
III. Funding of C-DAC
11. C-DAC receives funds from DIT, Government of India in the
form of Grant-In-Aid to carry out its R & D Activities. It is
supplemented by the funds from sponsored research programmes and
reserves generated from Internal Revenues.
12. The Allocations sought by C-DAC, the Budget Estimates (BE),
Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure relating to C-DAC for
the last three financial years and 2007-08 are as follows:-
 (Rs. in Crore)
Years Budget Budget Estimates (BE) Revised Estimates (RE) Actual Expenditure
Proposed
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total
2004-05 46 40 3 43 40 3 43 40 3 43
2005-06 87 60 3 63 60 3 63 60 3 63
2006-07 90 64.5 3 67.5 64.5 3 67.5 64.5 3 67.5
2007-08 127 75 3 78 — — — — —
13. In reply to a query whether the funds allocated by the
Government for the current financial year would be sufficient to carry
out the research activities of the Centre or C-DAC anticipates
requirements of additional funds, it has been stated that given the
projections, funds allocations have been less. Some areas as a result
tend to get slowed down. Alongwith other supportive measures in
respect of measures for attraction and retention of talented manpower
and better infrastructure (as indicated earlier), higher quantum of
funding will help C-DAC to set the bar high in fulfilling its mandate
and realize its full potential and meet the needs of the situation.
14. Replying to a specific query regarding the areas which may
suffer due to reduced allocations, C-DAC stated that in view of the
reduced allocation, Grid Computing, shared e-Science resources/
facilities will suffer to some extent and pace of other core R&D
programmes will get reduced accordingly. R&D efforts would be
affected accordingly.
15. Further, when asked about the help needed from Government
to upgrade its research activities, C-DAC replied that in many high
technology and high obsolescence areas such as Supercomputing, timely
and critical quantum of investments (financial and infrastructural) is

6
necessary. The investment as such needs to be upgraded—
commensurate with technological progress and demand side of the
market.
IV . Manpower Attrition
16. C-DAC in reply to a query regarding specific constraints/
problems being faced in its activities, have replied that today, the
foremost constraint of C-DAC is its inability to attract and retain talent
in the current market conditions. Even while this is receiving the
attention of the Governing Council and the Government, higher level
attention and support is absolutely necessary for important institutions
such as C-DAC to sustain their momentum. Performance linked
incentive and reward would be helpful in line with the prevailing
trends in the market.
17. In fact, during the course of the oral evidence of the
representatives of DIT and C-DAC before the Committee, DG, C-DAC
admitted the following in the context of slippages in set targets,
“We lacked crucial manpower and we lacked infrastructure”.
The Secretary, DIT also averred with the views of DG, C-DAC and
said:
“Sir, there is one thing which is general problem not only
regarding DIT and its organisations, but also other scientific
communities. There is a lack of emoluments as compared to what
is happening in the private sector”.
18. Further, in reply to a query regarding attrition of manpower,
C-DAC has stated that over the years, C-DAC has been facing problems
of attrition like other organizations, especially because of boom in IT
industry and demand for skilled manpower.
19. Manpower attrition rate during the year 2004 to 2006 at various
centres of C-DAC is given below:
C-DAC Centres 2004 2005 2006
12 3 4
Pune (including Knowledge Park - 37.70% 7.10% 16%
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai
and Delhi)

7
12 3 4
Mumbai (including Electronics 22% 18% 20%
City, Bangalore)
Mohali 15% 15% 24%
Noida 22% 22% 38%
Kolkata 12.07% 12.07% 10%
Thiruvannathapuram 5% 5% 5%
20. Classifying attrition levels across the hierarchy, C-DAC informed
that the attrition is higher amongst the scientific and technical categories
of employees. The attrition is highest at the entry-level followed by
the next two higher levels. There are many instances of crucial loss of
manpower at middle level or senior middle level, as well, leading to
enormous loss of expertise.
21. When asked about the reasons behind this serious problem
and whether the matter was taken to higher levels, C-DAC replied
that the differential in the salary compensation between C-DAC and
the industry is one of the main factors behind this problem. C-DAC
is in discussion with DIT in this regard. The matter will be taken up
with the Governing Council.
22. With reference to the measures taken to tackle the problem of
attrition, it has been submitted that C-DAC has been making efforts to
address this issue by a number of measures including choice of
challenging R&D topics, appraisal process which gives constant
feedback, employee satisfaction survey and refresher training
programmes focused towards employee development. All these have
resulted in progressive reduction in attrition. Recruitment and training
of new talent has been taken up. Efforts are also being made to take
lateral induction of project leaders to higher levels. The Governing
Council of C-DAC has also been seized of the issue of improving
various amenities provided to C-DAC members and other ways of
improving the compensation along with better performance.
23. Further, when enquired about any proposal ever made for
performance linked incentives and rewards to its employees, C-DAC
stated that such a proposal was made. However, this was not
considered favourably by DIT in view of the Ministry of Finance
guidelines. This issue will be taken up with the Governing Council.

8
V. Setting up of Commercial arm of C-DAC
24. About the specific help that C-DAC requires from the
Government to upgrade their research and promotional activities it
has been stated that a linkage to address commercialization of C-DAC
technology has become the prime need of the day. Homework to
establish a commercial arm has already been made, accordingly this
issue needs to be addressed.
25. In reply to a query regarding contours & shape of proposed
commercial arm, the present status of the proposal and how commercial
aspects were dealt in past C-DAC has replied that it has prepared a
proposal for setting up an adjunct corporate entity , hiring the services
of a reputed technology consultancy agency. It addresses the felt need
for a commercial arm of C-DAC and provides linkage between R&D
and commercialization for enhancing lab-to-market effort. Senior
Executives of C-DAC and the consulting agency interacted vigorously
to come out with a proposal titled ‘Enterprise Transition of C-DAC’.
The core concept and ideas of this proposal were presented to DIT in
April 2007. As of now, various groups and centres use their own
mechanisms to do commercialization of their R&D output.
VI. High Performance Computing
26. The Committee have been informed that one of the major
functions of C-DAC is development of High Performance Computing
(HPC). Providing details about HPC and role played by C-DAC in its
development, the Department in a background note on the subject
have stated that C-DAC, having been set up as India’s National
Initiative for the development of indigenous supercomputing
technology, has played a pioneering role in the development and
deployment of the PARAM series of supercomputers. PARAM Padma
with a peak performance of one teraflop (TF) is the latest in this
series and is housed at C-DAC’s Tera Scale Supercomputing Facility
(CTSF) at Knowledge Park, Bangalore. In furtherance of its activities
in development of technologies and solutions for High Performance
Computing, C-DAC has identified Grid Computing as a major thrust
area.
(i) Next Generation PARAM Super Computer
27. According to the Outcome Budget (2007-08) of the Department,
the timeline for commissioning 5 Teraflops peak (TFs) systems was
December, 2005. However, this project was delayed and subsequently
targets have been revised to 10 Teraflops sustained (TFs) systems.

9
28. During evidence on 4 July, 2007, DG, C-DAC when asked
about reasons for delay in commissioning of next generation system,
stated:
“……In HPC, in terms of development we did lag behind. We
had manpower problems. I would think, we did about 70 per
cent.”
“…. Six months to one year earlier, we should have delivered.”
29. About the reasons necessitating this revision, DG, C-DAC
informed the Committee during oral evidence:
“we have talked about originally 5 Teraflops (TFs) and we missed
the target. What we have done was that because the technology
meanwhile is changing, we have revised the target to an upgraded
machine of 10 teraflops and that too instead of a peak, we are
now providing what we call sustained 10 teraflops. So, though we
might have missed, we are now promising to make up…………”
30. Supplementing him, Secretary, DIT stated:
“And there was a change in the advancement in technology and,
therefore, there was a need to revise the architecture and the
proposal itself.”
31. Clarifying further about the reasons for delay a representative
of C-DAC stated:-
“……………We are using the microprocessor for building the
machine. We do not design these microprocessors. We have to buy
from companies like Intel, IBM, etc.. Now, we had to depend on
them to deliver the computer nodes which are the heart of
supercomputer. Now, there is a slippage on their part. This is one
of the important reasons.”
32. During evidence on 4 July, 2007, the DG, C-DAC in reference
to the commissioning of 10 TFs system, stated:
“we are delivering it by the end of the third quarter, that is, by
October-December (2007) period”.
33. However, the Department in written replies dated 15 July, 2007
have stated in regard to the timeframe of launching next generation
PARAM with sustained computing power of 10 Teraflops (TFs) that
the next generation PARAM system with a sustained computing power

10
of 10 Teraflops (TFs) is scheduled for commissioning during December
2007-February, 2008.
34. The Outcome Budget of the Department for 2007-08 also
indicated that the 10 Gbps interconnect which ought to have been in
place by December, 2006, however, has also missed the deadline.
(ii) Requirement of Supercomputing Resources
35. During examination of Demands For Grants (2006-07) of the
Department, the Committee came across a serious short supply of
supercomputing resources for problem solving even as India is coming
of age in its aspirations in terms of research, engineering and grand
challenge problems. They were also informed that India should aim to
have more supercomputer resources and build capacity in the form of
shared facilities, building of user competence of learn to benefit from
Supercomputers, etc.
36. In this context mentioning the steps proposed to be taken to
meet supercomputing resource requirement, the Department stated that
the requirement for Supercomputing resources can be met as follows:
• Building and operating large supercomputing facilities at
select locations and providing access through high-speed
Networks and Internet;
• Grid enabling HPC infrastructure and continuous
development of high-end HPC systems; and
•P roliferating smaller/medium range systems at multiple user
sites for learning and prototype application development.
37. Regarding the constraints/difficulties being faced by C-DAC
in this reference, the Department in the same reply have stated the
following:
• Ability to retain and attract skilled professionals to operate
such facilities on a long term basis;
•A vailability of necessary funds to set up such systems; and
• Lack of necessary infrastructure & funding for the same.
38. Further, in reply to a question as to whether these constraints
have been brought to the notice of the Government and what corrective
measures have been suggested in this regard, C-DAC submitted that
the constraints regarding inability to retain and attract skilled

11
professionals to operate supercomputing facilities on a long term basis,
non-availability of necessary funds to set up such systems, and lack of
necessary infrastructure & funding for the same have been taken up
in the Governing Council, Coordination Committee and other
instruments of C-DAC/DIT……. The resource requirements have been
projected in the 11th Plan and Annual Plan documents. For the year
2007-2008, as against the projected requirement of Rs. 127 crore the
actual allocation is Rs. 75 Crore. However, the core funding through
Plan allocation is increasing year by year for the last few
years………….. As regards infrastructure, in-principle approval was
given earlier. Individual proposals for infrastructures including land
and building are being proposed for consideration and
approval…………. As regards attraction and retention of skilled
professionals, the issue is taken up from time to time. From within
the organization, regular training for skills development, motivation
through work on nationally important projects, conducive eco-system
development are undertaken.
39. When asked about the percentage utilization of PARAM series
computers and steps being taken to increase its user base, C-DAC in
a written reply stated that utilization of PARAM Padma hosted at
CTSF - C-DAC’s Terascale Supercomputing Facility—is approximately
70%. This is rated to be fairly high with reference to the utilization of
supercomputer facilities across the world. System Availability is more
than 99%. Storage usage is more than 3.5 TBytes…………The PARAM
Padma supercomputer at CTSF has been put to major use by users
from C-DAC and over 80 technical affiliates registered for this facility
from premier research and educational institutes across India. They
can access this facility either through internet or through high-speed
communication network of GARUDA grid………Some portions of the
PARAM Padma (64 CPU) are reserved for GARUDA grid users
community.
40. It was also stated that in addition to above the following steps
for increasing the utilization further were being taken:-
• Putting the Systems on Grid.
• Conducting regular training and workshops for potential
users.
• Deployment of various configurations of these systems at
premier academic and research institutes.

12
VII. Grid Computing
41. Highlighting the objectives of Grid Computing and activities
of C-DAC in this area, the Department in a background note on the
subject have stated that recognizing the importance of Grid computing,
DIT have funded C-DAC to execute national grid GARUDA. In this
area, C-DACs ongoing work cover design, and deployment of a
distributed computing capability, initially across 45 institutions in 17
cities across the country over an ultra-high capacity network in its
Proof of Concept (PoC) phase. The capability will subsequently lead
to facilities based on terascale clusters, a few hundred terabytes of
storage archives, a 10 Gbps network and data management software
and Grid computing technologies. The connectivity will enable sharing
of data, algorithms and research outputs in real time. The focus will
be on developing application software through the establishment of a
Grid Strategic User Group that will drive the usage of the Grid by
multiple users across the country.
42. The Objectives of Grid computing are:
• Sharing of high-end computational resources with the larger
scientific and engineering community across the country;
• Addressing the requirements of emerging High Performance
Computing applications by integrating geographically
distributed resources;
•P roviding Universal access to resources; and
•C reating a Collaborative Framework for solving applications,
which are interdisciplinary requiring experts from multiple
domains and distributed locations.
43. According to the written notes furnished by the Department,
the project was initiated in October, 2004. Original time frame for
completion of the Proof of Concept (PoC) phase of Grid Computing
was one year. Now, extension of the operational phase till March, 2008
is being requested.
44. When the Committee, during evidence on 4 July, 2007 enquired
about the reasons for request for extension DG, C-DAC, stated:-
“In this case, the inherent nature of the project is that 38 institutions
are involved in this. To energize them, to bring them into the
concept and technology, to give them on course, make them
contribute their own resources and complete other administrative

13
processes and so many things are there. It is like a community
building which sometimes takes more time. Community building
unfortunately took a longer time.”
VIII. Cyber Security
45. Giving details about the progress made by C-DAC in the field
of cyber security, the Department in the material submitted to the
Committee have stated that C-DAC with wide experience in R&D has
chosen cyber security as one of the priority area proposing to deliver
multilevel/multilayered security solutions to safeguard the Government
Infrastructure. Solutions already developed in this direction are Cyber
Forensics tools, Adaptive Intrusion Detection System, End systems
security solution, document security solutions, Steganographic tools,
etc. These solutions cannot be static as the attacks keep growing with
changing times and technologies. It has been further stated that
C-DAC continues to explore delivering the need of the hour Cyber
Security Solutions as follows:
• Cryptography/Cryptanalysis;
• Cyber Forensics;
• Face Recognition and associated biometrics techniques;
• Legal Interception of Voice over Internet Protocol(VOIP)
packets transparent, end-to-end security-hardened solutions;
• Intrusion detection systems;
• Secure Storage System;
• Digital Audio Watermarking; and
•T rust Enhancement of Cyber Space for promotion of
e-Governance.
46. In reply to a query regarding level of success of these solutions
in ensuring cyber security, C-DAC stated that indigenous Cyber
Forensics tool kit and Cyber Check Suite developed by C-DAC have
been utilized by several leading Law Enforcement and Forensic
Agencies in the country such as CBI, IB, CFSL and State Police, etc..
Over 60 licences of Cyber Check Suite have been delivered to these
agencies as well as Defence organisations. These tools have helped in
investigating cyber crimes, conforming to IT Act Provisions. Steganalysis
Tools have also been developed and integrated with the Cyber Forensic
Tools. Adaptive Intrusion Detection System developed by C-DAC has
been tested by a number of agencies and they are also seriously
considering its deployment.

14
47. Regarding problematic areas where these solutions were found
inadequate in tackling cyber crimes, C-DAC have stated that the
solutions provided by C-DAC with respect to Cyber Forensics are
effective in carrying out offline analysis of cyber crimes. However,
they cannot be used to tackle on-line cyber crimes, which are increasing
rapidly day by day. With further development support, the tools could
be scaled up and made effective for on-line monitoring and analysis.
Being essentially of catch-up nature, newer violation methods are likely
to be improvised; and that will demand perpetual vigilance and design
of new solutions.
48. During oral evidence on 4 July, 2007, when the Committee
enquired about the level of progress made in providing cyber security
solutions and whether they are of International standards, the
representative of C-DAC responded:-
“…….. so far, I can say no. We still lack that level.”
IX. Multilingual Computing
49. Explaining the importance of Multilingual Computing and work
done by C-DAC in this field, the Department have informed the
Committee in a background note on the subject that Computer
technology in India has both a developmental as well as a social role.
In its developmental role, it is concerned with the design and
development of newer technologies for various applications. In its social
role, it breaks the language barrier and bridges the gap between the
various sections of the society through easier access to information
using their respective mother tongues or local languages. Language
here has a major role to play and, therefore, language computing
becomes central to the exchange of information across speakers of
various languages. Language computing, therefore, faces two major
challenges - first, the development of appropriate language tools and
technologies for its total language computing needs and secondly the
multiplicity of Indian languages with different scripts, dictions and
styles, each vying for a place in the computing roadmap. The ultimate
goal of multilingual computing is to ensure that the technology reaches
the common man at his doorstep in his own native tongue so that he
feels more at home working with the new technology. This in turn
will facilitate his active involvement in the whole process of social
and economic advancement that the new technology is expected to
bring about. In Multilingual Computing and Allied Areas, C-DAC
continues to work towards the design, development and deployment
of technologies/solutions for the following:
• Machine Assisted Translation (MAT) systems;
• Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems;

15
•T ext-to-Speech (TTS) systems;
• Optical Character Recognition (OCR) systems;
• Fonts (TTF & OTF) for Indian Languages; and
• Other Multilingual tools such as data processing tools,
information extraction and retrieval tools, dictionaries, spell-
checkers and grammar-checkers, etc.
50. Some of its notable achievements in these endeavours include
Text-to-Speech (TTS) in Bangla which was used by the State Election
Commission to announce West Bengal State Election Results in 2006.
TTS for Nepali is also under development. In the Automatic Speech
Recognition Project, development of the ‘Shrutlekhan-Rajbhasha’ with
the support of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs had already
been done. This can be made available to masses in CD form.
(i) Lack of standardisation and lexical resources
51. In reply to a query regarding constraints being faced by C-
DAC in the field of multilingual computing, the Department in their
reply have inter-alia stated that the constraints faced are as under:
(i) Lack of adherence and proliferation of standards such as
storage, display, inputting, dictionary formats, etc (for all 22
scheduled languages). States need to take lead.
(ii) Non-availability of lexical resources which are essential for
development of spellcheckers, grammar checkers,
dictionaries, thesaurus, and most of the Natual Language
Processing (NLP) related Research and tools”.
52. From the information made available to the Committee C-DAC
claimed to have pioneered the language technology and through its
continuous R&D activities played a vital role in standardization,
proliferation and developments of tools and technologies for common
man. Currently an estimated 15-20 million users are using C-DAC’s
GIST- Graphics and Intelligence based Script Technology over the last
15-16 years. The same is being promoted by NIC and other Government
Organisations. Some of the states like Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andhra
Pradesh have standardised on C-DAC’s multilingual products/tools.
Given the immense utility of multilingual computing the Committee
desired to know the reasons as to why other states are not keen to get
standardized on C-DAC’s multilingual products/tools. The Department
in a written reply have stated that as indicated above, a few states
have standardized on some of the C-DAC’s multilingual products for

16
use in various Government departments. The requirement from the
State Government is a mix of products and tools for enabling/
developing multilingual applications. Other states such as Orissa and
Kerala are also using C-DAC’s GIST technology for varied applications,
directly as well as through NIC and other organizations. With MNC
companies also providing support to a few Indian languages, states
have an alternative option to use.
53. Describing the initiatives taken by C-DAC for promoting
standardization, the Department in the same reply have stated that C-
DAC participated in proliferation of National Standards for Storage
(ISCII – Indian Standards Code for Information Interchange) and Input
(INSCRIPT keyboard) Standard. However, with the changing technology
and support of all Universal languages, International standards such
as Unicode are formed & are being developed/supported/implemented
by various MNC’s. One of the major agenda of C-DAC is to provide
inputs or evolve standards for at least all the 22 scheduled languages.
Recently C-DAC has worked on standards for Bodo, Santhali, Maithili,
Dogri, and Vedic Sanskrit and others with participation from various
institutions, and experts from various states. C-DAC is actively
participating in various standardization meetings organized by DIT as
well as state Governments.
54. When asked, whether C-DAC has any plan to overcome these
constraints, the Department in their reply have stated that following
was being done:
• Standardization meetings with participation from states and
stake holders, and
• Establishing linguistic resource development centres with
regional participation and adopting best practices in this
field and studying work carried out outside the country.
55. It was further added that active participation from various
States is crucial for development, implementation of standardized
solutions. Participation of State level representative/ authority in
standardization meetings held at National level.
(ii) Non-availability of skilled manpower in computational linguistics
56. Listing the constraints being faced by C-DAC in Multilingual
Computing, the Department in a written reply have stated the
following:
• “Non-availability of skilled manpower in the area of
computational linguistics. Since working in language

17
technology area requires computational as well as linguistic
skills it is difficult to get the relevant manpower. Also
general trend is that freshers are not keen in working on
domain specific language technology; they prefer working
in broad IT areas which gives them better and wider
placement opportunities.
• Manpower attrition.
• Skilled Language computing and Language experts are not
readily available to be deployed on these projects. Attracting
members to work in the area of language technology is
difficult. The new generation is not very keen on working
in NLP areas, since majority tends to work in computation
part; Attracting manpower to work in the field of Language
technology; and retaining and motivating best of talents also
is an issue.”
57. Suggesting steps to overcome these constraints, the Department
in a written reply, have mentioned about starting computational
linguistics programmes in Universities as well as C-DAC Centres (with
more focus on practical aspect); giving due importance to language
technology in schools, colleges and universities; course curriculum by
default having language technology subject; starting of Computation
linguistic courses; giving better incentive to members working as well
as to the Industry for marketing/developing language enabled product,
eg: giving more tax benefits so that industry/developer tends to
develop software in Indian languages by default. Indian language
software’s, hardware, etc may be provided separate and better taxation
as compared to English alone tools/technologies.
X. Education & Training
58. As per some reports if the Indian IT Industry has to achieve
a target of US 60 billion in exports by 2009-10, it would require an
estimated 8,50,000 IT professionals and 1.4 million ITES-BPO
professionals by 2010. With offshore penetration for both IT as well
ITES-BPO services estimated at about 10 percent, and off shore adoption
rising rapidly, demand for these services from India is expected to
continue on its high growth trajectory. Besides, the Indian IT Industry
is growing at a faster pace and more and more companies are setting
up their businesses in India. The developing business demands an
appropriate sized and skilled workforce. However, in the current
scenario, many graduates coming out of academic institutions are
unable to meet the IT industry’s requirements.

18
59. When enquired about the role of C-DAC in meeting the
requirement of IT industries for skilled workforce, the Department in
a written reply have stated that C-DAC offers various high-end courses
in Advanced Computing, Embedded systems, VLSI design,
Bioinformatics, Geomatics, etc. for experienced as well as fresh
graduates. C-DAC’s IT courses are meant to bridge the gap between
academic institutions and industry.
60. It was further stated that C-DAC’s training and education
activity in Advanced Computing is creating high quality manpower
for ICT industry. The Centre designs and delivers various specialized
training programmes in ICT. Its Education and Training Programmes
continue to build and enhance skills in critical areas of Information
Technology and electronic product development throughout India. C-
DAC is recognized by major corporates in India to be a preferred
high-end provider of skilled manpower in areas of ICT. With the help
of about 50 training centres, C-DAC is playing an important role in
making available skilled workforce. Apart from ICT industry
requirements, C-DAC also plays an important role in imparting IT
training programmes to the Government employees. C-DAC has trained
more than 60000 employees of Government of Maharashtra and
imparted basic IT literacy programme. C-DAC is contributing in
supporting the drive of Indian defence forces for IT enabled workforce
by offering various specialized IT training programmes to the personnel
of Indian Army and Indian Navy across India. About 10000 army
personnel get trained every year. Mainframe training, DESD course
and other specialized courses like .NET, etc. contribute a lot in
producing skilled manpower. M. Tech course focusing on expertise in
VLSI is again generating industry-ready manpower.
61. Highlighting further the efforts made by C-DAC to meet the
emerging need for IT skilled professionals, the Department have stated
that C-DAC along with its network of training centres is making
modest contribution in catering to the need of IT industry for skilled
manpower; however, looking at the growing demand from the industry,
C-DAC is open to expand its training network and make available
more number of skilled resources to the IT industry. C-DAC needs to
increase the numbers by identifying credible organizations to offer the
courses as authorized training centres of C-DAC.
62. It was, however, stated that the requirement of the industry is
large and C-DAC is meeting only a small percentage of this
requirement. Large scale-up of C-DAC activities may not be viable
with the existing infrastructure. C-DAC are looking into the mode of

19
e-learning solutions in this area so that the fresh engineers can
participate in this programme using the virtual classroom concept.
63. Further, in reply to a query as to whether C–DAC has taken
up the matter with DIT, C-DAC have stated that e-Learning Division
of DIT and C-DAC worked on the concept paper to bring-out the
issues to be focused to make e-Learning a more viable mechanism to
impart education. C-DAC has been working on e-Learning technologies
including tools in its centers at Hyderabad, Mumbai, Pune and Noida.
DIT had released Rs.43 lakh during 2005-06 and Rs. 45 lakh during
2006-07 for E-Learning related activities.
64. Underlining the strategy to meet the IT Industry’s requirement,
C-DAC has also mentioned in a written reply that it plans to scale-up
the present course to increase the number of students using authorized
training centers and establishment of e-learning servers.
XI. Health Informatics
65. The Department have submitted before the Committee that C-
DAC have been working in the area of health informatics for the last
several years. The efforts have resulted in deployable systems and
solutions for Hospital Information System, Telemedicine, Tele-education
and computerized systems for health directorates. C-DAC plans to
continue putting effort in this area with focus on the following:
i. Hospital Information System (HIS),
ii. Systems and Solutions for Telemedicine and Tele-education,
iii. Picture Archival and Communication System (PACS),
iv. Medical Knowledge and Decision Support System, and
v. Framework for Standards Compliant Medical Systems.
66. Further, the Department in their Annual Report (2005-06) have
stated about a project regarding cancer care for rural masses named
‘ONCONET’. ONCONET is a comprehensive telemedicine solution for
Cancer Treatment and Follow-up at the Regional Cancer Centre(RCC),
Thiruvananthapuram and its Peripheral Centres. ONCONET attempts
to arrange a virtual super-specialty environment spear-headed by
Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram for its early cancer
detection and cancer eradication programmes, exploiting the advanced
technologies and latest trends in the industry. It includes a ‘Remote
Expert Consultation System’ with a powerful Video Conferencing
System, which provides uninterrupted and qualitative online interaction

20
between oncologists at RCC and doctors/patients at the five nodal
centres. The Learning Resource Centre for Oncology provides cancer
related information to clinicians, researchers, health planners, health
workers, administrators and patients services of ONCONET. C-DAC
has successfully completed the implementation of ONCONET Project.
67. In a presentation made before the Committee on 4 July, 2007,
C-DAC has mentioned the following:
• Success of ONCONET in Kerala has led to Cancer Net
Project of Tamilnadu which is nearing completion; System
Commissioned at Adyar Cancer Centre and at Ghandigram
Near Madurai.
•A yusoft: A WEB-BASED DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM for
Medical Practitioners and Researchers on Ayurved. (domestic
and overseas).
• Rural Health Management Information System for Primary
Health Care.

21
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
I. Introductory
1. The Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-
DAC) is an autonomous body of the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
C-DAC has been carrying out research and development in
Information Technology, electronics and associated areas for more
than one and a half decade. The Committee find that the endeavours
of C-DAC can be broadly classified into high performance computing,
grid computing, multi-lingual computing, software technologies and
professional electronics, cyber security and cyber forensics, health
informatics and education and training. The Institution is today
operating from 11 centres and laboratories across the country with
an organizational strength of about 2200 personnel. The Committee’s
observations arising out of examination of C-DAC are dealt with in
the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee are happy to note that starting from its initial
mission of building indigenous supercomputers, this premier national
institution has progressively grown to build an eco-system and
institutional framework for innovation, technology development
skills, delivery plans, collaboration, partnership and market
orientation in a number of niche areas of national importance and
market relevance in Information & Communication Technologies and
Electronics. That C-DAC has produced several practical tools,
technologies, products and services to meet the needs of small and
medium enterprises and other industrial players in the country and
end users in science and technology, manufacturing and service
sectors, Government, health, development and strategic sectors etc.
is indeed satisfying.
II. Organisational Set Up
(i) Meetings of Governing Council/Committees of C-DAC
3. The Committee note that the Governing Council (GC), the
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and the Coordination
Committee (CC) headed by the Minister of Communications and

22
Information Technology, Director General, CSIR and Secretary DIT
respectively, form the core of governing structure of C-DAC. The
Governing Council is responsible for taking major decisions and
overall supervision of C-DAC while Technical Advisory Committee
provides technological directions and suggestions to them. The
Coordination Committee deliberates on policy matters and operational
and financial issues on behalf of the Governing Council and the
Department of Information Technology. Undoubtedly, these bodies
have a major role in guiding C-DAC. They are also the much needed
interface between this autonomous Society and various arms of
Government and other bodies. Furthermore, they are also the bodies
mandated with solving the problems faced by C-DAC and also
facilitating their efforts in frontier sciences. The Committee, however,
note that the Governing Council met only four times in the last five
years while the Technical Advisory Committee and the Coordination
Committee met two and six times respectively since their constitution
in January, 2004. The Committee feel that this is more than casual
approach of the Department towards this premier research and
development institute of the country. They are unable to comprehend
as to how C-DAC would be able to meet earmarked targets and
achieve excellence in its mandated areas in absence of proper
guidance, direction, supervision and facilitation. This laxity and lack
of interest is all the more unacceptable since the endeavours of C-
DAC are in frontier IT technologies where time is of utmost essence.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department that there
should be frequent meetings of these bodies at regular intervals so
as to ensure that decisions on major issues are not delayed and the
problems/difficulties being faced by C-DAC are not allowed to linger
on to the detriment of national interest.
(ii) Strengthening Corporate Office of C-DAC
4. During the examination of the subject, C-DAC pleaded before
the Committee that its headquarters (Corporate Office) need to be
strengthened with suitable staffing at various levels. According to
C-DAC, this will help the body to effectively undertake mission
mode programmes leveraging the resources of groups/Centres across
the country. The Committee find force in the demand raised by the
Organisation. The Committee find it relevant to point out here that
after the merger of three organisations, viz., Electronics Research &
Development Centre of India (ER&DCI), National Centre for Software
Technologies (NCST) and Mohali Centre of the Centre for Electronics
Design & Technology of India (CEDTI), C-DAC is undergoing a
consolidation phase, as the merger has increased the number of units

23
under C-DAC and their presence across country. These factors also
necessitate a strong Corporate Office for effective supervision of the
units as well as co-ordination among them. The Committee have
been informed that C-DAC has submitted a proposal for manpower
requirement for the Corporate Office to the Coordination Committee,
which is headed by the Secretary, DIT, way back on 23 June, 2005.
After about nine months, C-DAC have been informed that the matter
required to be referred to the Ministry of Finance. Since no further
inputs in the matter have been provided by the Department in the
written information submitted to the Committee or during their oral
evidence, it can very well be assumed by the Committee that nothing
tangible has been done in this regard during the last 16 months.
The Committee are constrained to point out that a premier scientific
body like C-DAC certainly deserved a better handling. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should now
atleast take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance without any
further delay. Meanwhile C-DAC should also take interim measures
to strengthen its Corporate Office by way of suitable redeployment
so that effective functioning of the Organisation is not hampered.
The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made
in this matter.
III. Funding of C-DAC
5. The Committee note with concern that the Government have
not been considering the financial requirements of C-DAC with due
seriousness. Against sums of Rs. 46 crore, Rs. 87 crore, Rs. 90 crore
and Rs. 127 crore sought by C-DAC during the years 2004-05 to
2007-08 respectively, only Rs. 43 crore, Rs. 60 crore, Rs. 67.5 crore
and Rs. 78 crore respectively have been allocated to them. C-DAC
has submitted that reduced allocation of funds vis-à-vis projections
have resulted in slow down of progress/achievements in some areas
like Grid Computing, shared e-science resources/facilities and pace
of other core R&D programmes. Further, it has been stated that in
many high technology and high obsolescence areas, timely and critical
quantum of investments is necessary. The Committee are full in
agreement with C-DAC and express their unhappiness over the way
DIT has been deciding upon the funds requirements of C-DAC. The
Committee would like to make it clear to the Department that in
frontier areas of supercomputing and related matters the R&D
scenarios are changing rapidly. Hence, delay in provision of funds
and infrastructure have the portents of causing irreparable losses.
The Committee, therefore, expect that DIT will consider the pending
and future proposals of C-DAC for release of funds with due
promptitude and diligence.

24
IV. Manpower Attrition
6. During the course of the examination of C-DAC the
Committee also found that one of the major reasons behind the
slippages in the performance is the inability of C-DAC to attract
and retain talent in current market conditions. During the years 2004-
06, the attrition rates varied between 5 to 38% at various centres of
C-DAC. The attrition rates in scientific and technical categories of
employees was stated to be very high. The differential salary
compensation between C-DAC and the Industry is the main factor
behind this problem. A proposal from C-DAC regarding performance
linked incentive and rewards did not find favour with DIT in view
of the Ministry of Finance guidelines. The Committee cannot but
express their grave concern over this issue.
7. From the materials submitted by the Department the
Committee have observed several instances where projects and
research activities of C-DAC suffered due to the large scale attrition
of skilled manpower from its various centres/laboratories. The rapid
growth per-se in the IT Sector and the resultant demand of skilled
manpower which has created a situation of huge shortage of
manpower in IT sector has further aggravated the situation. Therefore,
in such a background, there is an inherent need to somehow
incentivise employees to avoid attrition and resultant work delays.
The Committee are of the opinion that once the commercial arm of
C-DAC is in place, C-DAC with approval of concerned authorities
may consider sharing certain percentage of revenue generated by
the commercial arm as incentive among its technical staff. In the
interest of functioning of C-DAC and with a view to retaining the
best scientific talent, the Department should also take up the matter
with Ministry of Finance for special salary compensation/allowance,
scheme/package for personnel deployed in such high end technology
areas. At the same time C-DAC should also take steps like creating
a conducive and strongly motivational work environment , providing
challenging assignments, providing some kind of patent sharing
arrangement with adequate bonds/conditions and restructuring of
their human resource policy to attract and retain talent. The
Committee would like to be informed about the decisions taken in
this regard at the earliest.
V. Setting up of Commercial arm of C-DAC
8. The Committee have been informed that C-DAC is working
on a proposal for setting up of a commercial arm for quite some
time now. According to C-DAC it will be helpful in effective tie up

25
between R&D and commercialisation and enhance lab to market
efforts. For this purpose, it hired the services of a reputed technology
consultancy agency and subsequently presented the core concept and
ideas of this proposal to DIT in April, 2007. Further, the Committee
are informed that contours and shapes of the proposed commercial
arm are still being worked out. The Committee exhort DIT to take
a decision on the proposal of C-DAC without an further delay. The
Committee feel that in view of the desirability of this lab to market
interface and as an interim measure C-DAC ought to utilize some
Government organizations who are already rendering commendable
services in marketing research outputs.
9. One such organization that comes into the mind of the
Committee in this context is the National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC), an organization under the Department of
Scientific & Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology.
NRDC is stated to be wholly dedicated to transfer of technologies
from R&D laboratories to industry covering the entire spectrum of
industrial technologies. NRDC is also stated to be engaged in the
development, promotion and commercialization of the R&D results/
technologies emanating from Research Institutes/Universities/
Industries, etc. Similarly, the Antrix Corporation Limited, the
commercial arm of Department of Space is also stated to be working
successfully for the promotion and commercial exploration of
products and services from Indian Space Programme since 1992. The
Committee are of the opinion that, pending the formation of its
own commercial arm, C-DAC should explore tying-up with such/
similar organisations for commercialisation of their technologies.
VI. High Performance Computing (HPC)
(i) Next Generation PARAM Super Computer
10. The core competency of C-DAC is stated to have been
developed in High Performance Computing (HPC) which is very
much evident from the kind of progress/achievements shown by C-
DAC in developing advanced computing infrastructure in the country
over the years. The Committee observe that in pursuance of its
objective of developing high end computing resources, C-DAC was
assigned the project of commissioning 5 Teraflops (TFs) systems by
December, 2005. However, this project was delayed and subsequently
targets were revised for upgraded 10 Teraflops (TFs) systems. This
crucial delay and non achievement of target was besides financial
constraints, due to delay in supply of critical components by the
vendors of C-DAC.

26
11. The Committee are disappointed to learn that C-DAC has
missed the target of commissioning 5 Teraflops (TFs) systems. It is
even more worrisome when technology is changing very fast and
any delay can seriously jeopardise a project and subsequently result
in not only cost overruns but also costly delays in nation building
efforts which cannot be quantified. The country is already facing
shortage of advanced computing infrastructure and in such a
background any slippage in development of new infrastructure is
disappointing. The Committee, therefore, emphasise that C-DAC
should attach highest priority to such projects and complete them
on time, if not before. The Committee also expect DIT to be fully
supportive of all such endeavours of C-DAC so that there is no
scope for any slippages.
12. The Committee also desire that DIT/C-DAC should take
suitable action against such defaulting vendors. They would like to
be informed of the precise action taken in the matter.
13.  The Committee further note with serious concern that the
10 Gbps interconnect project could not be completed by C-DAC as
per stipulated deadline i.e. December, 2006 and had to be staggered.
This is not a healthy state of affairs, particularly when it concerns
project of high value to the developmental efforts of the country.
The Committee, therefore, desire that a time bound schedule be
presented to them about the operationalisation of the 10 Gbps
interconnect system.
(ii) Requirement of Supercomputing Resources and constraints
14. The Committee note that there is a serious short supply of
supercomputing resources in the country. The Committee have been
informed that various steps proposed to be taken takes to meet the
supercomputing resources requirement like building large
supercomputing facilities, Grid enabling HPC infrastructure, etc.
However, C-DAC submitted that it is facing some constraints like
non availability of necessary infrastructure, funds and skilled
professionals in this regard and have taken up the matter with DIT.
Further, the Committee have been informed that utilization of
PARAM Padma is approximately 70%. The Committee are of the
opinion that since India is a leading light in IT revolution, more
and more multi national corporations (MNCs) involved in high end
research are making it as their R & D base. To further boost R &
D activities by Government and private sector, varied infrastructural
support is needed and supercomputing facilities are one among them.

27
However, the Committee note with concern that the country is facing
severe shortage of supercomputing resources. To aggravate the
situation further, C-DAC are facing shortage of funds, infrastructure
and skilled manpower and therefore are seriously constrained in
meeting the requirements of supercomputing resources. In the
opinion of the Committee this situation deserves to be remedied
forthwith. The Committee, therefore, recommend, even at the cost of
repetition that the Department should provide C-DAC with adequate
funds and infrastructural facilities for the purpose of development
of requisite supercomputing resources. Further C-DAC on its part
should make efforts to attract talents in supercomputing field by
tying-up with institutions of excellence and also take necessary steps
for optimum utilization of Super Computing Resources presently
available with it.
VII.Grid Computing
15. The Committee note that C-DAC have initiated the national
grid GARUDA with noble objectives, notably sharing of high-end
computational resources, addressing the requirements of emerging
High Performance Computing applications and creating a
collaborative framework for solving applications. The Project has,
however, got delayed due to various reasons, chief amongst them
being delay in building a culture of grid computing and stablisation
of grid. C-DAC has submitted that these primary constraints are
being resolved by arranging workshops and demonstrating
advantages of Grid computing. The Committee feel that C-DAC
should have adopted a more proactive approach and planned
workshop, courses and grid partners meets before hand to avoid
such a situation. Apparently, C-DAC has failed to visualise these
eventualities, which is unfortunate. Timely steps in this regard would
have created adequate environment and generated enthusiasm in grid
partners. Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon C-
DAC that it should take all possible care and measures to avoid any
further delay in the project and in future adopt a proactive approach
towards such projects of great national importance.
VIII. Cyber Security
16. C-DAC with wide experience in R&D in Communications &
Information Technology and electronics is delivering multi-level/
multi- layered cyber security solutions. In furtherance of its objectives
in the field of cyber security it has also developed and released
some products and tools. However, the Committee have been

28
informed that C-DAC tools are more useful for offline detection and
still lack capability to tackle cyber crimes online. Beside, C-DAC
admitted during the evidence before the Committee that these tools/
technologies still lack international standards. This is not a happy
situation at all. More so, when India is faced with serious and
continuous threats of cyber crimes against her and various law
enforcement & forensic agencies of the country are increasingly
looking to C-DAC for solutions. Therefore, it becomes all the more
pertinent for C-DAC to timely develop multiple application cyber
security technologies and tool of international standards. The
Committee would impress upon C-DAC to priortise ‘cyber security’
area and develop robust technologies to safe guard Indian cyber
installations against cyber crimes of all kinds.
IX. Multilingual Computing
(i) Lack of standardisation and lexical resources
17. It is heartening to note that in pursuance of their objective
of making technology available to public at large in their own native
language C-DAC is actively working towards design, development
and deployment of technologies/solutions in the field of multilingual
computing. An estimated 15-20 million users are benefiting from
C-DAC’s GIST-Graphics and Intelligence based Script T echnology
for last over one and a half decade. The Committee, however, note
that the multi-lingual products of C-DAC are yet to find favour
with most of the State Governments. C-DAC is facing some
difficulties in this regard, these inter-alia  include lack of
standardisation & lexical resources. As for the reasons, firstly only
a few states have standardised on some of the C-DAC’s multilingual
products because their requirement is a mix of products and tools
and secondly, the states have alternative option to use products from
MNCs. To overcome these constraints C-DAC plans standardisation
meetings and establishing linguistic resource development centres.
The Committee are of the view that besides standardisation meetings,
these matters should be actively taken up with the respective State
Governments to enlist their support not only in evolving common
standards but also establishing linguistic resources in respect of all
scheduled languages. Further, if necessary these matters may be raised
in inter-state fora like National Development Council, Ministers’ level
meetings, Conference of Secretaries, etc. C-DAC, on its part ought to
also customise its products to the requirements of respective states.

29
18. The Committee also feel that C-DAC should take further
initiatives in extending the benefits of multilingual computing to
common man. They would like C-DAC to accord due priority to
Speech Recognition and Text to Speech projects as in the present
scenario they can be of immense utility to the people at large. The
Committee would also like the Department to not only monitor these
projects continuously but also ensure that they suffer in no way due
to paucity of funds or other impediments.
(ii) Non-availability of skilled manpower in computational linguistics
19. The Committee have been informed that working in language
technology area requires computational as well as linguistic skills
and it is difficult to get relevant manpower. The general trend being
that freshers are not keen in working in domain specific language
technology. C-DAC has submitted that these constraints may be
overcome by starting computational linguistics programme in
Universities & C-DAC centers, etc. The Committee are of the opinion
that C-DAC should tie-up with Universities for respective languages
and provide necessary support in starting computational linguistics
programmes on a priority basis. Additionally, with support from the
Department, C-DAC may establish development labs/centres at the
campus of Universities for training and recruiting the requisite
manpower beside development of linguistic tools/technologies so that
this critical resource for multilingual computing is available in
abundance.
X. Education and Training
20. The Committee have taken note of some reports projecting
an estimated demand for 8,50,000 IT professionals and 1.4 million
ITES-BPO professionals by 2010. However, in the current scenario
due to various reasons, many graduates coming out of academic
institutions are unable to meet the IT industry’s requirements. The
Committee have been informed that C-DAC with the help of about
50 training centres is offering various education and training
programmes to build and enhance skills in critical areas of
Information Technology, therefore, playing an important role in
making available skilled workforce. Further, C-DAC is conducting
various industry oriented education programmes and looking at the
growing demand from industry, they are open to expand their
training network to make available greater number of skilled
manpower to the IT industry. However, large scale increase in its
activities may not be viable with existing infrastructure. C-DAC is,
therefore, looking into the mode of e-learning solutions in this area.
The Committee appreciate the coordinated efforts of C-DAC and the

30
vital role being played by C-DAC in creating high quality manpower
for ICT industry. They would, however, simultaneously like to
impress upon C-DAC to further expand its network of training
centres by expeditiously including more and more authorised training
centres in it. Further, in view of the huge estimated demand of the
industry, C-DAC should start e-learning courses without any further
delay. The Department, on their part, should make available adequate
funds to C-DAC for this purpose so that the valuable initiatives of
C-DAC in this direction bear fruits forthwith. The Committee would
like to be kept informed about steps taken in this direction.
XI. Health Informatics
21. The Committee note with appreciation the laudable
contributions of C-DAC in the field of health informatics and related
fields. A small but significant beginning has been made in
developing remote software diagnostic assistance for cancer patients
in rural areas of Kerala through Regional Cancer Center,
Thiruvananthpuram. The Committee are sure that C-DAC will ensure
a quick dissemination of this Scheme to other parts of rural India.
22. The development of Ayusoft Solutions is another feather in
the cap of C-DAC. The Committee are sure that C-DAC will take
this project to its logical conclusion by spreading knowledge of the
ancient system of Ayurved to every corner of the globe so that the
mankind benefits therefrom.
23. Last but not the least, the Committee have noted the efforts
of C-DAC in the direction of evolving a Rural Health Management
Information System for Primary Health Care. Inspite of concerted
attempts of Government the primary health care in rural areas is not
only in crying need of better management but of complete overhaul.
A Rural Health Management Information System will go a long
way in improving the reach, spread and efficacy of the primary
health care and in the process the lot of teeming millions in our
rural areas. The Committee desire top priority to this venture by C-
DAC and DIT. They would like to be apprised of the roadmap
charted out for the expeditious fructification of the System at the
earliest.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
2 August, 2007 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

31
APPENDIX I
CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS
Project Board Corporate Office
*Many of these positions have been already proposed (Being non-existent) or filled up by eisting members
on part time basis.
• Head, Research and Development *
• Head, Business Development
• Head, Academics & Education Technology
• Registrar
• Head, Corporate HRD
• Chief Finance Officer
• Head, Legal and Contracts
• Head Corporate Communications & Web Admin.
Director General
Coordination Committee
Governing Council
Technical Advisory Committee
Director, Bangalore
Director, Pune
Director, Hyderabad
ED, Mumbai
ED, Thiruvananthapuram
ED, Kolkata
ED, Noida
Director, Chennai
Director, Mohali

32
APPENDIX II
CENTRE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ADVANCED COMPUTRING
CENTRES HEADED BY EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS/DIRECTORS
Director/Excutive Director
Head Admin/Centre
Coordinator
HR Executive
Finance Officer
Head Business Development
Technical Groups

33
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 4th July, 2007 from 1500 hours to
1830 hours in Committee Room G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Lalmani Prasad
6. Shri Tufani Saroj
7. Shri P .C. Thomas
8. Shri Narahari Mahato
9. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
10. Shri Ramesh Dube
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
13. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
14. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
15. Shri Motiur Rahman
16. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary

34
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Videsh Sanchar Nigam Ltd. (VSNL)
and Tata T eleservices Ltd. (TTSL)
1. Shri N. Srinath — Managing Director, VSNL
2. Shri Mukund Rajan — Director, TTSL & VSNL
3. Shri Ashok Sud — P resident, Corp. Regulatory,
TTSL
4. Shri Shrinivasa Addepalli —V ice President, Corp. Strategy,
VSNL
5. Shri Praveen Sharma — V ice President, Regulatory
Affairs, VSNL
Representatives of the Department of
Information T echnology (DoIT)
1. Shri Jainder Singh — Secretary, DoIT
2. Shri S. Ramakrishnan — DG (C-DAC)
3. Shri M.M. Nambiar — Addl. Secretary, DoIT
4. Shri R. Chandrasekhar — Additional Secretary, DoIT
5. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan — Joint Secy. & Fin. Advisor,
DoIT
6. Shri Pankaj Agrawala — Joint Secretary, DoIT
7. Dr. U.P . Phadke — Advisor, DoIT
8. Dr. A.K. Chakravorti — Advisor, DoIT
9. Dr. Gulshan Rai — Exec. Director-ERNET
10. Shri J.K. Tyagi — Deputy Financial Advisor,
DoIT
11. Shri V .B. Taneja — Sr. Director, DoIT
12. Shri A.B. Saha — Exec. Director (C-DAC)
13. Shri Rajan Joseph — Exec. Director (C-DAC)
14. Shri Zia Saqib — Exec. Director (C-DAC)
15. Shri S.P . Dixit — Director (C-DAC)
16. Shri N. Mohananram — Director (C-DAC)
17. Dr. George Varkey — Director (C-DAC)

35
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
The witnesses, then withdrew.
6. The Chairman, then welcomed the Secretary, DoIT and other
officers accompanying him to the sitting of the Committee.
7. Thereafter, the Director General, Centre for Development of
Advanced Computing (C-DAC) gave a presentation on ‘Functioning of
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)’.
8. The Members sought certain clarifications on the issues relating
to the functioning of C-DAC. The representatives of the DoIT &
C-DAC responded to the same.
9. A list of queries pertaining to the issue of functioning of C-DAc
which could not be clarified during the examination of the witnesses
was then handed over to the concerned officer of DoIT for written
replies.
10. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing valuable information in connection with
the examination of the subject ‘Functioning of C-DAC’.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept separately.
The Committee, then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this report.

36
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 2nd August, 2007 from
1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room G 074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad — Acting Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Tufani Saroj
6. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
7. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
8. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Motiur Rahman
10. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee under rule 258(3)
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha
choose Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad to preside over the meeting.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration

37
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with some
modificaitons:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on ‘Functioning of Centre for Development of
Advanced Computing (C-DAC) relating to the Department
of Information Technology (DoIT).
4. As the House was not in Session, the Committee decided to
present the above said Reports to the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction
71(A).
5. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
two Reports in the light of factual verifciations received from the
concerned Departments and present them to the Hon’ble Speaker on
a date and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this report.