LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
65
Cover.pmd 16/02/2009, 11:59 AM1

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and
their outlets. The said information is available on website
'www.parliamentofindia.nic.in'.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are
available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323),
Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
List of these items are available on the website mentioned
above.
Cover.pmd 16/02/2009, 11:59 AM2

SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fifty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 October, 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2008/Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
Inner Cover.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM1

CIT No. 198
Price : Rs. 76.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by S. Narayan & Sons, New Delhi-20.
Inner Cover.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM2

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF THE COMMITTEE  .............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. ( V)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ............................. 21
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Government ........................................... 49
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ....................................................................... 50
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ......................... 64
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009) held on 27 August, 2008 ....................... 65
A
NNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations Contained in
the Fifty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ..... 68
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM1

(ii)
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM2

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2008-2009)
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
17. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
18. Shri P.C. Thomas
19. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
* Shri Badiga Ramakrishna, M.P. ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.
26 August, 2008.
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM3

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Dr. C.P. Thakur
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Shyam Benegal
Secretariat
1. Shri Rajagopalan Nair M. — Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P.C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM4

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-fifth Report on Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2008-09)’ of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Fifty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April,
2008 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. The
Department furnished their Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report
on 10 July, 2008.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 27 August, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
   N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
27 August, 2008 Chairman,
5 Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM5

(vi)
Contents.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:09 PM6

1
REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining
to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Information Technology).
2. The Fifty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
16 April, 2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April,
2008. It contained 34 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have
been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos: 1-7, 9-11, 13-16, 19, 22-25, 27-32 and 34
(Total : 26)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies of the Government:
(Total : NIL)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies of the  Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Para No:  8, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21 & 26
(Total : 07)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which reply is of interim nature:
Para No:  33
(Total : 01)
(Chapter-V)
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM1

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by
the Government in cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken notes
on the observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final
action taken replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter-V
of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Tenth & Eleventh Plan Outlays
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. The Committee in their Fifty-eighth report had observed that
the Department inspite of   utilising 99.97% of the funds allocated during
the Tenth Plan, have been allocated 69 per cent of the funds sought by
them for the Eleventh Plan i.e. an allocation of Rs. 12496.00 crore against
the proposed Rs. 18160.79 crore. Since the drastic cuts in the proposed
funds affected the performance of the Department in view of lowering of
targets, etc. the Committee had recommended that IT sector being the
sunshine area of Country’s economy, all efforts should be made by the
Government promptly so that the genuine needs of funds of the
Department were met fully.
7. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
efforts are consistently made for allocation of adequate resources and
the Planning Commission had been approached for allocating higher
GBS in the year 2008-09.
8. The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Department had already got themselves acquainted
with all the efforts made by the Department for securing the funds
projected in their proposal for the Eleventh Plan including their
approaching the Planning Commission for allocating higher GBS for
the current fiscal (2008-09). The fact, however, remains that these
efforts of the Department have not borne fruits and their proposal for
the financial resources for the Eleventh Plan has been reduced by more
than 30%. The Committee, therefore, expect that rather than apprising
them about the efforts made in the time gone by the Department would
get down to the task of securing enhanced allocations for the remaining
part the Eleventh Plan right form the 2008-09 RE stage onwards. In
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM2

3
view of the commendable track record the Department of information
Technology in utilizing the Tenth Plan allocations, the Committee find
no reason why the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance would
be reluctant to cater to the legitimate financial requirement of the
Department.
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
9. Having noted that as many as 504 Utilisation Certificates (UCs)
for funds amounting to Rs. 615.66 core were pending by various States
and implementing agencies (as on 31.12.2007), the Committee in the
aforementioned Report had while expressing their concern about the
insufficiency in the efforts of the Department in this regard, asked them
to make all efforts to clear the pendency and also put in place adequate
safeguards to avoid recurrence of the same.
10. In their Action Taken Note the Department have stated that
efforts are being made to liquidate the pending UCs. The Department
have further mentioned that no sanction is issued unless the UC for the
earlier grant is received. In a special drive JS& FA took meetings with the
Heads of different Divisions, Controller of Accounts, etc. resulting in
liquidation of a large number of pending UCs on monthly basis. It is
hoped that the number of pending UCs/unspent balances will certainly
come down soon.
11. The Committee note the Department’s efforts to liquidate
the pending UCs including the Special Drive launched for the purpose
which has according to the Department resulted in liquidation of a
large number of UCs. However, in view of the vagueness of the reply
and in order to get a better idea to the  results achieved through these
efforts the Committee would like to be furnished with a detailed reply
complete with all facts and figures at the earliest. They would also like
to be apprised about the updated position of the pending UCs/unspent
balances.
National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
12. In their previous Report, the Committee having observed the
allocation of a sum of Rs. 800.00 crore only against Rs. 1053.63 crore
sought by the Department for National e-Governance Plan had asked
the Government to ensure that no roadblocks in the form of administrative
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM3

4
delays or financial constraints come in the way of the Department of
Information Technology in their endeavours. The Committee had also
impressed upon the Department to strive their utmost to meet the high
expectations from NeGP and to implement it at the earliest.
13. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the observations and advice of the Committee are noted.
14. The Committee are not satisfied with the vague reply of the
Department. Instead of just casually dealing with the Recommendation
of the Committee on matter of such national importance, the
Department should unambiguously spell out the concrete measures
taken by them to ensure that the implementation of NeGP does not
suffer from administrative delays or financial constraints and fructifies
without any further staggering of targets.
State Data Centres (SDCs)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
15. The Committee having observed continuing time over-runs in
the implementation of the State Data Centre (SDC) Scheme had in their
Fifty-eighth Report expressed strong disapproval at the Department’s
way of handling the Scheme and desired that atleast 20 Data Centres be
established and operationalised by March, 2009.
16. The Department in their Action Taken Note while agreeing
with the observations of the Committee that the SDC scheme needs to be
taken up on priority for implementation in the States have stated that
they would take all necessary actions to ensure that the directives of the
Committee are followed and all necessary steps shall be taken for
establishing and operationalising of 20 Data Centres by March 2009.
They have further informed that since the SDC Scheme approval by the
Goverment in January 2008, proposal of 23 states/UTs have been
approved and funds released to them as part of first year’s requirement.
The States/UTs have also been advised to initiate activities/actions
required for timely completion of the SDC. Further the Template RFP has
been forwarded to the States by DIT and State consultants assigned to
the respective states shall work closely with the States in various
activities connected with the successful implementation of the SDC.
17. It has been further stated that considering the linkage between
SDC, SWAN and CSCs in delivery of services to citizens, DIT has been
endeavouring to ensure that these three parts of the service delivery
platform become available in each State together. The States, on their
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM4

5
part, have also been striving to coordinate the implementation of all the
three and achieve their completion simultaneously. Considering the lead
time for each of these projects. DIT have advised States to first put in
place implementation arrangement for SWAN and CSCs and then take-
up SDCs. This is now being done by most States vigorously.
18. Since the Scheme approval by the Government on 24
th January
2008, the SDC proposals for the following States/UTs have been
approved with outlays indicated against each:
Sl. State/UT Total Project DIT Share Amount
No. Cost Over Released
5 Years so far
(Rs. in Crore)
12 3 4 5
1. Assam 49.04 11.97 3.82
2. Andhra Pradesh 55.75 18.37 4.19
3. Chhattisgarh 49.15 18.24 4.12
4. Goa 33.06 12.48 1.80
5. Gujarat 55.04 18.30 4.40
6. Haryana 50.68 13.5 4.18
7. HP 43.64 16.32 3.72
8. Jharkhand 46.92 13.31 4.16
9. Kerala 55.68 18.31 4.16
10. Madhya Pradesh 55.75 18.37 4.19
11. Maharashtra 55.77 18.38 4.19
12. Manipur 39.04 15.16 3.14
13. Meghalaya 39.21 15.37 3.25
14. Nagaland 30.68 12.37 2.69
15. Orissa 54.24 16.94 3.47
16. Puducherry 29.69 10.28 2.64
17. Punjab 50.58 13.44 3.72
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM5

6
12 3 4 5
18. Rajasthan 48.92 12.59 4.05
19. Sikkim 27.39 10.06 2.53
20. Tamil Nadu 55.8 18.41 4.21
21. Tripura 40.05 15.44 3.28
22. Uttar Pradesh 55.33 18.41 4.20
23. West Bengal 55.25 17.89 3.95
Total 1076.66 353.92 84.06
19. The Committee appreciate the action taken by the
Department in pursuance of their recommendation. Now that proposals
of the 23 States/UTs have been approved and funds released to them
as part of the first year’s requirement for the important component of
NeGP, the committee exhort the Department to ensure that the SDCs
are established and operationalised in the 23 States/UTs mentioned
above by March, 2009 positively.
Security Of Sovereign Data
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
20. Appreciating that the State Data Centre form a crucial
component of core infrastructure of National e-Governance Plan, the
Committee, in their earlier Report, had suggested that the implementation
of SDCs should solely be entrusted to the Government agencies like NIC,
ERNET, etc. to ensure safety and sanctity of data. The Committee also
desired that the Department should clearly highlight the national
security perspective to all participating States and guide/help them in
placing adequate safeguards in this regard.
21. The Department, in their Action Taken Note have stated that
considering that the State Data Centre would be crucial and critical
infrastructure of the State, it has been clearly indicated in the Policy
Guidelines that the sovereign control of the data/applications shall be
with the state both de-jure  and de-facto.  Therefore, the implementation
options indicated in the Policy Guidelines put the establishment and
operations of the Data Centre directly with the State to be implemented
through State Government Designated Agency and would be assisted by
NIC domain experts as part of the Composite Team established at the
State for State Data Centre Project. Also where the State/UT adopts
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM6

7
outsourced option, it has been clearly indicated that the servers shall be
owned and operated by the State and the management of the Data/
information shall be under the direct control of the State both de-jure and
de-facto . It may be informed that all the 23 States/UTs whose proposals
have been approved have opted for the option, where setting up of Data
Centre and operation & management would be with the State. As part of
best practices for the Data Centre, DIT have also elaborated in the Policy
Guidelines on the importance of data access, data security, data privacy
and data protection requirements to be followed and ensured during
implementation of the State Data Centre. DIT shall continue to advise
and provide/render all possible help and support to the States in this
regard on an ongoing basis both during implementation and post
implementation phase of the State Data Centre.
22. The Committee note the action taken by the Department to
meet the concerns of the Committee about national security and
protection of sovereign data. They, however, desire that their concerns
should also be kept in view while establishing State Data Centres in
the remaining States.
Common Service Centres (CSCs)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
23. The Committee in their previous Report, on finding that out of
100000+CSCs proposed to be established in the country by 2008 only
3338 had been set-up thereby necessitating staggering of the timeline to
March 2009 had, while expressing their disappointment in the matter,
impressed upon the Department to expedite the roll out of CSCs Scheme
as per the revised deadline.
24. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the recommendation of the Committee is noted. It has been further stated
that DIT is actively driving and monitoring the implementation of the
CSCs Scheme, and doing all it can to speed up the implementation.
However, it must be stressed that the actual implementation of the CSCs
Scheme on the ground, as per the design of the CSCs Scheme, is the
responsibility of the State Goverments. The design of CSCs Scheme calls
for the selection of a  Service Centre Agency (Private Agencies which will
actually set up the CSCs) by the State Government and it is this Agency
which actually sets up the CSCs on the ground. Currently, on account of
the proactive intervention of DIT and the support provided to the States
by DIT through the National Legal Service Agency (NLSA) and the active
involvement of the State Governments, bid evaluation for setting up more
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM7

8
than 90,000 CSCs has been completed. It is expected that CSCs would be
set up in most States by the end of FY 2008-09. However, it must be
stressed that the bid process management, award of work  and facilitation
of implementation by the selected agency is done by the State Government.
Since as per design the contract with the Service Centre Agency (SCA) is
signed by the State Government, it may by noted that the actual period of
implementation from the date of signing the contract with the SCA is
12 months in most cases as per the detailed  statement  shown at page
52 to 56 of chapter IV Hence the projections now being made are based
on actual contractual arrangements entered into by State Government.
25. From the statement furnished by the Department regarding
the status of implementation of CSCs Scheme, the Committee find that
information has been furnished in respect of 14 States/UTs only. In
case of four States viz. Jharkhand, West Bengal, Haryana and Gujarat
where a total of 18518 CSCs were to be rolled out between 5 April to
22 July, 2008 in various phases, no information as regards to their exact
status has been furnished by the Department even though the roll out
deadlines are over. The Committee also observe that out of the
14 States/UTs for which the status of implementation of CSC Scheme
has been furnished, atleast four States viz. Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Orissa and Meghalaya, where a total of 29496 CSCs are to be rolled
out, are going to miss the revised timeline of March, 2009. The
Committee are concerned by this continuing unsatisfactory state-of-
affairs. This indicates the casual approach of the Department towards
this very important component of NeGP. The CSCs are the intended
delivery platforms of the NeGP. Any delays in their roll outs would
make the entire Scheme go haywire. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Department should work in right earnest to ensure that the roll
out of 100000+CSCs, as originally envisaged, should be operationalised
by the revised timeline of March, 2009 positively. They would also like
to be furnished with the information about the exact status of
implementation of CSCs Scheme in the remaining States/UTs.
Monitoring Bodies of Elected Representatives
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
26. In their earlier Report, the Committee had recommended that
the Department should enforce a very comprehensive and strict
monitoring regime for ensuring co-ordination amongst various agencies
and State Governments for the implementation of the CSCs Scheme. The
Committee had also desired that monitoring bodies of elected
representative at Central, State, district and local level be formed to further
this end.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM8

9
27. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the monitoring of the implementation of the CSCs Scheme is being
done on a regular basis. This is being done by DIT with the assistance
of the NLSA. Further, the State Governments, through the State
Designated Agencies (SDA), are also monitoring the deliverables and
performance of the Service Centre Agencies (SCAs). It may be
mentioned that when the work for establishing the CSCs is awarded
to the SCAs, clearly defined milestones are a part of the Master Service
Agreement (MSA) which is signed between the SCA and the SDA.
Further, the MSA also contains suitable clauses to ensure that if a
particular SCA does not establish the CSCs as per the timelines
indicated in the MSA (excluding circumstances beyond its control), it
would be eligible for penalties. The performance of the SCAs is
monitored on the basis of the MSA by the SDA and reports regarding
the progress of implementation is also received by DIT. A detailed
progress report on the CSCs Scheme is attached with this report. Hence
DIT would like to assert that there is strict monitoring of the CSCs
Scheme by DIT and proper coordination with the State Governments
in this regard.
28. Regarding the suggestion of the Standing Committee to
monitor the CSC Scheme by bodies of elected representatives, it has been
stated that the DIT welcomes the suggestion of the Committee to have a
body of elected representatives at the State, District and local levels, to
monitor the CSCs Scheme. DIT will advise the State Governments to set
up a suitable mechanism for involving elected representatives for
monitoring the CSCs Scheme at the State, district and local level.
However, at central level it is felt that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee itself has to be the most appropriate body to carry out this
monitoring.
29. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department
have acknowledged the desirability of having a body of elected
representatives at the State/district/local levels to monitor the CSCs
Scheme and that they intend to advise the State Governments to set
up a suitable mechanism for involving the elected representatives
for the purpose. The Committee, however, strongly feel that keeping
in view the pressing need for expediting the CSCs Scheme roll out,
the Department ought to have already sent the advisory to the State
Governments in the matter by now. They, therefore, impress upon
the Department to do the needful without any further delay and
apprise the Committee about the action taken.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM9

10
Monitoring and Follow up at Various Fora
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
30. The Committee in their earlier Report felt the urgent need to
provide projects specific interfaces between the State and Line Ministries/
Departments and opined that the implementation of NeGP should be a
part of the agenda of all inter State meetings and conferences, etc. so as to
resolve ambiguities and remove hurdles, for timely implementation of
NeGP and its components. The Committee had also desired cooperation
and coordination of various State agencies for timely implementation of
NeGP particularly in the context of the State sector MMPs.
31. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
steps have been taken to coordinate the role and the responsibility of the
State Government Departments and the Central Line Ministries/
Departments in project implementation of State Sector MMPs under NeGP.
Implementation of NeGP was taken up as an Agenda in the Conference
of Chief Secretaries of State and Union Territories recently held on
22
nd April 2008. A conference of the State IT Secretaries is proposed to be
called by the Minister of Communications and Information Technology
in the month of July 2008, to coordinate States’ action for timely
implementation of NeGP, particularly State sector MMPs. Action would
also be initiated to make NeGP implementation a part of the agenda of
Chief Ministers’ Conference, Inter-State fora like NDC and Governors
meet to improve coordination.
32. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the
Department in pursuance of their recommendation and hope that all
these measures proposed would be taken to their logical conclusion.
They, would also like to be apprised about the outcome of the aforesaid
two Conferences and the steps taken, thereafter, for timely and
effective implementation of NeGP.
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
33. In their Fifty-eighth Report, the Committee having noted the
drastic pruning down of the budgetary proposal of STPI from
Rs. 12.00 crore to Rs. 2.00 crore in 2007-08 at RE stage and no allocation
being made to STPI for 2008-09 against the projection of Rs. 60.00 lakh,
had desired to know from the Department the reasons behind the same.
In response, initially, an impression was given to the Committee that
since STPIs generated enough accruals they did not require budgetary
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM10

11
support. However, during the course of evidence, the Department
admitted that while internal accruals were sufficient for the maintenance
of the existing 48 centres, budgetary support was required by STPI for
opening new centres. The Committee had, therefore, in their previous
Report recommended that not only should STPI clearly project its
financial requirements so as to make the budget exercise realistic,
contradictory statements should also be avoided.
34. In response, in their Action Taken Note the Department have
stated that as per the current policy for setting up a new STPI Centre, the
State Government has to provide 3 acres of land, 10,000 sq. ft. of build up
space and a grant in aid of Rs. 1 crore to STPI. DIT provide a seed capital
of Rs. 50 lakh to STPI for setting up a new centres. STPI has projected a
budgetary support of Rs. 100 lakh during a financial year to establish
two centres in a year.
35. The action taken reply of the Ministry is a mere reiteration of
a policy, which has already been submitted to the Committee time and
again in the past, without even a word on the specific action taken on
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee strongly deprecate
this casual attitude of the Department and desire that a specific reply
complete in all respects may be furnished to them within one month
from the presentation of this Report enumerating action taken in
pursuance of the instant recommendation of the Committee.
Broadbasing STPI Centres
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
36. In their previous Report the Committee on finding that a
majority of software export was centred around tier I and II cities and in
the forward/developed States of the country had recommended that STPI
should open new centres also in tier III and IV cities as also in less
developed States to provide the requisite growth impetus to these areas.
37. In their action taken note the Department have stated that as
per current policy for setting up a new STPI centre, the State Government
has to provide 3 acres of land, 10000 sq. ft. of built up space and a grant-
in-aid of Rs. 1 crore to STPI. DIT provide a seed capital of Rs. 50 lakh to
STPI for setting up of new STPI Centres. A feasibility study has to be
conducted by STPI jointly with the State Government to evaluate the
export potential and commercial viability of the proposal.
38. The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken reply
furnished by the Department. The Committee are aware of the current
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM11

12
policy and the resultant tier I and II cities centric growth of the software
export. Precisely due to these very reasons, the Committee had
recommended that STPI, in order to stimulate and expand growth in
the IT sector, should open new centres in tier III and IV cities as also in
lesser developed States. The Committee, therefore, desire that rather
than apprising them of the current policy for setting up of new STPI
centres the Department should furnish a specific response about how
to encourage setting up of new centres in tier III and IV cities as also in
lesser developed States even if it requires some additional initiatives
and incentives on the part of the department.
Additional Benefits For STPI Units
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
39. On being informed that the withdrawal of tax benefits to STPI
units from March, 2009 might adversely affect these units and the fact
that although the matter had already been taken up by the Department
with the Ministry of Finance, a decision was still pending, the Committee
had asked the Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Finance for an expeditious decision. The Committee had also
asked the Department to formulate a new/supplementary scheme with
additional benefits to the IT companies and small and medium
enterprises already established or being established in small cities/
towns.
40. In response the Department, in their Action Taken Note, have
stated that as per the extract from the reply of the Finance Minister, to the
debate in the Lok Sabha on the Finance Bill, 2008, it is decided that the
two sections (10A and 10B of the Income Tax Act) will be amended and
exemptions continue until 31.3.2010.
41. The Committee note with satisfaction that the income tax
benefits to the SPTI units have been extended by another year i.e.
upto 31 March, 2010. The Committee, however, feel that such yearly
extensions are not sufficient to dispel the anxieties of the STPI units,
most of whom are small and medium enterprises. The Committee
had, therefore, in their previous recommendation asked the
Department to formulate a new/supplementary scheme with
additional benefits for the STPI units already established or being
established in smaller cities/towns. The action taken reply of the
Department is completely silent in this regard. The Committee,
therefore, desire a specific reply from the Department in the matter
to enable them to take a final view.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM12

13
Promotion of Electronics/ IT Hardware Manufacturing
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
42. The Committee, in their earlier Report, having observed that
the Hardware Sector was lagging far behind the Software Sector and the
Department’s endeavours of getting a Discussion Paper prepared; this
discussion paper considered by a task force; the task force constituting
another small group to submit a report to them, and the decisions on the
task force on the basis of the report of this small group being implemented
by various Ministries/Departments had apparently not having yielded
any results had while expressing their unhappiness over this piecemeal
and disjointed effort felt that if the Department had timely formulated
the National Hardware Policy, the Hardware Sector would also have
been buoyant and kept pace with the Software Industry. They had,
therefore, desired that the Department should come up with a well laid
out comprehensive National Policy on Electronic/IT Hardware sector
without any further delay.
43. The Department of Information Technology in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:–
“The Department of Information Technology is actively engaged in
promotion of Electronics Hardware Manufacturing in the country.
DIT had prepared ’’A Discussion Paper on the Conceptual Policy
Framework to Promote Growth of Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industry” in consultation with the stakeholders.
The main objectives of the proposed package of incentives for the
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing sector are to make the
industry globally competitive, to attract more FDI in the industry, to
bring down the prices of the end products (by bringing down the
production cost and increasing volumes to take advantage of
economies and efficiencies of scale) to increase the demand, to
compensate for disabilities until the basic infrastructure constraints
that the nation faces are removed, and to move towards total taxation
level of 12-15% over a period of 3 years.
Most of the proposals contained in the Discussion Paper were to be
implemented by other Ministries/Departments. Therefore, as
suggested by DIT, the Government decided to constitute a Task Force
on Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing industry in order to
provide a package of incentives to promote the growth of this
industry. Member secretary, Planning Commission and Secretaries
of the Departments of Information Technology, Industrial Policy &
Promotion, Commerce, Revenue, Economic Affairs and Expenditure
were members of the Task Force.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM13

14
The Task Force constituted a small Group under the Chairmanship
of Member Secretary, Planning Commission to look into all relevant
aspects of the matter and give its recommendations regarding
appropriate fiscal as well as other benefits for the Electronics/IT
Hardware Industry for consideration of the Task Force. After
consideration of the Report of the Group by the Task Force and as a
follow up of decisions taken by the Task Force, action has already
been taken/initiated for implementation of a number of
recommendations by DIT and other concerned Departments.
The present status of implementation of the recommendations/
decisions is as under:
(i) Infrastructure Support: Inadequate infrastructure was
identified as one of the disability factors being faced by the
Electronics Hardware manufacturing sector. As per the
recommendation of  the Task Force, setting up of Special Investment
Regions (SIRs) for Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing, has
been announced vide Gazette Notification dated 29.5.2008.
(ii) Incentives for R&D: In addition to existing schemes for funding
R&D projects, DIT has put in place the following schemes, as per
the recommendation of the Task Force:
• Support International Patent Protection in Electronics & IT
(SIP-EIT): The details of the scheme are available on DIT’s
website.
• Multiplier Grants Scheme: The objective of the Scheme is to
encourage industry to collaborate with premier Academic and
Government R&D institutions for development of innovative
and commercially viable product/packages. The details of the
scheme are available on DIT’s website.
• Promote technology and innovation focused start ups: DIT has
initiated a scheme for Technology Incubation and Development
of Entrepreneurs (TIDE) in the area of Electronics, IT and
Management. The Scheme aims to assist Institutions of Higher
learning such as IITs, IIMs, NITs and IIITs, etc. To strengthen
their Technology Incubation Centres and thus enable young
entrepreneurs to initiate technology start up. Companies for
commercial exploitation of technologies developed.
(iii) Environmental considerations:
• E-Waste: The electrical and electronic waste (e-waste) is one of
the fastest growing waste streams in the world. In India, the
issue of e-waste management is in a nascent stage. To address
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM14

15
this issue, the guidelines for environmentally sound
management of e-Waste have been approved by MoEF and
placed on the websites of MoEF as well as Central Pollution
Control Board.
• Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC)/Electromagnetic
Interference (EMI) & Safety Standards: It is essential to have
the products designed and tested to accepted standards of
safety and EMI/EMC. The Task Force noted that the industry
is in favor of notification of standards and compliance thereto.
However, the industry does not support mandatory licensing
by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). It was noted that
notification of standards could not be declined from the BIS
licensing scheme. The matter is under consideration of the
concerned ministry (Department of Consumer Affairs).
(iv) Tariff issues and fiscal incentives:
• Correction of inverted tariff structure: The cases of inverted
duty structure brought to notice of DIT by the Industry
Associations have been corrected by the Department of
Revenue.
• Reduction of total taxation level: The Task Force recommended
that the total taxation level for this industry should be brought
down to reasonable level of 12 to 15% over a period of three
years. The recommendation has been partially implemented.
The general rate of excise duty (CENVAT) has been reduced
from 16% to 14% and announcement has been made for
reduction of Central Sales Tax (CST) from 3% to 2% in the Budget
2008-09. Regarding the proposals for abolition of CST and
rationalization of VAT on both IT and non-IT electronics goods
to 4% the matter is under consideration of Ministry of Finance.
(v) Special Incentives for Fabs and other High Tech IT Products:
Subsequent to announcement of The Special Incentive Package
Scheme (SIPS) vide Gazette Notification dated 21.3.2007 and issuance
of Guidelines on 14.9.07  eleven proposals covering investment in
Semiconductor fab, LCD manufacturing and solar photovoltaic
including polysilicon have been received.
(vi) Special attention and priorities to Electronics/IT Hardware
manufacturing: As per the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP), 2004-2009
(updated as on 11
th April, 2008), “Electronics and IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industries’’ has been included as a thrust sector in
chapter 1B relating to “Special Focus Initiatives’’
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM15

16
It may be noted that the Task Force has addressed all the issues
raised by the Industry Associations for promoting growth of
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing in the country. It may also
be noted that while several issues concern DIT, a large number of
issues concern other Ministries/Departments of Government of
India. Action has already been taken by DIT on some of decisions of
the Task Force. For the remaining issues, the concerned Ministries/
Departments have either taken action or are in the process of taking
action.
We appreciate the concerns of the Hon’ble Members of the Standing
Committee regarding the need for a comprehensive National Policy
on Electronic/IT Hardware sector. In view of the position brought
out in the preceding paras, major issues concerning the Hardware
sector have already been addressed. The above mearures/initiatives
once fully implemented, shall together constitute a comprehensive
package of incentives for promotion of Electronics Hardware
manufacturing sector in the country. Further, the matters relating to
tariff structure are reviewed regularly, as a part of Annual Budget
exercise by the Ministry of Finance and this is an ongoing process.
44. The Committee are dismayed to note that the present reply
of the Department is, barring a few updations, a reiteration of the
information submitted to them at the time of examination of Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department. While the rapid strides made
by India in the software sector are indeed laudable, neglecting the
growth of hardware sector has its own perils. It need not be emphasized
that a few countries who have an edge in the hardware sector have
virtually swamped the global market and are reaping huge benefits. It
is high time India also followed suit. Furthermore the utilitarian
significance of the infrastructure created for the hardware sector is
undeniable. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Department should
come out with a well thought of National Policy on Electronic/IT
Hardware Sector without any further loss of time.
Digital DNA Park
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
45. The Committee having observed that a firm of Chennai which
had been short listed by STPI for procurement of land for the badly
delayed Digital DNA Park Scheme (commenced in 2003) had not been
able to do the needful during the last two fiscals, had strongly
recommended that, STPI being the nodal agency, should accord highest
priority to this project and the Department should monitor the progress
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM16

17
at the highest level. They had also desired to be periodically informed of
the progress made in the project implementation.
46. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the Special Secretary and JS & FA, DIT have taken a meeting with Secretary
(Industry), Government of Tamil Nadu and representative of
M/s. Ascendas, the industry partner the Bio-IT Park Project and TIDCO,
Chennai. The Committee deliberated on the issue of timely implementation
of the project and finally decided that under the given circumstances
due to non-availability of appropriate land it is difficult to pursue the
project. Further, the project has been reviewed by the Project Review and
Steering Group and recommended to close the same.
47. The Committee find the abrupt discontinuation of the Digital
DNA Park Project totally inexplicable and a pointer towards the gross
failure of the Department in overseeing and monitoring a project of
immense significance as all efforts made and investment incurred on
the Project since 2003 have gone down the drain. The Committee
deplore the failure of the Department in the matter and desire that
necessary lessons should be drawn for the future to check recurrence
of such cases. They would also like to be apprised of the cost incurred
so far on the Project and any alternatives being worked out by the
Department for implementing the project elsewhere.
Human Resource Development
Recommendation (Para No. 23 & 24)
48. Considering the  NASSCOM’s projection of over three million
professionals required in the IT and BPO industries and the possible
threat to IT/ITeS industry due to shortage of skilled manpower after
2009, the Committee in their aforesaid Report had urged the Department
to make persistent and concerted efforts in tandem with other Ministries/
Departments and the Industry associations to ensure that the fast growing
IT/ITeS Industry did not suffer a setback due to shortage of skilled
professionals.
49. In their Action Taken Note, the Department have stated that
they in coordination with other Ministries of Government of India like
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Labour &
Employment, Planning Commission, etc. and Industry associations like
NASSCOM are making continuous efforts to ensure the availability of
skilled manpower for the fast growing IT/ITeS Industry. DIT would
continue with these efforts in future also.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM17

18
50. The Committee take note of the efforts being made by the
Department in coordination with other Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India, Planning Commission and Industry associations
to ensure the availability of skilled manpower for the IT/ITeS Industry.
The Committee, however, feel that in view of the emerging global
scenario in the IT/ITeS Industry, the Department may conduct an
evaluation study on Human Resource Development aspect so as to be
find out as to whether some midcourse corrections are required to effect
in regard to manpower requirements. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the results of such a study.
Recognition of DOEACC Qualifications
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
51. In their Fifty-eighth Report, the Committee on finding that the
recommendations of the Distance Learning Council on the application
of DOEACC  for recognition of their ‘B’ level qualification as equivalent
to MCA were pending consideration with the All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) and in the meantime various universities/
deemed to be universities has recognized DOEACC’s ‘B’ and ‘A’ level
courses for admission to their M-Tech and M.Sc./MCA programmes
respectively and also appreciating the fact that the recognition of
DOEACC’s ‘C’ level qualification would  be taken up by AICTE only
after ‘B’ level qualification had impressed upon the Department to
earnestly pursue the matter with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development /AICTE so that the recognition was accorded to effectively
engage DOEACC in its endeavours towards formal and non–formal
industry oriented education in the area of ICT.
52. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the issue of recognition of ‘B’ &’ C’’ level qualification is being
constantly/regularly pursued with AICTE at different levels.
53. The Committee are not at all satisfied with this stoic reply of
the Department. The inordinate delay in recognition of ‘B’ level
qualification of DOEACC by AICTE might have already affected a
substantial number of students pursuing formal and non-formal
industry oriented education in area of ICT which cannot be condoned.
The Committee having noted the continued failure of the Department’s
efforts with AICTE would like them to take up the matter suitably with
the Ministry of Human Resource Development for obtaining an
expeditious decision in the matter.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM18

19
National Knowledge Network
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
54. In their previous Report, the Committee had noted that in order
to optimally utilise the potential of institutions such as research
laboratories, universities and other institutions of higher learning,
including professional institutions engaged in generation and
dissemination of knowledge in various fields, the Department of
Information Technology had evolved a new scheme called the ‘National
Knowledge Network’ with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 100.00 crore for
the year 2008-09 which would be executed under the guidance of an
empowered committee to be constituted by April, 2008. This Empowered
committee would indicate the choice of the implementing agency,
architecture of the network and time frame for the implementation of the
scheme. The Committee had desired that the Empowered committee be
constituted as per the deadline and thereafter the Department should
chalk out their plan of action to roll out the ‘National Knowledge
Network’ Scheme in the 2008-09 fiscal year itself for optimum utilization
of Rs. 100 crore earmarked for the purpose. In view of some government
agencies like C-DAC (GARUDA) and ERNET already rendering network
facilities for R&D and educational activities and the Ministry of Human
Resource Development proposing for a separate network in line with
National Network Commission. The Committee had also asked the
Government to explore the feasibility of evolving an integrated approach
to seamlessly interconnect the knowledge institutions to encourage
sharing of resources and collaborative research.
55. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the High Level Committee (earlier referred to as Empowered Committee),
with Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India as chairman
has been constituted vide  Notification No. 4(3)/2007-ELG dated
30 April, 2008.
56. The High Level Committee would oversee, monitor and
coordinate all activities relating to creating and implementation of the
proposed National Knowledge Network, including merger of networks.
57. The National Knowledge Network would be established under
the guidance of High Level Committee. The High Level Committee would
chalk out the plan for establishing the network including identifying the
implementing agency, finalize all technical issues relating to the proposal
including the selection of best networking option, term of participation
etc. The High Level Committee would make necessary specific
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM19

20
recommendations for DIT to obtain financial and other approvals of the
competent authority.
58. National Knowledge Network would connect all knowledge
institutions in the country, cutting across sections like higher and
technical education, medical education, legal education, agricultural
education and science and technology.
59.  The Committee note that a High Level Committee has been
constituted to oversee, monitor and co-ordinate all activities relating to
creating and implementation of the proposed National Knowledge
Network. The Committee expect that their views and concerns
particularly about the multiplicity of agencies would be placed before
the High Level Committee. The Committee also desire that the Scheme
should be rolled out within a definite time frame.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM20

21
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
As part of the Ministry of Communications & Information
Technology’ the Department of Information Technology are responsible
for the formulation and implementation of national policies in
Information Technology Sector, the domain of the Department includes
all matters relating to computer based in Information Technology
including software and hardware processing, silicon facility, promotion
of knowledge based enterprises, internet, e-commerce, information
technology education, development of electronics and coordination
amongst their users, and standardization of procedures and matters
pertaining to international bodies. To operationalise the objectives of the
Department, suitable Schemes are formulated and implemented by the
Department. The Schemes are implemented either directly by the
Department or through the Organizations/Institutions under their
jurisdiction.
Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Department
in their endeavors of fulfilling the objectives is assisted by Organizations/
Institutions under its jurisdiction.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe from Demand No. 14 pertaining to the
Department of Information Technology that an amount of Rs. 1716.00
crore has been allocated to the Department for the year 2008-09.  This
consists of Rs. 1616.50 crore in the Revenue section and Rs. 99.50 crore
in the Capital section. The Revenue section includes Rs. 1680.00 crore
for Plan activities and Rs .36.00 crore for Non-Plan activities. The major
budgetary allocations  (both Plan and Non-Plan) proposed are Rs. 800
crore for the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), Rs. 400 crore for the
National Informatics Centre (NIC), Rs. 100 crore for the National
Knowledge Network and Rs. 94 crore for the Centre for Development of
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM21

22
Advanced computing (C-DAC). Compared to the allocation proposed for
2008-2009, total allocation during the year 2007-08 was Rs. 1536.00 crore
with the Revenue (Plan), Capital (Plan) and the Non-Plan component
being Rs. 1421.00 crore, Rs. 79.00 crore and Rs. 36.00 crore respectively.
This was reduced to Rs. 1445.00 crore at the RE stage when outlay on the
Plan side was curtailed to Rs. 1400 crore although the outlay on the
Non-Plan side was increased from Rs. 36.00 crore to Rs. 45.00 crore. The
Committee note that there is an increase of 20% in the plan allocation of
the Department in the year 2008-09 as compared to the RE figures of
2007-08. On the other hand, the Non-plan allocation has seen a decline
of 20% being reduced from Rs. 45 crore in 2007-08 to Rs. 36 crore in 2008-
2009. The Gross Outlay of the Department also has an IEBR component
generated by the R&D activities of their various units. The IEBR
component generated by the R&D activities of their various units. The
IEBR component was Rs. 248.79 crore in the year 2007-08 This year it
has been shown as Rs. 272.14 crore. The Committee note that the
approved outlays in both the years are significantly less than the outlays
proposed. In 2007, the Department got Rs. 1400.00 crore (RE) against Rs.
2092.08 crore projected by than and in 2008-09  they have been allocated
Rs. 1680.00 crore for plan activities against Rs. 2500.00 crore proposed
by them. In both the years actual allocation are about one third less than
the allocation sought (34% in 2007-08, 33% in 2008-09). A Scheme-wise
analysis reveals that barring an increase of Rs. 80.00 crore for NIC and
an additional outlay of Rs. 100.00 Crore for National Knowledge Network
there are not many noticeable changes in the allocations over the last
year. The various aspects arising out of allocation and utilization of
funds have been broached upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has made consistent efforts to ensure sufficient
allocation of resources for its Plan schemes. The matter of enhancement
of outlays was taken up with the Planning Commission at the level of
Secretary, DIT & Hon’ble Minister, Communications and Information
Technology.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the Department had proposed an Outlay
of Rs. 6294.95 crore for the Tenth Plan. They were, however, allocated a
sum of Rs. 3709.30 crore. This has been further pruned down to
Rs. 3587.00 crore at RE stages. As against this the actual expenditure
during the Tenth Plan was 3541.71 crore. It is heartening to note that the
Department have spent 99.97% of the funds allocated to them during the
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM22

23
Tenth Plan. The Committee however note huge gap of 43% in the
allocation proposed and the funds allocated to the Department at the RE
stages of the Tenth Plan. In the case of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee
find that the Department have sought and allocation of Rs. 18160.79
crore. However, they have been allocated a sum of Rs. 12,496.00 crore
only which works out to about 69% of the funds sought. The Committee
understand that these drastic cuts in the proposed outlays do affect the
performance of the Department in view of the consequent lowering of
targets, weeding out merging of Schemes and adjustment of scale of
operations. The Committee find the situation disconcerting in view of
the fact that Information Technology is dynamic and growing sector
worldwide and is one of the sunshine areas of the country’s economy.
The Committee feel that it is the most opportune time of establishing
ourselves firmly in several core areas of the IT sector for which the
Department require full support of Government. The Committee, therefore
desire that all efforts should be made by the Government to ensure that
the genuine need of funds of the Department should by met fully and
with due promptitude so that the benefits accruing to the country are
further expanded and consolidated.
Action Taken by the Government
Efforts are consistently made for allocation of adequate resources,
Planning Commission had been approached for allocating higher GBS
in year 2008-09.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Pararaph No. 8 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee have noticed a very serious incongruity in the
funding pattern of the Department. Out of the total Eleventh Plan outlay
of Rs. 12496.00 crore, a sum of Rs. 1400.00 crore i.e. 11% of the total
outlay has been allocated in the first year of the plan and the allocation
during the second year is Rs. 1680.00 crore for Plan side which is 13.44%
of total outlay. It implies that a massive 75% of the total allocations
would be utilized during the remaining three years of the Plan. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that the allocation funds should be
made in uniform manner in all the years or the plan subject to genuine
needs. In this context, the allocation of Rs. 2092.00 crore and Rs. 2500.00
crore sought by the Department for the first two years of the  Eleventh
Plan assume significance. The Committee apprehend that with this type
of lopsided availability of funds, DIT will face the problem of funds
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM23

24
shortage in the first two years of the Plan and a planning and
implementation processes. Apparently, the DIT have not put their case
seriously before the Planning Commission. The Committee expect that
the Department will do the same more purposefully and forcefully now
and get additional allocations from RE 2008-09 stage onwards to have a
balanced spread of funds in the remaining period of Eleventh Plan.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT will approach the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance with the recommendations of the Standing Committee for
enhancing the outlays at RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee appreciate to note that the utilization of the
budgetary allocation towards the North-East Region during the Tenth
Plan period was up to the mark on the part of the Department. Similarly,
during the first year of the Eleventh Plan period, Rs. 140 crore as allocated
towards the North-East Region would be optimally utilized, as assured
by the Department. The Committee  desire that the momentum in the
maximum utilization of funds in the North- East Region should be
maintained by the Department in the year 2008-09 and afterwards also
so that the benefits of Information Technology are reaped there.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has been utilizing the 10% of the Budgetary
Allocation for the developmental activities of NE Region as has been
noted by the Standing Committee.
The Department will make consistent effort to ensure maximum
utilization of funds in the North-East Region to benefit them in future
also.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the extant Budgeting norms of the Ministry
of Finance stipulate a maximum limit of 33% spending in Q-4 and a
similar ceiling of 15% in the month of March. In the case of the  Department
of Information Technology, in the Financial year 2007-08 about 49% of
RE stage funds, which are already Rs, 100 crore lass than the BE funds,
are left for Q-4. Similarly, for the month of March, 2008 the Department
have to spend Rs. 397.53 crore which constitute 28.40% of the 2007-08
RE. The Department have stated that these are mostly grants to states,
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM24

25
which will be released before that they have requested the Ministry of
Finance for exemption of respective ceilings. The Committee deprecate
the casual attitude of the Department about the fiscal planning and
management and their utter disregard to the inconvenience that this
substantial release at the very last moment will cause to the recipient
states. The modified Budged and cash scheme of the Ministry of Finance
was introduced with the objective to avoid last quarter spending and
consequent March rush and it deserves fullest cooperation from and
compliance by all the Ministries and Departments. The Department of IT
with their excellent record of optimum utilization of funds over the years,
should set example for others by strictly adhering to the stipulated limits.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take
necessary its societies/companies in this regard by way of regular
monitoring.
Action Taken by the Government
Department takes necessary measures to ensure that expenditure
remain as per the Budgeting norms of the Ministry of Finance. However,
recommendation of the Standing Committee is noted for compliance.
Attached Offices/ societies are also being apprised of the Budgeting
norms issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note with concern that as many as 504 utilisation
certificates in respect of funds amounting to Rs. 615.66 crore are still
pending submission by the states and implementing agencies as on
31.12.2007. The Ministry of Finance have also conveyed to the Department
about the insufficiency of their efforts in this regard. The Department are
reportedly, trying to address this issue through their internal meetings.
However, the Committee are not satisfied with the explanation furnished
by the Department and they tend to agree with the views of the Ministry
of Finance in the matter. They therefore, exhort the Department to make
all out efforts to clear the pendency at the earliest and put adequate
safeguard measures to avoid the recurrence of the same in future.
Action Taken by the Government
Every efforts are being made by this Department to liquidate the
pending UCs. No sanction is issued unless the UC for the earlier grant is
received. In a special drive JS & FA took meetings with the Heads of
different Divisions, Controller of Accounts etc. resulting liquidation of a
large number of pending UCs. Secretary, DIT also monitors liquidation
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM25

26
of pending UCs on monthly basis. It is hoped that the number of pending
UCs/unspent balances will certainly come down soon.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Pararaph No. 11 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that SWAN is one of the three-core
infrastructure components of NeGP. It aims to establish a network with
a minimum bandwidth capacity of 2 Mbps from State Headquarters upto
the Block level in all the States and UTs excepting those states, which
have opted out . During the examination of Demands for Grants for the
year 2006-07, the Committee were informed that SWAN was to be
operational in seven States by March, 2007. Further during the
examination of Demands for Grants 2007-08 the Committee were assured
that by March, 2008 the facility would be in place either partly or wholly
in at least 15 States/UTs as per 2007-08 physical outputs. The target
however, could not be met in any of these years During the financial year
2008-09 the target is to implement SWAN in all these States by December,
2008. But the Committee find that as on 12 March, 2008 the SWAN
Scheme has been implemented only in four States viz, Delhi, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. In view of the above, the Committee
are disappointed to note that despite their recommendations for
expeditious implementation of SWAN, no noticeable progress has been
made, rather the Department are moving more and more off the targets.
The Committee can not but express anguish over the repetitive delays in
SWAN implementation and once again impress upon the Department to
expedite and complete SWAN in all participating states before the five
years period of the scheme comes to an end in March, 2010. The Committee
would like to be periodically informed of the progress made in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Since the SWAN scheme was approved by Government of India in
March 2005, the Empowered committee have been considering and
approving the individual SWAN proposals submitted by State/UTs. It
may be mentioned that while submitting the proposal, any state/UT has
to undertake several processes, like selection of the implementing agency
(there are two options viz selecting a private operator through a PPP
model and bid process or nominating NIC as the implementation Agency),
selection of an appropriate consulting Agency for the state/UT to
undertake detailed study of the requirements and preparation of  the
SWAN proposal, selection and preparation of the SWAN sites across the
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM26

27
State/UT and streamlining other institutional processes for smooth
implementation. Further, after approval of the SWAN proposal, by the
Empowered committee, the State/UT further undertakes preparation of
the tender document with the assistance from the consulting Agency,
interaction with DIT during vetting of the tender document for its various
technical and financial parameters outlined in the SWAN Guidelines
and the Government approval of the SWAN. The conclusion of the tender
process itself with signing of the contractual documents between the
State/UT and the identified Network operator takes around 3-4 months’
time. Completion of all these processes in almost all the cases has taken
significantly higher time than estimated. However, it is mentioned that
once the contract is signed with the identified Network operator, the
time taken for implementation has been mostly within the estimated time
of 12-15 months, as originally envisaged in the Scheme. Notwithstanding
this scenario, Department of IT has been vigorously pursuing with the
States/UTs for early completion of the implementation process by closely
interacting with the IT Department of State/UT, the consulting agencies
deployed by them even by sending DIT teams to specific States/UTs for
handholding during preparation of the proposal and the tender
documents. In view of the fact that a few of the States/UTs have not
commenced the implementation process as yet, Department  of IT has
significantly increased its efforts through escalated interactions between
the State/UT and the DIT SWAN team to resolve all the relevant issues
for early starting of the implementation. As of the current projection,
SWANs in most participating States/UTs would be implemented by mid-
2009. A tabulation annexed with this report indicates the current status
of implementation of individual State/UTs SWAN project Department
of IT would periodically inform the Committee about the progress in this
regard.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM27

28
Sl. Name of Implementation Bandwidth Network Month of Implemen- Remarks Expected
No. State/UT Model Service Operator Contract tation month of
Provider signed Duration completion
(BSP)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
State
1. Haryana PPP BSNL T ulip December-06 08 Months SWAN NA
Implemented on
August 07-
Operational
2. Tamil Nadu PPP BSNL TCS December-06 12 Months SWAN NA
Implemented on
December 07-
Operational
3. Himachal PPP BSNL HP February-07 12 Months SWAN NA
Pradesh Implemented on
February 08-
Operational
4. Kerala PPP BSNL UTL March-07 19 Months Implementation July-08
delayed in remote
Locations during
rainy season.
5. Jharkhand @ PPP BSNL UTL October-05 14 Months Implemented July-08
Acceptance test
in progress
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM28

29
6. Gujarat # PPP BSNL UTL June-07 12 Months Implementation June-08
in progress
7. Sikkim NIC BSNL NIC      -      - Implementation October-08
in progress
8. Manipur NIC BSNL NIC      -      - Implementation September-08
in progress
9. Bihar PPP BSNL TCS August-07 15 Months Loi issued in October-08
Aug 07.
Implementation
in progress
10. Tripura NIC BSNL NIC      -      - Implementation October-08
in progress
11. Punjab PPP BSNL HCL Ja nuary-08 09 Months Implementation October-08
in progress
12. West Bengal PPP BSNL T ulip October-07 12 Months Implementation October-08
in progress
13. Assam PPP BSNL T ulip December-07 12 Months Implementation December-08
in progress
14. Uttar NIC BSNL NIC      -      - Implementation December-08
Pradesh in progress
15. Madhya PPP BSNL Not yet      -      - Bid process December-08
Pradesh identified completed and
bid evaluation
in progress
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM29

30
16. Uttarakhand NIC BSNL NIC       -       - State revised the Not
changed applicable
implementation at this
Option recently stage
(PPP to NIC);
revised proposal
under scrutiny
17. Maharashtra PPP Negotiation ITI + March-08 10 Months Contract Signed January-09
with BSP Spanco
18. Orissa PPP Negotiation Not yet       -       - Bid process January-09
with BSP identified completed and
evaluation
in progress
19. Rajasthan PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - Bid process January-09
identified completed and
evaluation
in progress
20. Meghalaya PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - Bid process January-09
identified initiated
21. Nagaland PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - RFP under January-09
identified review by DIT
22. Jammu & NIC BSNL Not yet       -       - Functional January-09
Kashmir identified specifications
under review
by NIC
1       2   3    4     5      6       7       8     9
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM30

31
23. Karnataka PPP BSNL UTL February-08 13 Months Contract Signed March-09
24. Chattisgarh PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - Bid process March-09
identified initiated
25. Mizoram PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - RFP vetted by March-09
identified DIT; bid process
to be initiated
26. Arunachal PPP BSNL Not yet       -       - RFP under March-09
Pradesh identified review by DIT
27. Andhra PPP Negotiation Not yet       -       - Revised Proposal March-09
Pradesh with BSP identified under review
28. Goa Opted out of SWAN Scheme and Implemented Goa Broadband Network (GBBN)
UT
1. NCT of Delhi NIC BSNL NIC       -       - SWAN NA
Implemented in
February 08
Operational
2. Chandigarh NIC BSNL NIC       -       - SWAN NA
Implemented in
May 08
Operational
3. Dadra & PPP Negotiation Not yet       -       - RFP under December-08
Nagar Haveli with BSP identified preparation
1       2   3     4     5       6       7         8       9
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM31

32
4. Daman & PPP Negotiation Not yet - - RFP under December-08
Diu with BSP identified preparation
5. Puducherry NIC BSNL NIC - - Implementation January-09
in progress
6. Lakshadweep - Negotiation NIC - - Proposal under March-09
with BSP review
7. Andaman & Using VSAT network implemented by ISRO and Opted out of SWAN Scheme
Nicobar
# Enhancement of Gujarat SWAN is under implementation and revised timeline is yet to be confirmed. Expected by June 08.
@ Final Acceptance Test of Jharkhand SWAN is in progress, hence implementation duration is more than 14 months.
PPP Public Private Partnership
BSP Bandwidth Service Provider
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM32

33
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee are informed that amongst the three infrastructure
components of NeGP viz. SWAN, SDCs & CSCs, SDCs have the shortest
gestation period. As per the outcome Budget, the Department were given
cumulative targets to establish State Data Centres in 10 States and then
20 States by December, 2007 and March, 2008 respectively. However, the
Committee are informed that due to the absence of the scheme approval,
no State Data Centre could be taken up for implementation during the
years 2006-07 and 2007-08. During the course of their study visits to
various State Headquarters, the Committee were apprised by the State
Government representatives about the difficulties being faced by them
as the central Goverment approval of their SDC proposal submitted long
back were still awaited causing lot of problems to them. In this connection,
it would be pertinent to mention the NeGP was conceived and approved
in 2005 and SDC, scheme despite being an important part of it, has only
been approved in January, 2008. The Committee in their earlier reports
has persistently recommended to expedite the formulation of Policy
Guidelines and consequent roll out of SDC scheme but to no avail. The
Committee, therefore cannot but express their strong disapproval of the
way the Department have handled this scheme. The Committee impress
upon the Department that now when they have the Scheme approved
and broad policy guidelines in hand, there should not be any hurdle in
establishing and operationalising 20 Data Centres, if not more by March,
2009.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT agrees with the observations of the Committee that the SDC
Scheme needs to be taken up on priority for implementation in the States.
DIT would take all necessary actions to ensure that the directives of
the Committee are followed and all necessary steps shall be taken for
establishing and operationalising of 20 Data Centres by March, 2009. It
may be informed that since the SDC Scheme approval by the Government
in January 2008, proposals of 23 States/UTs have been approved and
funds released to them as part of first year’s requirement. The
States/UTs have also been advised to initiate activities/actions required
for timely completion of the SDC. Further, the Template RFP has been
forwarded to the States by DIT and State consultants assigned to the
respective States shall work closely with the States in various activities
connected with the successful implementation of the SDC.
Considering the linkage between SDC, SWAN and CSCs in delivery
of services to citizens, DIT has been endeavouring to ensure that these
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM33

34
three parts of the service delivery platform become available in each
State together. States, on their part, have also been striving to coordinate
the implementation of all the three and achieve their completion
simultaneously. Considering the lead time for each of these projects, DIT
has advised States to first put pace implementation arrangement for
SWAN and CACs and then take-up SDCs. This is now being done by
most States vigorously. The updated status of approval/implementation
of the SDCs scheme is given below.
Status of SDC Scheme: Since the Scheme approval by the Goverment
on 24th January, 2008.The SDC proposals for the following States/UTs
has been approved with outlays indicated against each.
Sl. State/UT Total Project DIT Share Amount
No. Cost Over Released
5 Years so far
(Rs. in Crore)
1. Assam 49.04 11.97 3.82
2. Andhra Pradesh 55.75 18.37 4.19
3. Chhattisgarh 49.15 18.24 4.12
4. Goa 33.06 12.48 1.80
5. Gujarat 55.04 18.30 4.40
6. Haryana 50.68 13.5 4.18
7. HP 43.64 16.32 3.72
8. Jharkhand 46.92 13.31 4.16
9. Kerala 55.68 18.31 4.16
10. Madhya Pradesh 55.75 18.37 4.19
11. Maharashtra 55.77 18.38 4.19
12. Manipur 39.04 15.16 3.14
13. Meghalaya 39.21 15.37 3.25
14. Nagaland 30.68 12.37 2.69
15. Orissa 54.24 16.94 3.47
16. Puducherry 29.69 10.28 2.64
17. Punjab 50.58 13.44 3.72
18. Rajasthan 48.92 12.59 4.05
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM34

35
19. Sikkim 27.39 10.06 2.53
20. Tamil Nadu 55.8 18.41 4.21
21. Tripura 40.05 15.44 3.28
22. Uttar Pradesh 55.33 18.41 4.20
23. West Bengal 55.25 17.89 3.95
Total 1076.66 353.92 84.06
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee have been informed that the State Data Centre is a
crucial component of core infrastructure of National e-Governance Plan
not only from the service delivery perspective but also from strategic
point of view as it would involve sovereign data. The Committee are of
the opinion that implementation of SDCs should solely be entrusted to
the Government agencies like NIC, ERNET, etc. to ensure safety and
sanctity of data. They, therefore, desire that the Department should clearly
highlight national security perspective involved in establishing and
operationalising SDCs to all participating States and guide/help them
in placing adequate safeguards in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering that the State Data Centre would be crucial and critical
infrastructure  of the State, it has been clearly indicated in the Policy
Guidelines that the sovereign control of the data/applications shall be
with the State both de-jure  and de-facto . Therefore, the implementation
options indicated in the Policy Guidelines put the Establishment and
operations of the Data Centre directly with the State to be implemented
through State Government Designated Agency and would be assisted by
NIC domain experts as part of the Composite team established at the
State for State Data Centre project. Also where the State/UT adopts
outsourced option, it has been clearly indicated that the servers shall be
owned and operated by the State and the management of the data/
information shall be under the direct control of the State both de-jure and
de-facto . It may be informed that all the 23 States/UTs whose proposals
have been approved have opted for the option, where setting up of Data
Centre and operation & management would be with the State.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM35

36
As part of best practices for the Data Centre, DIT has also elaborated
in the Policy Guidelines on importance of data access, data security,
data privacy and data protection requirements to be followed and ensured
during implementation of the State Data Centre. DIT shall continue to
advise and provide/render all possible help and support to the States in
this regard on an ongoing basis both during implementation and post
implementation phase of the State Data Centre.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that various agencies like National Level
Service Agency apart from the State Governments have been entrusted
with the responsibility to implement CSCs scheme and all these agencies
have their own implementation, plan and monitoring methods, thereby
causing a lot of communication gaps. Moreover, there is a severe lack of
coordination and cohesion in this compartmentalized method of
implementation. The Committee therefore, recommend that the
Department should enforce a very comprehensive and strict monitoring
review for overseeing and coordinating the implementation of the CSC
scheme. They also desire that monitoring bodies of elected representatives
should be set up at each level i.e. Central, State, district and local levels to
monitor and review the implementation progress as well as
operationalization of CSCs and other components of NeGP. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The monitoring of the implementation of the CSC Scheme is being
done on a regular basis. This is being done by the DIT with the assistance
of the NLSA. Further, the State Government, through the State Designated
Agencies (SDA) , is also monitoring the deliverables and performance of
the Service Centre Agencies (SCAs) it may be mentioned that when the
word for establishing the CSCs is awarded to the SCAs clearly defined
milestones are a part of the Master Service Agreement (MSA) which is
signed between the SCA and the (SDA). Further, the MSA also contains
suitable clauses to ensure that if a particular SCA does not establish the
CSCs as per the timelines indicated in the MSA (excluding circumstances
beyond his control), he would be eligible for penalties. The performance
of the SCAs is monitored on the basis of the MSA by the SDA and reports
regarding the progress of implementation is also received by the DIT. A
detailed progress report on the CSC scheme is attached with this report.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM36

37
Hence the DIT would like to assert that there is strict monitoring of the
CSC scheme by the DIT and proper coordination with the State
Governments in this regard.
Regarding the suggestion of the Standing Committee to monitor the
CSC Scheme by bodies of elected representatives, the DIT welcomes the
suggestion of the committee to have a body of elected representatives at
the State, District and local levels, to monitor the CSC Scheme. The DIT
will advise the State Governments to set up a suitable mechanism for
involving elected representatives for monitoring the CSC Scheme at the
State, District and local level. However, at Central level it is felt that the
Parliamentary Standing Committee itself has to be most appropriate body
to carry out this monitoring.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that 27 Mission Mode Project (MMPs) have
been initiated under NeGP relating to various services. Out of these 27
MMPs fall in the central category and 9 MMPs are in the integrated
categories to be spearheaded for implementation by various Line
Ministries/Departments, while State Governments are responsible for
11 State sector MMPs. Though substantial progress has reportedly been
made under the Central and integrated MMPs, the Committee find that
the State Mission mode projects  are yet to come up to the level of
implementation on a national scale. The Committee are of the view that
implementation of State Sector MMPs is of crucial importance as most of
these MMPs are directly related to day to day activities of the citizens
and therefore would be of immense benefit to the common man. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the respective Line Ministries must
be asked to take proactive steps to expedite implementation of State MMPs
and help State Governments in drafting and designing projects/policies/
guidelines relating to these MMPs so as to complete all these projects
within a stipulated time frame. The Committee would like to be
periodically informed of the decision taken and progress made in this
regard.
Action Taken By the Government
1. The Apex Committee, under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary, regularly reviews the status of implementation of not only
State Sector MMPs but also of Central and Integrated Sector MMP in the
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM37

38
various meetings of the Apex committee chaired by Cabinet Secretary,
specific MMPs especially large and complex MMPs, are discussed with
the concerned Secretaries, issues are identified and decisions are taken
to speed up the preparation of schemes.
2. A full meeting of NeGP was taken by the Apex committee, under
the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary, on 7th December, 2007 to review
the status of implementation of various Mission Mode Projects. Secretaries
from the Line Ministries and Departments brought many issues that
were impeding the progress of implementation of MMPs. The Apex
Committee decided the following action points to speed up the MMPs
progress.
a. A project team comprising of personnel possessing domain,
technology and management skills should be established
pending approval of scheme in each of the MMP Line
Ministries/Departments.
b. A mechanism should be developed for obtaining all requisite
professional services efficiently including hiring of personnel
on contract basis at market rates.
c. A suitable policy needs to be adopted on creation of SPVs to
handle large and complex MMPs.
d. Department of Information Technology should formulate
suitable recommendations on various issues like manpower
related policies and procedures including fixing of tenure,
incentives, procurement, standardization etc.
3. The Department of Information Technology was asked to
prepare a suitable proposal covering recommendations on all the
aspects/issues related to NeGP MMPs to be placed before the Union
Cabinet for approval.
4. The generic issues so raised in the meeting were later discussed
in depth with the Line Ministries/Mission Leaders, Nodal Officers and
representatives of State IT Secretaries in workshop of all the Mission
Leaders/ Departments to work remedial measures.
5. A monthly review is taken by the Cabinet Secretary on the status
of progress of various MMPs and issues impeding the progress of MMPs
are identified, thereafter meeting of the Apex committee is held to guide
and resolve the inter-departmental issues to speed up the progress of the
MMPs.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM38

39
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee also note that issues regarding the role and
responsibility of the States and the Central Line Ministries in the project
implementation need to be addressed. Further, there is an urgent need to
provide projects specific interfaces between the States and the Line
Ministries. The Committee are further informed that implementation of
NeGP is an item on the agenda in the forthcoming conference of Chief
Secretaries. The Committee are of the opinion that implementation of
NeGP should essentially be a part of the agenda of all inter-state fora like
the chief Ministers’ conference, NDC, Governors’ meet etc. to resolve the
ambiguities relating to responsibilities and role of State and Central
agencies and to avoid hurdles like lack of coordination, etc. in timely
implementation of NeGP and its components. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department should ensure to enlist cooperation and
coordination of various state agencies for timely implementation of NEGP
particularly State sector MMPs.
Action Taken by the Government
Steps have been taken to coordinate the role and the responsibility
of the State Government Departments and the Central Line Ministry in
project implementation of State Sector MMPs under NeGP.
Implementation of NeGP was taken up as an Agenda in the Conference
of Chief Secretaries of State and Union Territories recently held on
22
nd April 2008. A Conference of the State IT Secretaries is proposed to be
called by Minister of Communication and Information Technology in
the month of July 2008, to coordinate States action for timely
implementation of NeGP particularly State Sector MMPs. Action would
also be initiated to make NeGP implementation a part of the agenda of
Chief Ministers conference, Inter-state forums like NDC and Governors
meet to improve coordination.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 32 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the National Informatics Centre (NIC) is
the only organization in the Country to provide total informatics
support to the Central Ministries & Departments, State Governments,
District Administrations and other Government bodies. NIC in pursuit
of its objectives is playing a pivotal role in major e-Governance
initiatives at all levels of governance and providing various network
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM39

40
services (WAN, MAN, LAN), Data Centres, capacity building, etc. But
the Committee are concerned to observe that during the year 2007-2008
against a proposal of Rs. 427.00 crore, NIC was granted Rs. 320.00 crore
whereas its actual expenditure has exceeded the allocations during the
year. Further, during 2008-09 fiscal, a sum of Rs. 400.00 crore has been
allocated to NIC against a proposal of Rs. 560.00 crore. As reported, the
Planning Commission on the plea of scarcity of funds has reduced the
allocation for NIC. In view of the importance of mandate given to NIC
and wide spectrum of activities it has been carrying out, the Committee
desire that adequate funds should be allocated to NIC to enable it to
discharge its responsibility timely as well as effectively. They, therefore,
recommend that the Department should take up the matter with
Planning Commission for enhanced allocation of funds to NIC at the RE
level.
Action Taken by the Government
Appropriate action will be taken at RE 2008-09 stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
Taking note of the possible adverse impact of the new SEZ policy
and the end of tax holiday available to STPI units w.e.f. 31 March 2009,
the Committee in their 29
th & 46 th reports (14 th Lok Sabha) had desired
that STPI units should also be provided with same tax benefits & facilities
that are available to SEZ units. This year also while examining the
Demand for Grants, the Committee are informed that in case the tax
benefits available to STPI units are withdrawn from March 2009, the
units might get adversely affected. Although this matter had already
been taken up with Ministry of Finance, no decision has been taken so
far. In order to enable the STPI units to chalk out their immediate and
long term planning the Committee desire that the Matter may be
vigorously pursued with the Ministry of Finance for an early decision in
this regard. Further, the Department should formulate a new/
supplementary scheme with additional benefits to the IT companies and
the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) already established or being
established in smaller cities/towns.
Action Taken by the Government
As per the extract from the reply of the Finance Minister, to the
debate in the Lok Sabha on the Finance Bill 2008, it is decided that the
two sections (10A and 10B of the Income Tax Act) will be amended and
exemptions continue until 31.3.2010.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM40

41
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 41 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that the Standardization, Testing and Quality
Certification Directorate has been set up with the objective of establishing
quality assurance infrastructure in the country to facilitate quality
productions and services at par with the global standards and practices.
The directorate have been playing a key role in enabling the Indian IT
Industry and users in achieving compliance with the international quality
standards in order to compete globally. During the year 2007-08 the
Directorate was provided with an Outlay of Rs. 50.00 crore. Significantly,
the Directorate generated Rs. 40.00 crore as IEBR, which is transferred to
the Consolidated Fund of India. For the year 2008-09 the Directorate
sought an allocation of Rs. 74.00 crore against which they have been
allocated a sum of Rs. 42.00 crore only. Given the exacting quality control
regime prevailing in the global IT sector standards, the Committee find it
really surprising as to why this Organization, which is the bedrock of
quality control in the country is being deprived of funds required for
establishing and expanding its R&D infrastructure, more so, when the
IEBR generated by the Directorate are also not being reinvested in it. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should pursue the matter
of getting enhanced allocation for the STQC more purposefully and
forcefully so that necessary corrections are carried out at the RE stage.
Action Taken by the Government
The matter would be taken up with Planning Commission and also
with Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that the NASSCOM has projected that to reach
US$ 60 billion in export revenues by the year 2010 and for the domestic
IT industry to continue to grow, the IT and BPO industries would need to
employ over three million professionals as direct employment. The
NASSCOM has also indicated that the current industry employment is
about to reach two million professionals by March, 2008. The Committee
also note that the Government of India along with the industry
associations like NASSCOM has been continuously looking at the
IT sector’s requirement from time to time. As a follow up, the DIT has
also constituted a study Team on Human Resource Development under
the working Group on IT sector for the Eleventh Five year Plan to cope
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM41

42
with the manpower needs of the ever-growing IT/ITES industry. Taking
into consideration the threat looming large over the IT/ITES industry
due to possible shortage of skilled manpower after 2009 as reported, the
Committee urge upon the department to make persistent and concerted
efforts in tandem with the industry associations to ensure that the fast
growing IT/ITES industry does not suffer a setback due to shortage of
skilled professionals.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee acknowledge the fact that the efforts of DIT alone
would not be sufficient to bridge the gap between the demand and supply
of IT skilled workforce for the present and the future. The Ministry of
Human Resource Development would continue to play a major role to
address the issue of manpower requirement. However, the Committee
feel that the Department of Information Technology being the nodal
Department for overseeing the overall functioning and development of
the IT Sector has a larger role to play than any other sister Ministry/
Department. The Committee, therefore, desire that the DIT in coordination
with other Government Ministries/Departments as well as the Private
Sector should take measures to bridge the gap between the demand and
supply of IT skilled workforce.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT in coordination with other Ministries of Government of India
like Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Labour &
Employment, Planning Commission, etc. and Industry Associations like
NASSCOM is making continuous efforts to ensure the availability of
skilled manpower for the fast growing IT/ITES Industry. DIT would
continue with these efforts in future also.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 50 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee are highly concerned to note that during the year
2007-08 against a proposal of Rs. 22.00 crore the DOEACC was allocated
a meagre amount of Rs. 50 lakh only. Similarly, during the 2008-09 fiscal,
DOEACC proposed an amount of Rs. 11.00 crore whereas a paltry amount
Rs. 44 lakh only was allocated to it. Scarcity of resources has been
attributed to such drastic reduction of Plan Outlays for DOEACC. At the
same time, the Committee are informed that the society essentially needs
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM42

43
budgetary support for meeting the Capital Expenditure mainly for
capacity building of its 10 centres located at different places in the
country. Here, it may be mentioned that during the years 2005-06 and
2006-07 DOEACC’s utilisation of Plan allocation was optimum. Thus,
in view of the fact that the Centre has an unblemished record of utilisation
of budgetary allocation during the preceding years and it needs adequate
funds towards its existing and emerging activities including
infrastructure development and upgradation of various labs, the
Committee impress upon DIT to initiate measures for making adequate
funds available to DOEACC in facilitating its mission.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee appreciate to note that DOEACC has been taking a
number of initiatives to cater to the ever-growing demand of IT/ITES
professionals. Such efforts include short term courses in the area of
Information Technology, Electronics Design and Technology,
Manufacturing Technology and Maintenance Engineering in addition
to the formal and non-formal long term courses. Besides, various intensive
customer support programmes and training courses are conducted by
DOEACC, even in the North-East Region and Jammu & Kashmir. While
commending the initiatives of DOEACC, the Committee desire that such
efforts should continue unhindered to address the ever-growing demand
for IT/ITES professionals.
Action Taken by the Government
DOEACC is continuing to offer its various courses for generating
quality manpower and develop skilled professionals in the field of
Information, Electronics & Communication Technology (IECT). In order
to meet the emerging needs of the industry, DOEACC also periodically
review various courses both long term & short term. New courses are
designed and introduced to cater to the specific requirement of the
industry from time to time in IECT area.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee note that to facilitate direct connectivity between
India and Europe to support current and potential cooperative research
activities, a 45 Mbps link has already been established between ERNET
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM43

44
India and European Research Network GEANT under the Manpower
Development scheme of DIT. The Committee were further informed during
evidence that this link is being gradually upgraded to 100 Mbps to
improve the speed and quality. However, as per the Outcome Budget
(2008-09) this link is being upgraded to 622 Mbps/1Gb link. The
Committee desire the Department to reconcile the upgradation target
and spell out their exact plan of action to take adequate measures to
upgrade the link, so that the existing and emerging cooperative research
activities between India and Europe are well supported with greater
speed and better quality.
Action Taken by the Government
The existing 45 Mbps link between ERNET and GEANT is being
upgraded to 100 Mbps. It is expected that users demand would
continuously grow for next couple of years as many Indian researchers
have multi-national research collaborations project such as Integrated
Knowledge Network in India etc. which would require high international
bandwidth connectivity to Europe. It is planned that India should go for
minimum 1 Gbps bandwidth in 2008, 2.5 Gbps in 2009 and 10 Gbps in
2010. There should be redundancy in network connectivity with one
link going to Europe and second link going to TEIN2 POP either in
Singapore or Hong Kong.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee note that an expenditure of Rs. 60 lakh including
Government grant of Rs. 25 lakh incurred on the development of a
technology for ferrite Radio Frequency Absorber Tiles by SAMEER did
not yield the desired benefits as the technology was not transferred for
commercial exploitation and the Department could not persuade the
technology development partner to commercialize the technology. It
happened as no Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed by
the DIT with the partner and SAMEER before releasing the Grants. The
Committee also find that at a certain point of time the commercial interest
of the partner to go ahead with the project waned subsequent to which
SAMEER approached another company which showed no interest in
manufacturing the product. Although, the Department have forwarded
an exhaustive explanation in this regard, yet the Committee feel that due
to sheer bad management, the technology developed in the present case
could not be transferred/commercialized resulting in wastage of
valuable assets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that henceforth
when any joint venture is contemplated by the PSEs of the department
with any private technology development partners, adequate safeguard
mechanisms like MoU & Performance Bank Guarantee should be put in
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM44

45
place, so that the projects are accomplished in time and the intended
purpose is served.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee on IT with regard
to the R&D project of SAMEER on RF Absorber Tiles has been noted.
Currently, there is no Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) under the control of
DIT. However, safeguard mechanisms like MoU & Performance Bank
Guarantee would be adopted whenever any private technology
development partner is associated in projects with R&D societies of the
Department like C-DAC, SAMEER, etc. However, extraneous factors like
fast changing technologies, market conditions and business interests of
the private partner may still adversely affect timely completion and
commercialization.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Nanotechnology Development Programme was initiated in
March, 2004 to establish centres of excellence for research in Nano
Electronics and Nano Meteorology and also to fund small and medium
level research projects in specific areas. The Committee find that during
the year 2008-09 against a proposal of Rs. 65 crore towards
Nanotechnology Development Programme, a sum of  Rs. 35 crore only
has been allocated. The Committee are highly concerned to note that
paucity of funds will adversely affect the funding of research projects at
IIT Kharagpur, IIT Delhi and IISc Bangalore. In view of the fact that
Nanotechnology being christened as the next futuristic technological
revolution, inadequate fund allocation towards the development of
Nanotechnology would seriously hamper the proactive R & D efforts for
the technological and economic development of the nation. The Committee
also feel that the Department stand a good chance of getting the required
funds, in view of maximum utilisation of allocations during the preceding
years. The Committee therefore impress upon the Department to take up
the matter of sufficient fund allocation for Nanotechnology Development
Programme.
Action Taken by the Government
Additional funds for the Nanotechnology Development Programme
would be sought at the RE stage during the financial year 2008-09.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee note that the year 2007-08 the Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) has inspite of fund
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM45

46
constraints and a high attrition rate in its R & D manpower, made sizable
progress in its major thrust areas schemes like the High Performance
Computing and Grid Computing, Multilingual Computing and Heritage
Computing Professional Electronics including VLSI and embedded
systems, Software Technologies including Free/Open Source Software
(FOSS), Cyber Security and Cyber Forensics and Health Informatics.
However, achievements have been low in some of the Schemes and
activities because of the two above cited reasons. The Committee expect
that the Centre would further improve its performance in 2008-09 in its
various spheres of activities. The DIT on their part should extend all
possible assistance to C-DAC in its pursuit of excellence and an
acknowledged place in R&D institutions in the world.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted by the
Department for necessary action.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
Attrition of manpower in C-DAC has consistently been engaging
the attention of the Committee because of its adverse ramifications not
only upon the Centre itself but the nation as a whole. In this context, the
Committee find that several proposals pertaining to the staff benefits of
C-DAC like enhanced leased accommodation facility, post retirement
medical reimbursement, performance incentive and payment of fuel
charges are still being processed at various levels in the Department. In
order to check further damage to the Centre in terms of manpower
attrition, the Committee once again stress upon the Department to
expeditiously take up the staff benefit proposals of C-DAC with the
Ministry of Finance to incentivise and retain manpower in high
technology areas.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has approved the enhanced leased accommodation
facility for C-DAC. It has also taken up the issue of performance incentive
with Ministry of Finance.
The recommendations of the Sixth Pay Commission (SPC) include
better pay allowances ‘Performance Related Incentive Scheme” and
scheme for contractual appointment. It is expected that some of the salary/
staff benefit related issues of C-DAC would get addressed once the
recommendations of the SPC are implemented by the Government.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM46

47
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee note that in order to optimally utilise the potential of
institutions such as research laboratories, Universities and other institutions
of higher learning including professional institutions engaged in generation
and dissemination of knowledge in various fields, the Department of
Information Technology have evolved a new scheme called the ‘National
Knowledge Network’ with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 100.00 crore for the
year 2008-09. The Committee find that the Department would execute the
Scheme under the guidance of an Empowered Committee, which would
indicate the choice of the implementing agency, architecture of the network
and time frame for the implement action of the National Knowledge Network.
The Empowered Committee would be constituted by the end of April, 2008,
the Department at  present, are neither sure of the time frames nor the number
of educational institutes to be covered under the network. The Committee
also finds that one Scheme called ‘GARUDA’ managed by C-DAC is already
in place besides ERNET to carry out the  R & D and educational activities of
the Department. Moreover the Ministry of HRD has also mooted a proposal
for a separate network in line with the National Knowledge Network. The
Committee felt that instead of multiple approaches, an integrated effort to
carry out such novel schemes would be more effective and yield better results.
The Committee would therefore like the Government to explore the feasibility
of evolving an integrated approach to seamlessly interconnect the Knowledge
institutes to encourage sharing of the resources and collaborative research.
The Committee further hope that the Empowered Committee would be
constituted as per the deadline and thereafter the Department would chalk
out their plan of action to roll out the National Knowledge Network’ Scheme
in the 2008-09 fiscal year itself for optimum utilization of Rs. 100 crore
earmarked for the purpose. The Committee also desired that the Scheme be
gradually extended to the educational institution situated in the non-urban
and backward areas, which are in dire need of sharing resources and
knowledge.
Action Taken by the Government
The High Level Committee (earlier referred to as Empowered
Committee), with Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India
as Chairman, has been constituted vide Notification No. 4(3)/2007-ELG
dated 30.4.2008.
The High Level Committee would oversee, monitor and coordinate
all activities relating to creating and implementation of the proposed
National Knowledge Network, including merger of networks.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM47

48
The High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Principal
Scientific Adviser to the Government of India has been constituted. The
National Knowledge Network would be established under the guidance
of High Level Committee. The High Level Committee would chalk out
the plan for establishing the network including identifying the
implementing agency, finalize all technical issues relating to the proposal
including the selection of best networking option, term of participation
etc. The High Level Committee would make necessary specific
recommendations for DIT to obtain financial and other approvals of the
competent authority. National Knowledge Network would connect all
knowledge institutions in the country, cutting across sections like higher
and technical education, medical education, legal education, agricultural
education and science and technology.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 59 of Chapter I)
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM48

49
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT
NIL
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM49

50
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The National e-Governance Plan is an epoch making programme
which is expected to change the entire concept and system of governance
in the Country. Against this background, the Committee note that the
total alocation for NeGP during 10 th plan was Rs. 1036.67 crore. Whereas
the expenditure was Rs. 1028.80 crore. In BE 2008-09, Rs. 800 crore have
been allocated for this Scheme as against a proposal of Rs. 1053.63 crore
i.e. a difference of approximately Rs. 250 crore. The Department have
submitted that this would be reviewed/met at the RE stage. The
Committee feel that given the utilisation record under this Scheme, the
allocation definitely needs a rethink. The Committee expect that the
Department would strive their utmost to ensure that high expectations
from NeGP are met and the same is implemented at the earliest. The
Committee also expect the Government to ensure that no roadblocks in
the form of administrative delays or financial constraints come in the
way of DIT in their endeavors.
Action Taken by the Government
The observations and advice of the committee are noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Scheme aims to establish 1,00,000 broadband internet enabled
CSCs in rural areas of the Country and is being implemented in a Public
Private–Partnership mode. The Department were supposed to set up
30,000 kiosks by March, 2007 and complete the process of establishment
of 1,00,000,+ CSCs in the country by 2008. The Committee are
disappointed to learn that only 3338 CSCs have been set up in five States
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM50

51
viz. Jharkhand, West Bengal, Haryana, Bihar and Tripura and the target
has now been revised to be achieved by March, 2009. The Committee,
therefore, once again impress upon the Department to take all necessary
measures to expedite the roll out of CSCs scheme across the Country by
the revised deadline .
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. In this connection,
it is stated that the DIT is actively driving and monitoring the
implementation of the CSC Scheme, and doing all it can to speed up the
implementation. However, it must be stressed that the actual
implementation of the CSC Scheme on the ground, as per the design of
the CSC Scheme, is the responsibility of the State Governments. The design
of the CSC Scheme calls for the selection of a Service Centre Agency
(Private Agencies which will actually set up the CSCs) by the State
Government and it is this Agency which actually sets up the CSCs on the
ground. Currently, on account of the proactive intervention of the DIT
and the support provided to the States by the DIT through the NLSA,
and the active involvement of the State Governments, bid evaluation for
setting up more than 90,000 CSCs has been completed. It is expected that
CSCs would be set up in most States by the end of FY 2008-09. However,
it must be stressed that the bid process management, award of work and
facilitation of implementation by the selected agency is done by the State
Government since as per design the contract with the Service Centre
Agency (SCA) is signed by the State Government. It may be noted that the
actual period of implementation from the date of signing the contract
with the SCA is 12 months in most cases as per the detailed statement
placed below. Hence the projections now being made are based on actual
contractual arrangements entered into by State Government.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I)
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM51

52 Status of CSC Implementation – State wise
Sl. State/UT Bid Zone (Z)/ Successful No. of MSA Signing Contract Timelines
No. Division (D) Bidder CSCs Date Duration for 100% CSC
Roll out
1 234 5 6 7 8
1. Jharkhand D1-Ranchi UTL 703 11 Apr’07 12 Months 11 Apr’08
D2-Hazaribagh UTL 1657
D3-Kolhan UTL 583
D4-Dumka Zoom Developers 1019
D5-Palamu AID 600
Total 4562
2. West Bengal Z1-Darjeeling, SREI-WIPRO 780 5th Apr’07 12 Months 5th Apr’08
Jalpaiguri,
Coochbehar
Z2-Uttar Dinapur, SREI-WIPRO 649 5th Apr’07 5th Apr’08
Dakshin Dinapur,
Maldah
Z3-Murshidabad, SREI-WIPRO 935 5th Apr’07 5th Apr’08
Nadia
Z4-North 24 Paraganas Reliance- 966 7th May’07 7th May’08
Paschim Mednipur SAMTECH
Z5-Burdwan, Purulia Reliance- 894 7th May’07 7th May’08
SAMTECH
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM52

53
Z6-South 24 Paraganas SREI-WIPRO 978 5th Apr’07 5th Apr’08
Howrah
Z7-Hooghly, Bankura SREI-WIPRO 832 5th Apr’07 5th Apr’08
Z8-Purba Medinipur, SREI-WIPRO 763 5th Apr’07 5th Apr’08
Birbhum
Total 6797
3. Haryana D1-Ambala SARK-Jaipuria 275 17 Apr’07 12 Months 17 Apr’08
D2-Rohtak Comat+Hughes 267
D3-Gurgaon 3i Infotech 294
D4-Hisar SARK-Jaipuria 323
Total 1159
4. Gujarat Z1-Ahmedabad CMS Computers 1473 21 Dec’07 6 Months 21 Jun’08
Ltd. (as
Z2-North Gujarat Reliance 1504 22 Jan’08 decided 22 Jul’08
Z3-Rajkot 3i Infotech Ltd. 1344 17 Dec’07 by the 17 Jun’08
Z4-South Gujarat 3i Infotech Ltd. 1679 17 Dec’07 State Govt.) 17 Jun’08
Total 6000
5. Sikkim 4 Districts Comat+Hughes 45 24 Apr’08 6 Months 24 Oct’08
(Complete State) (only CIC
to CSC
Conversion)
1 234 5 6 7 8
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM53

54
6. Bihar D1-Patna SREI-WIPRO 1347 6 Oct’07 12 Months 6 Oct’08
D2-Magadh SREI-WIPRO 883
D3-Purnia SREI-WIPRO 833
D4-Tirhut SREI-WIPRO 1728
D5-Koshi SARK 504
D6-Darbhanga Zoom 1110
D7-Bhagalpur Zoom 427
D8-Munger SREI-WIPRO 774
D9-Saran SARK 857
Total 8463
7. Tripura Z1-North & South Comat+Hughes 67 1 Nov’07 12 Months 1 Nov’08
Tripura
Z2-West Tripura Comat+Hughes 78
& Dhalai
Total 145
8. Madhya Pradesh D1-Chambal AISECT 393 18 Feb’08 12 Months 18 Feb’09
D2-Gwalior CMS 825 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D3-Ujjain NICT 1028 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D4-Indore NICT 1130 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D5-Bhopal CMS Computer 1311 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D6-Hosangabad 3i Infotech Ltd. 257 20 Feb’09 20 Feb’09
D7-Sagar AISECT 1076 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D8-Jabalpur Reliance 1765 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
D9-Rewa AISECT 1447 18 Feb’08 18 Feb’09
Total 9232
1 234 5 6 7 8
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM54

55
  9. Tamil Nadu Z1-North East SREI 1045 17 Mar’08 11 Months 17 Feb’09
Z2-North West 3i Infotech Ltd. 823 (as decided
Z3-East 3i Infotech Ltd. 1354 by the State
Z4-South 3i Infotech Ltd. 1062 Govt.)
Z5-Central 3i Infotech Ltd. 1155
Total 5439
10. Assam Group 1 Central & Zoom Devlopers 1542 25 Mar’08 12 Months 25Mar’09
Southern
Group 2 Eastern SREI+WIPRO 1303 14 Mar’08 14 Mar’09
Western & Northern SREI+WIPRO 1530 14 Mar’08 14 Mar’09
Total 4375
11. Uttar Pradesh Z1-Moradabad CMS Computers 1615 8 Apr’08 12 Months 8 Apr’09
Ltd.
Z2-Varanasi SREI+WIPRO 3669
Z3-Faizabad Comat 2601
Technologies
Z4-Lucknow SREI+WIPRO 4449
Z5-Bareilly Comat 2120
Technologies
Z6-Agra 3i Infotech Ltd. 1688
Z7-Kanpur CMS Computers 1767
Ltd.
Total 17909
1 234 5 6 7 8
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM55

56
12. Uttarakhand Bid Unit 1-Pauri Reliance 1394 25 Apr’08 12 Months 25 Apr’09
Gadwal
Bid Unit 2-Kumau Reliance 704
Bid Unit 3-Dehradun Comat+Hughes 706
Total 2804
13. Orissa Z1-Mayurdhanj, CMS 1922 17 Jun’08 12 Months 17 Jun’09
Balasore, Bhadrak, Computers
Kendrapara, Jajpur
Z2-Nayagarh, Khurda, CMS 1366
Puri, Cuttack, Computer
Jagatsinghpur
Z3-Angul, Keonjhar, Zoom 1314
Dhenkanal, Deogarh, Developers
Sundergarh
Z4-Bargarh, SREI 1136
Bolangir, Sambalpur, Infrastructure
Sonepur, Jharsuguda,
Boudh
Z5-Phulbani, Ganjam, CMS 1674
Gajapati, Rayagada Computers
Z6-Malkangiri, SREI 1146
Koraput, Infrastructure
Nabarangpur,
Kalahandi, Nuapara
14. Meghalaya Entire State BASIX 225 9 Jul’08 12 Months 9 Jul’09
1 234 5 6 7 8
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM56

57
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that against a budgetary proposal of Rs. 12
crore during the year 2007-2008, the Software Technology Parks of India
(STPI) was allocated an amount of Rs. 2 crore at the RE stage. Similarly,
during 2008-2009 no allocation has been made to STPI against a proposal
of Rs. 60 lakh. During preliminary examination of the Demands for
Grants (2008-2009), an impression was given that since STPI Centres are
having enough internal accruals, they do not need any budgetary support.
But subsequently during the course of evidence, the Committee were
informed that while STPI’s internal accruals are enough for the
maintenance of the existing 48 centers, It requires budgetary support to
open up new centres. The Committee acknowledge the fact that STPI is a
self sustaining organization and it can carry out its existing activities
even without budgetary support. But, the Committee feel that STPI should
clearly project its financial requirements so that the budget exercise
appears realistic and contradictory statements are avoided.
Action Taken by the Government
As per current policy for setting up a new STPI Centre, the State
Government has to provide 3 acres of land, 10,000 sq.ft. of built up space
and a grant in aid of Rs. 1 crore to STPI. DIT provides a seed capital of
Rs. 50 lakh to STPI for setting up a new centre. STPI has projected a
budgetary support of Rs. 100 Lakh during a financial year to establish
two Centers in a year.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 35 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) Scheme was
conceived with an objective to inter-alia  promote software and software
services and to provide statutory and data communication services, etc.
The Committee note with satisfaction that the STPI Scheme has been
immensely successful as is evident from its phenomenal export earnings
which increased from Rs. 37,176 crore in 2002-2003 to Rs. 1,44,214 crore
in 2006-2007. However, a majority of software export is centered around
tier-I & tier-II cities and in forward/developed States of the Country. The
Committee desire that STPI should open new Centres also in tier-III and
tier-IV cities as well as in less developed States to provide the requisite
growth impetus to these areas.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM57

58
Action Taken by the Government
As per current policy for setting up a new STPI Centre, the State
Government has to provide 3 acres of land, 10,000 sq.ft. of built up space
and a grant in aid of Rs. 1 crore to STPI. The Department of Information
Technology, Government of India provides a seed capital of Rs. 50 lakhs
to STPI for setting up of New STPI Centres. A feasibility study has to be
conducted by STPI jointly with the State Government to evaluate the
export potential and commercial viability of the proposal.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 38 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note that while computer software production has
quadruped since 2002-2003, the electronics hardware production has
only doubled during this period. The Committee observe that hardware
sector is lagging due to a number of reasons like lack of a national policy,
infrastructure constraints, lack of economies of scale, high taxation
regime vis-à-vis  other countries, etc. The Committee have time and again
emphasized the need for formulation of a National Policy on IT
Hardware. The Department have all along been assuring the Committee
that the same was on the anvil. Unfortunately, DIT have now backtracked
from this. Moreover, the Department’s endeavors of getting a Discussion
Paper prepared; this discussion paper considered by a task force; the
task force constituting another small group to submit a report to them;
and the decisions on the task force on the basis of the report of this small
group being implemented by various Ministries/Department have
apparently not yielded any results. Rather, it has given an impression of
a piecemeal and disjointed approach to an important area of the country’s
technological development. The Committee are unhappy over this. They
are of the considered view that if the Department had timely formulated
the National Hardware Policy, the hardware sector would also have
been buoyant and kept some pace with the Software industry. The
Committee feel that even now it is not that late and the Department should
come up with a well laid out comprehensive National Policy on
Electronic/IT Hardware sector without any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
1. The Department of Information Technology is actively engaged
in promotion of Electronics Hardware Manufacturing in the country.
DIT had prepared “A Discussion Paper on the Conceptual Policy
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM58

59
Framework to Promote Growth of Electronics/IT hardware
Manufacturing Industry” in consultation with the Stakeholders. The
main objectives of the proposed package of incentives for the Electronics/
IT Hardware Manufacturing Sector are to make the industry globally
competitive, to attract more FDI in the industry, to bring down the prices
of the end products (by bringing down the production cost and increasing
volumes to take advantage of economies and efficiencies of scale), to
increase the demand to compensate for disabilities until the basic
infrastructure constraints that the nation faces are removed, and to move
towards total taxation level of 12-15% over a period of 3 years.
Most of the proposals contained in the Discussion Paper were to be
implemented by other Ministries/Departments. Therefore, as suggested
by DIT, the Government decided to constitute a Task Force on Electronics/
IT Hardware Manufacturing industry in order to provide a package of
incentives to promote the growth of this industry. Member Secretary,
Planning Commission and Secretaries of the Departments of Information
Technology, Industrial Policy & Promotion, Commerce, Revenue,
Economic Affairs, and Expenditure were members of the Task Force.
2. The Task Force constituted a small Group under the
Chairmanship of Member Secretary, Planning Commission to look into
all relevant aspects of the matter and give its recommendations regarding
appropriate fiscal as well as other benefits for the Electronics/IT
Hardware Industry for consideration of the Task Force. After
consideration of the Report of the Group by the Task Force and as a
follow up of decisions taken by the Task Force, action has already been
taken/initiated for implementation of a number of recommendations by
DIT and other concerned Departments.
The present status of implementation of the recommendations/
decisions is as under:
(i) Infrastructure Support: Inadequate infrastructure was
identified as one of the disability factors being faced by the
Electronics Hardware manufacturing sector. As per the
recommendation of the Task Force, setting up of Special Investment
Regions (SIRs) for Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing, has
been announced vide Gazette Notification dated 29.5.2008.
(ii) Incentives for R&D: In addition to the existing schemes for
funding R&D projects, DIT has put in place the following Schemes,
as per the recommendation of the Task Force:
• Support International Patent Protection in Electronics &IT (SIP-
EIT): The details of the scheme are available on DIT’s website.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM59

60
• Multiplier Grants Scheme:  The objective of the scheme is to
encourage industry to collaborate with premier Academic and
Government R&D institutions for development of innovative
and commercially viable products/packages. The details of
the scheme are available on DIT’s website.
• Promote technology and innovation focused start ups:  DIT
has initiated a Scheme for Technology Incubation and
Development of Entrepreneurs (TIDE) in the area of Electronics,
IT and Management. The scheme aims to assist Institutions of
Higher learning such as IITs, IIMs, NITs and IITs, etc. to
strengthen their Technology Incubation centres and thus
enable young entrepreneurs to initiate technology start up.
Companies for commercial exploitation of technologies
developed.
(iii) Environmental considerations:
• E-waste:  The electrical and electronic waste (e-waste) is one of
the fastest growing waste streams in the world. In India, the
issue of e-waste management is in a nascent stage. To address
this issue, the Guidelines for environmentally sound
management of e-Waste have been approved by MoEF and
placed on the websites of MoEF as well as Central Pollution
Control Board.
• Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC)/Electromagnetic
Interference (EMI) & Safety Standards:  It is essential to have
the products designed and tested to accepted standards of
safety and EMI/EMC. The Task Force noted that the industry
is in favour of notification of standards and compliance thereto.
However, the industry does not support mandatory licensing
by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). It was noted that
notification of standards could not be delinked from the BIS
licensing scheme. The matter is under consideration of the
concerned Ministry (Department of Consumer Affairs).
(iv) Tariff issues and fiscal incentives:
• Correction of inverted tariff structure:  The cases of inverted
duty structure brought to notice of DIT by the Industry
Associations have been corrected by the Department of
Revenue.
• Reduction of total taxation level: The Task Force recommended
that the total taxation level for this industry should be brought
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM60

61
down to reasonable level of 12% to 15% over a period of three
years. The recommendation has been partially implemented.
The general rate of excise duty (CENVAT) has been reduced
from 16% to 14% and announcement has been made for
reduction of Central Sales Tax (CST) from 3% to 2% in the Budget
2008-09. Regarding the proposals for abolition of CST and
rationalization of VAT on both IT and non-IT electronics goods
to 4%, the matter is under consideration of Ministry of Finance.
(v) Special Incentives for Fabs and other High Tech IT Products:
Subsequent to announcement of the Special Incentive Package
Scheme (SIPS) vide Gazette Notification dated 21.3.2007 and issuance
of Guidelines on 14.9.2007, eleven proposals covering investment
in Semiconductor Fab, LCD manufacturing and solar photovoltaic
including polysilicon have been received.
(vi) Special attention and priorities to Electronics/IT hardware
manufacturing:  As per the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP), 2004-09
(updated as on 11th April, 2008), “Electronics and IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industries” has been included as a thrust section in
Chapter-1B relating to “Special Focus Inintiatives.”
3. It may be noted that the Task Force has addressed the issues
raised by the Industry Associations for promoting growth of Electronics/
IT Hardware Manufacturing in the country. It may also be noted that
while several issues concern DIT, a large number of issues concern other
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. Action has already been
taken by DIT on some of the decisions of the Task Force. For the remaining
issues, the concerned Ministries/Departments have either taken action
or are in the process of taking action.
We appreciate the concerns of the Hon’ble Members of the Standing
Committee regarding the need for a comprehensive National Policy on
Electronic/IT Hardware sector. In view of the position brought out in the
preceding paras, major issues concerning the Hardware sector have
already been addressed. The above measures/initiatives, once fully
implemented, shall together constitute a comprehensive package of
incentives for promotion of Electronics Hardware manufacturing sector
in the country. Further, the matters relating to tariff structure are reviewed
regularly, as a part of Annual Budget exercise by the Ministry of Finance
and this an ongoing process.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 44 of Chapter I)
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM61

62
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are perturbed to note that the implementation
activities of the Digital DNA Park was commenced way back in May,
2003, but surprisingly the land acquisition process for the project is still
going on even after a lapse of almost five years. The Committee in their
15
th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Department , had already expressed disappointment over the delay in
implementation of this Project involving many formalities that resulted
in non-utilisation of allocated funds. The Committee are informed that a
firm of Chennai has been short listed for procurement of 100 acres of
land and the land acquisition process is on. However, according to the
outcome Budget (2008-09), this process is on for last two financial years.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that, STPI being the nodal
agency, should accord highest priority to this Project and the Department
should monitor the progress at the highest level, the Committee would
like to be periodically informed of the progress made in project
implementation.
Action Taken by the Government
Special Secretary and JS & FA, DIT have taken a meeting with
Secretary (Industry), Government of Tamil nadu and representative of
M/s Ascendas, the industry partner the Bio-IT Park project and TIDCO,
Chennai. The Committee deliberated on the issue of timely implementation
of the project and finally decided that under the given circumstances
due to non-availability of appropriate land it is difficult to pursue the
project.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 47 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee find that consequent upon the DOEACC’s
application to the Distance Learning Council under the Ministry of
Human Resource Development for recognition of the Centre’s ‘B’ level
qualification as equivalent to MCA, the Council has sent its
recommendations which are under the consideration of the All India
council of Technical Education (AICTE). In the meantime, various
universities/deemed universities have recognized DOEACC ‘B’ & ‘A’
level courses for admission to their M. Tech & M.Sc./MCA programmes
respectively the Committee also find that  recognition of DOEACC’s ‘C’
level qualification would be taken up by AICTE only after ‘B’ level
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM62

63
qualifications, is recogized. In view of the imperatives of the recognition
of DOEACC’s ‘B’ level the Committee would like to impress upon the
Department to earnestly pursue the matter with Ministry of HRD/AICTE
so that the recognition is soon accorded to effectively engage DOEACC
in its endeavour towards formal and non–formal industry oriented
education the area of ICT.
Action Taken by the Government
The issue of recognition of ‘B’ & ‘C’ level qualifications is being
constantly/regularly pursued with AICTE at different levels.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 53 of Chapter I)
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM63

64
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLY IS OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that during the year 2007-08, against a proposal
of Rs. 50.00 crore, the Media Lab  Asia was allocated Rs. 10.00 crore
which was completely eliminated at the RE stage. Similarly, during the
financial year 2008-09, against a proposal of Rs. 50.00 crore, the Lab has
been allocated Rs. 1.00 crore only. Such reductions are attributed to the
ongoing restructuring process in pursuance of a Cabinet decision with
effect from 1 may, 2003. The Committee also find that pursuant to the
Cabinet decision that the outlay for the Eleventh Plan and the level of
Government support to MLA would be decided based on an independent
evaluation by experts to be carried out in 2006-07, the Department have
constituted a Committee of Experts which had already held three meetings
and is likely to submit its report soon. Taking note of the sorry state of
affairs of MLA which was conceived as a novel project to put technology
to the of common man, the Committee hope that the expert committee
would give its report at an early date so that the restructuring process is
completed and the Eleventh Plan outlay and the extent of Government
support to MLA are finalized to enable the Lab to embark upon its
missions afresh.
Action Taken by the Government
The 4th meeting of the Committee of experts constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to
the Government of India, was held on 21st May, 2008. The Committee is
likely to finalise the Report on the Media Lab Asia and suggest the level
of funding for the 11th Plan period. The Government will take further
necessary action on receipt of the Review Report.
   NEW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
27 August, 2008 Chairman,
5 Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM64

65
APPENDIX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th August, 2008 from
1100 hrs.  to 1300 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
Members
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
7. Shri Bhaubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri Tathagata Sathpathy
Rajya Sabha
11. Dr. C.P. Thakur
12. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
14. Shri Shyam Benegal
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM65

66
Secretariat
1. Shri P. Sreedhran — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P.C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Information Technology)
*** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology) to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the
Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
* Matters not related to this report.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM66

67
5. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:–
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Fifty-eighth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-
2009)’ of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Information Technology).
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above
Draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to
him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
* Matter not related to this report.
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM67

68
ANNEXURE
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 1-7, 9-11, 13-16, 19, 22-25,
27-32 and 34
Total 26
Percentage 76.47
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies of the Government:
Paragraph No: NIL
Total NIL
Percentage 0
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies of the  Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos:  8, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21 & 26
Total 07
Percentage 20.58
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph No:  33
Total 01
Percentage 2.94
Text.pmd 16/02/2009, 12:02 PM68