STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Forty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Functioning of
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)]
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2008/Ashadha, 1930 (Saka)
61

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Functioning of Centre for Development of
Advanced Computing (C-DAC)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 July, 2008
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2008/Ashadha, 1930 (Saka)

CIT No. 194
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by National
Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Gov ernment ...................................... 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Gov ernment ........................................... 19
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration......................................................................... 20
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are interim in nature ....................................... 27
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Twenty-sixth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2007-08)
held on 16.07. 2008 ......................................................... 29
A
NNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-ninth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) .................................. 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
@15. Vacant
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
20. Shri P.C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
(iii)
* Vice Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be a member on being inducted to the Union Council of Ministers
on 7th April, 2008.
@ Vice Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal ceased to be a member on resignation from Lok Sabha on 7th Jan., 2008.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
$27.  Dr. C.P. Thakur
$28.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P.C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
$ Nominated w.e.f. 21 May, 2008.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present this Sixty-first Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Forty-ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Functioning of Centre for Development of Advanced Computing
(C-DAC)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Forty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 August,
2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Department
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-ninth Report on 29 February, 2008.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 16 July, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committ ee contained in their
Forty-ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Annexure.
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL  KUMAR,
16 July, 2008 Chairman,
25 Ashadha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-ninth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Centre for Development of
Advanced Computing (C-DAC)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Information
Technology).
2. The Forty-ninth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on
03.08.2007 and to Lok Sabha on 21.08.2007 and was laid on the Table
of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained 23 recommendations/
observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and categorised
as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:—
Para Nos. : 1, 2, 3, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 & 22
Total : 13
Chapter - II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:—
Para No. : 9 Total : 1
Chapter - III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:—
Para Nos.: 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14 & 23 Total : 7
Chapter - IV

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are
of interim nature:—
Para Nos. : 10 & 11 Total : 2
Chapter - V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons therefor.
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I and final action
taken replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this
Report should be furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Meetings of Governing Council/Committees of C-DAC
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3)
6. Noting the long gaps in the meetings of various bodies entrusted
with guiding and facilitating C-DAC viz. the Governing Council, the
Technical Advisory Committee and the Coordination Committee and the
adverse effect this might be having on the functioning of C-DAC, the
Committee in their Forty-ninth Report had disapproved the laxity and
disinterest being shown by the Department. The Committee impressed
upon the Department that there should be frequent meetings of these
bodies at regular intervals so as to ensure that decisions on major issues
were not delayed and the problems/difficulties being faced by C-DAC
were not allowed to linger on to the detriment of national interest.
7. In their action taken note the Department have stated that the
recommendations of the Committee have been noted for action. In
addition, C-DAC have been asked to submit urgent issues for decision
on file, so that these may be expedited.
8. The Committee note with satisfaction that at last the
Department have started appreciating the need for quick decision
making in matters pertaining to a premier research institution like
C-DAC. It is inexplicable as to why the system of obtaining ‘on file’
decisions in matters of urgency was not being resorted to, hitherto, as
this is one of the basic tenets of administration and decision making.
The Committee hope that now when the system of ‘on file’ approval
2

has been put in place, issues of pressing importance and urgent matters
having a bearing on the functioning of C-DAC will be attended to by
the Department without any time lag.
II. Strengthening Corporate Office of C-DAC
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4)
9. The Committee in their Forty-ninth Report while observing that
C-DAC’s proposal for augmentation of manpower in its Corporate Office
submitted to the Coordination Committee on 23 June, 2005 was responded
to nine months later with the comments that the matter required to be
referred to the Ministry of Finance, had pointed out that nothing tangible
had been done in the matter and recommended that the Department
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance without any
further delay. The Committee had also suggested that as an interim
measure C-DAC should suitably redeploy its personnel so as to strengthen
its Corporate Office.
10. The Department in their action taken note have stated that
the matter was discussed in the 24th meeting of the Governing Council
(GC) held in November, 2007 and the GC has recommended a sub-
Committee to examine the matter. Further, as an interim measure,
C-DAC has appointed a few members on contract basis for the Corporate
Office.
11. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that
C-DAC had submitted the proposal for augmentation of manpower in
its Corporate Office way back in June, 2005. Nine months later it was
told that the proposal required to be referred to the Ministry of Finance.
Further action taken thereon was not reported to the Committee. The
Department have now made an about turn two and half years later by
stating that the matter was discussed in the GC and it has recommended
that a sub-Committee may examine it. It has also been stated that
C-DAC has appointed a few members on contract basis for its Corporate
Office as an interim measure. Thus, nothing concrete has been done
during the last three years or so to judiciously attend to the manpower
shortage being faced by C-DAC in its Corporate Office. The Committee
are unhappy to note the dilly-dallying by DIT on such an important
issue. The Committee disapprove of this state of affairs and desire that
conclusive action be taken in the matter within a period of six months
so that a premier institution engaged in research and development
in information technology does not suffer due to administrative
inaction.
3

III. Funding of C-DAC
Recommendation (Paragraph Nos. 5 & 14)
12. Having noted that the grossly reduced allocations to C-DAC
against funds sought over the years had resulted in slow down of progress/
achievements in several core Research and Development programmes,
the Committee, in their Forty-ninth Report, had while expressing their
concern over this trend asked the Department of Information Technology
to consider the pending and future proposals of C-DAC for release of
funds with due promptitude and diligence.
13. The Committee having further noted the severe shortage of
supercomputing resources in the country due to shortage of funds,
infrastructure and manpower, had recommended that the Department
should provide C-DAC with adequate funds and infrastructural facilities
for the purpose of development of requisite supercomputing resources.
14. The Department in their action taken note have stated that the
allocations for C-DAC for the Financial Year 2008-09 have been increased.
In addition to core grants, C-DAC has also been provided with additional
funds via sponsored research projects.
15. It has been further stated that C-DAC is being provided with
adequate financial support for building the High Power Computing
Systems. The Government have also approved the fund requirements for
creating the Research and Development infrastructure for C-DAC at five
locations. The fund allocations for the financial year 2008-09 have also
been increased. In addition to core grants, C-DAC has been provided
with additional funds.
16. Having examined in detail the Demands for Grants of the
Department for 2008-09 in their Fifty-eighth Report, the Committee are
not inclined to agree fully with the reply of the Department. C-DAC
has been allocated Rs. 94.00 crore against a sum of Rs. 249.00 crore
sought by it for the year 2008-09. This is in no way any major
improvement over the allocations made vis-a-vis allocations sought in
the previous years for an organization. Undoubtedly, paucity of funds
can prove detrimental in cutting edge technology and high obsolescence
areas where timely and critical quantum of investment is of the essence.
Also, the country is reportedly faced with a severe shortage of
supercomputing resources. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Department should spare no effort to get adequate funds for the
C-DAC so that lack of resources does not hamper its work in the
remaining years of the Eleventh Plan. On its part, C-DAC should strive
4

for newer and varied means of internal resource generation through
stepped up Research and Development efforts.
IV. Manpower Attrition
Recommendation (Paragraph Nos. 6 & 7)
17. In their Forty-ninth Report while voicing their concern over the
alarmingly high rate of attrition in scientific and technical categories of
employees of C-DAC, the Committee had in the interest of functioning
of C-DAC and with a view to retaining the best scientific talent asked
the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for
special salary compensation/allowance, scheme/package for personnel
deployed in such high end technology areas.
18. In their action taken note the Department have stated that the
proposal of setting up of adjunct entity has been approved in principle
by the Governing Council (GC) in its 24th meeting held in November,
2007. It also contains components of incentivization to manpower of C-
DAC, based on the turn-over/profits of the adjunct entity.
19. It has been further stated that some items pertaining to staff
benefits are receiving attention and were tabled in the 24th GC meeting
for approval. The GC suggested further examination of the staff benefits.
20. The Committee note that some items pertaining to the staff
benefits had been placed before the Governing Council for approval
which, however, has suggested further examination of these benefits.
The Committee feel that somehow the serious problem of attrition of
skilled manpower from C-DAC is not being correctly appreciated by
the Department and its attitude towards resolving this problem is
somewhat casual. The Committee feel that it is high time the
Department attended to the problem of high attrition rate in the C-
DAC with the sincerity and earnestness it deserves and come up with
cogent solutions without wasting any further time.
V. Setting Up of Commercial Arm of C-DAC
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 8)
21. Having been informed that C-DAC was working on a proposal
for setting up of a commercial arm for quite some time as it would be
helpful in achieving an effective tie-up between Research and Development
and commercialization and enhanced lab to market efforts, the Committee
in their previous Report had exhorted DIT to take a decision on the
proposal of C-DAC without any further delay.
5

22. In response, the Department in their action taken note have
informed that preparatory work relating to setting up of Adjunct Corpus
Entity for marketing and commercialization was completed. The proposal
was presented to DIT and the Governing Council (GC). The GC in its
24th meeting accorded in principle approval to bring-in place the
Corporate Entity as proposed.
23. The Committee note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, a beginning has been made in the direction of
fructifying the commercial arm of C-DAC. In view of the immense
benefits that will be accruing to C-DAC with its own commercial arm
being functional, the Committee desire that DIT should go all out in
making this entity a reality at the earliest.
VI. High Performance Computing
Recommendation (Paragraph Nos. 10 & 11)
24. Observing that there was a crucial delay in commissioning of
5 Teraflops (TFs) systems which were subsequently upgraded to
10 Teraflops (TFs), the Committee in their Forty-ninth Report had emphasised
that C-DAC should attach highest priority to such projects and complete
them on time and wanted the DIT to be supportive of all such endeavours
of the C-DAC.
25. The Department in their action taken note have stated that
C-DAC is working with renewed energy and vigour for commissioning
of the next generation High Power Computing (HPC) System of PARAM.
Towards this, component procurement process has been initiated, site
preparation is in progress, in house designing and building of a sub-
system has been completed.
26. From the reply of the Department it is apparent that the next
generation HPC system of PARAM is yet to see the light of the day.
During the examination of the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department, it was observed from the Outcome Budget of the Department
that November, 2008 is the timeline for installation, commissioning and
testing of 10-20 Teraflop Systems. The Committee cannot but once again
highlight the importance of the Project and trust that C-DAC and DIT
would take all necessary measures and complete the next generation
HPC System of PARAM within the stipulated time.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 12)
27. In their previous Report, the Committee, having noted that
delay in supply of critical components by the vendors of C-DAC alongwith
6

financial constraints, led to crucial delay in commissioning of 5 Teraflops
(TFs) System (subsequently upgraded to 10 Teraflops System) had desired
that DIT/C-DAC should take suitable action against such defaulting
vendors.
28. The Department in their action taken note have stated that
C-DAC has held meeting with vendors regarding availability of processors
at very senior levels to share its concerns and appraise itself on roll out
plans.
29. The Committee note that C-DAC has held meeting with the
vendors to address the problem of delay in availability vis-a-vis
announcements of processors at times by vendors. However, the
Committee are not satisfied with the efforts being made by C-DAC,
in view of the crucial importance of the Project. Defaults of such serious
nature merit more concrete action than merely meeting with the vendors
at senior levels to share C-DAC’s concerns. The Committee, therefore,
once again stress upon the C-DAC to take adequate and effective
measures to assure timely supply of critical components for the next
generation HPC System of PARAM series.
VII. Grid Computing
Recommendation (Paragraph No.15)
30. Having observed that C-DAC’s national grid ‘GARUDA’
initiative had got delayed due to various reasons, chief amongst them
being delay in building a culture of grid computing and stabilization of
grid, the Committee in their previous Report had impressed upon
C-DAC that it should take all possible care and measures to avoid any
further delay in the project and in future adopt a proactive approach
towards such projects of great national importance.
31. The Department in their action taken note have stated that the
Proof-of-Concept (PoC) GARUDA initiative has achieved its objectives
without further delay, and is now being used for Grid enablement of
applications, tools and utilities.
32. It has been further stated that C-DAC has recently hosted the
3rd IEEE International e-Science and Grid Computing Conference during
December 10-13 at Bengaluru. This has provided valuable inputs and has
reinforced enthusiasm amongst researchers in India.
33. The proposal for the main phase of Garuda initiative is being
finalized in consultation with the Experts. The lessons from the PoC
phase are being incorporated into this proposal.
7

34. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Proof of
Concept (PoC) GARUDA project has been completed without any
further delay and is now being used for Grid enablement of
applications, tools and utilities. Furthermore, the proposal for the main
phase of GARUDA initiative is being finalized in consultation with
the Experts and the lessons from the PoC Phase are being incorporated
into it. The Committee feel that though a beginning has now been
made in the right direction, a lot still needs to be done to make the
GARUDA initiative a practical success. The Committee desire that
C-DAC should, in view of the lessons gained from the past experience,
work in right earnest to implement GARUDA without any time and
cost overruns.
VIII. Health Informatics
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 23)
35. In their previous Report, the Committee having noted the efforts
of C-DAC in the direction of evolving a Rural Health Management
Information System for Primary Health Care, had opined that a Rural
Health Management Information System would go a long way in
improving the reach, spread and efficacy of the primary health care. The
Committee had, therefore, desired top priority to this venture by C-DAC/
DIT and had also desired to be apprised of the road map charted out
for the expeditious fructification of the system at the earliest.
36. The action taken notes submitted by the Department are silent
in relation to the Rural Health Management Information System for
Primary Health Care and its present status.
37. The Committee take exception to the Department not
furnishing a specific reply to the aforesaid recommendation. The Rural
Health Management Information System has all the potential of
changing the face of the Primary Health Care in the rural areas. They,
therefore, desire that they should be apprised of the action taken in
pursuance of their recommendation at the earliest.
8

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph Nos. 1 & 2)
The Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) is
an autonomous body of the Department of Information Technology (DIT)
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860. C-DAC has been carrying
out research and development in Information Technology, electronics and
associated areas for more than one and a half decade. The Committee
find that the endeavours of C-DAC can be broadly classified into high
performance computing, grid computing, multi-lingual computing,
software technologies and professional electronics, cyber security and
cyber forensics, health informatics and education and training. The
Institution is today operating from 11 centres and laboratories across the
country with an organizational strength of about 2200 personnel. The
Committee’s observations arising out of examination of C-DAC are dealt
with in the succeeding paragraphs.
The Committee are happy to note that starting from its initial
mission of building indigenous supercomputers, this premier national
institution has progressively grown to build an ecosystem and institutional
framework for innovation, technology development skills, delivery plans,
collaboration, partnership and market orientation in a number of niche
areas of national importance and market relevance in Information &
Communication Technologies and Electronics. That C-DAC has produced
several practical tools, technologies, products and services to meet the
needs of small and medium enterprises and other industrial players in
the country and end users in science and technology, manufacturing and
service sectors, Government, health, development and strategic sectors
etc. is indeed satisfying.
Action Taken by the Government
Department is grateful for kind observations. C-DAC shall continue
its endeavors to meet its objectives and nation’s expectations.
9

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 23)
The Committee note that the Governing Council (GC), the Technical
Advisory Committee (TAC) and the Coordination Committee (CC) headed
by the Minister of Communications and Information Technology, Director
General, CSIR and Secretary DIT respectively, form the core of governing
structure of C-DAC. The Governing Council is responsible for taking
major decisions and overall supervision of C-DAC while Technical
Advisory Committee provides technological directions and suggestions
to them. The Coordination Committee deliberates on policy matters and
operational and financial issues on behalf of the Governing Council and
the Department of Information Technology. Undoubtedly, these bodies
have a major role in guiding C-DAC. They are also the much needed
interface between this autonomous society and various arms of
Government and other bodies. Furthermore, they are also the bodies
mandated with solving the problems faced by C-DAC and also facilitating
their efforts in frontier sciences. The Committee, however, note that the
Governing Council met only four times in the last five years while the
Technical Advisory Committee and the Coordination Committee met two
and six times respectively since their constitution in January, 2004. The
Committee feel that this is more than casual approach of the Department
towards this premier research and development institute of the country.
They are unable to comprehend as to how C-DAC would be able to meet
earmarked targets and achieve excellence in its mandated areas in absence
of proper guidance, direction, supervision and facilitation. This laxity
and lack of interest is all the more unacceptable since the endeavours
of C-DAC are in frontier IT technologies where time is of utmost essence.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department that there should
be frequent meetings of these bodies at regular intervals so as to ensure
that decisions on major issues are not delayed and the problems/difficulties
being faced by C-DAC are not allowed to linger on to the detriment of
national interest.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the
Department for action.
In addition, C-DAC has been asked to submit urgent issues for
decision on file, so that these may be expedited.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I)
10

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 8)
The Committee have been informed that C-DAC is working on
a proposal for setting up of a commercial arm for quite some time
now. According to C-DAC it will be helpful in effective tie up between
R&D and commercialisation and enhance lab to market efforts. For this
purpose, it hired the services of a reputed technology consultancy
agency and subsequently presented the core concept and ideas of this
proposal to DIT in April, 2007. Further, the Committee are informed
that contours and shapes of the proposed commercial arm are still
being worked out. The Co mmittee exhort DIT to take a decision on the
proposal Of C-DAC without an further delay. The Committee feel that
in view of the desirability of this lab to market interface and as an interim
measure C-DAC ought to utilize some Government organizations who
are already rendering commendable services in marketing research
outputs.
Action Taken by the Government
Preparatory work relating to setting up of Adjunct Corporate Entity
for marketing and commercialization was completed. The proposal was
presented to DIT and Governing Council (GC). The GC in its 24th meeting
accorded in principle approval to bring in place the corporate entity as
proposed.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 13)
The Committee further note with serious concern that the
10 Gbps interconnect project could not be completed by C-DAC as per
stipulated deadline i.e. December, 2006 and had to be staggered. This is
not a healthy state of affairs, particularly when it concerns project
of high value to the developmental efforts of the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire that a time bound schedule be presented
to them about the operationalisation of the 10 Gbps interconnect
system.
Action Taken by the Government
HPC is one of the thrust areas of C-DAC, and has delivered PARAM
series of High Performance Computers with the support of DIT.
11

C-DAC is working with renewed energy and vigour for
commissioning the next generation HPC systems. Work on building next
generation HPC system of PARAM series with architectures involving
multi-core multi-threaded processors, inter-connects with lower latencies
and standard interfaces, hybrid systems with accelerators, associated
software stack, libraries, tools for programming and debugging, algorithms
which exploit underlying architecture for specific applications, three tier
storage architecture scalable to Petabytes of low latency, File Systems, etc.
— is progressing. Towards this, component procurement process has been
initiated; site preparation is in progress; in-house designing and building
of sub-systems completed (such as PARAM Net III HPC interconnect,
Reconfigurable Computing System accelerators, and overall design of the
facility including mechanical, EMI, thermal aspects).
As regards delays in the availability vis-a-vis announcements of
processors at times by vendors, C-DAC has held meetings with vendors
at very senior levels to share its concerns and appraise itself on roll out
plans.
C-DAC has completed the development of 10 GB/Sec interconnect
system. It is targeting synchronized operationalization of the same with
the commissioning of new HPC system.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 15)
The Committee note that C-DAC have initiated the national grid
GARUDA with noble objectiv es, notably sharing of high-end
computational resources, addressing the requirements of emerging High
Performance Computing applications and creating a collaborative
framework for solving applications. The Project has, however, got delayed
due to various reasons, chief amongst them being delay in building a
culture of grid computing and stablisation of grid. C-DAC has submitted
that these primary constraints are being resolved by arranging workshops
and demonstrating advantages of Grid computing. The Committee feel
that C-DAC should have adopted a more proactive approach and planned
workshop, courses and grid partners meets before hand to avoid such
a situation. Apparently, C-DAC has failed to visualise these eventualities,
which is unfortunate. Timely steps in this regard would have created
adequate environment and generated enthusiasm in grid partners.
Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon C-DAC that it
should take all possible care and measures to avoid any further delay
in the project and in future adopt a proactive approach towards such
projects of great national importance.
12

Action Taken by the Government
The Proof-of-Concept (PoC) Garuda project has achieved its
objectives without further delay, and is now being used for Grid
enablement of applications, tools and utilities.
C-DAC has recently hosted the 3rd IEEE International e-Science
and Grid Computing Conference during December 10-13 at Bangalore.
This has provided valuable inputs and has reinforced enthusiasm amongst
researchers in India.
The proposal for the main phase of Garuda initiative is being
finalized in consultation with the Experts. The lessons from the PoC
phase are being incorporated into this proposal.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 16)
C-DAC with wide experience in R&D in Communications &
Information Technology and electronics is delivering multi-level/ multi-
layered cyber security solutions. In furtherance of its objectives in the
field of cyber security it has also developed and released some products
and tools. However, the Committee have been informed that C-DAC
tools are more useful for offline detection and still lack capability to
tackle cyber crimes online. Beside, C-DAC admitted during the evidence
before the Committee that these tools/technologies still lack international
standards. This is not a happy situation at all. More so, when India is
faced with serious and continuous threats of cyber crimes against her
and various law enforcement & forensic agencies of the country are
increasingly looking to C-DAC for solutions. Therefore, it becomes all
the more pertinent for C-DAC to timely develop multiple application
cyber security technologies and tool of international standards. The
Committee would impress upon C-DAC to priortise ‘cyber security’ area
and develop robust technologies to safeguard Indian cyber installations
against cyber crimes of all kinds.
Action Taken by the Government
C-DAC is focused on developing tools and technologies for network
infrastructure protection, cyber forensics and authentication &
identification systems to prevent cyber crimes and facilitate effective
investigation of cyber crimes.
13

To help cyber users including critical information infrastructure to
mitigate incidents relating to cyber security, DIT has set up Indian
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-ln). It issues appropriate
advisories from time to time and helps in designing secure networks and
systems with appropriate technologies and tools.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 17)
It is heartening to note that in pursuance of their objective of
making technology available to public at large in their own native
language C-DAC is actively working towards design, development and
deployment of technologies/solutions in the field of multilingual
computing. An estimated 15-20 million users are benefiting from C-DAC’s
GIST-Graphics and Intelligence based Script Technology for last over
one and a half decade. The Committee, however, note that the multi-
lingual products of C-DAC are yet to find favour with most of the
State Governments. C-DAC is facing some difficulties in this regard,
these inter-alia  include lack of standardisation & lexical resources.
As for the reasons, firstly only a few states have standardised on some
of the C-DAC’s multilingual products because their requirement is
a mix of products and tools and secondly, the states have alternative
option to use products from MNCs. To overcome these constraints
C-DAC plans standardisation meetings and establishing linguistic resource
development centres. The Committee are of the view that besides
standardisation meetings, these matters should be actively taken up with
the respective state governments to enlist their support not only in
evolving common standards but also establishing linguistic resources in
respect of all scheduled languages. Further, if necessary these matters
may be raised in inter-state fora like National Development Council,
Ministers’ level meetings, Conference of Secretaries, etc. C-DAC, on its
part ought to also customise its products to the requirements of respective
states.
Action Taken by the Government
Standardization in respect of Input, Storage and Display is of
vital importance for wider proliferation of language technology
products and solutions in India, especially in the context of National
E-Governance Plan (NeGP). The standardization activity of language
technology products and solutions are being conducted at apex level
by Department of Information Technology (DIT) and C-DAC is
closely associated with this activity by providing inputs and suggestions
to various Standardization Committees. Through DIT’s initiative a
national level committee under Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS)
14

named ‘Indian Language Technologies and Products Sectional
Committee (LITD-20) has been formed in which C-DAC is one of the
members.
C-DAC is also closely collaborating in association with DIT on
various other international standards bodies such as UNICODE, W3C,
IDN, and ICANN. This will ensure Indian language representation in
evolving international web technology and information exchange
standards.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 18)
The Committee also feel that C-DAC should take further initiatives
in extending the benefits of multilingual computing to common man.
They would like C-DAC to accord due priority to Speech Recognition
and Text to Speech projects as in the present scenario they can be of
immense utility to the people at large. The Committee would also like
the Department to not only monitor these projects continuously but also
ensure that they suffer in no way due to paucity of funds or other
impediments.
Action Taken by the Government
This is a major thrust area of CDAC.
Speech to text and text to speech initiatives in respect of Indian
Languages represent the next generation research frontier of Indian
Language Computing.
Recognizing that the area is of great importance, DIT has been
funding projects on building resources like speech corpora for various
Indian languages. Many Centres of C-DAC are involved in this.
Accelerated efforts are planned during the 11th Plan.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 19)
The Committee have been informed that working in language
technology area requires computational as well as linguistic skills and
it is difficult to get relevant manpower. The general trend being that
freshers are not keen in working in domain specific language technology.
C-DAC has submitted that these constraints may be overcome by starting
computational linguistics programme in Universities & C-DAC centers,
etc.. The Committee are of the opinion that C-DAC should tie-up with
Universities for respective languages and provide necessary support in
15

starting computational linguistics programmes on a priority basis.
Additionally, with support from the Department, C-DAC may establish
development labs/centres at the campus of Universities for training and
recruiting the requisite manpower beside development of linguistic tools/
technologies so that this critical resource for multilingual computing is
available in abundance.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT through its ‘Specialized Manpower Development in Language
Technology’ programme has introduced Masters Programme in
Computational Linguistics /Knowledge Engineering and PG Diploma
programme in Language Technology at 8 institutions across the country.
C-DAC under this project has already initiated PG Diploma in Language
Technology.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 20)
The Committee have taken note of some reports projecting an
estimated demand for 8,50,000 IT professionals and 1.4 million ITES-BPO
professionals by 2010. However, in the current scenario due to various
reasons, many graduates coming out of academic institutions are unable
to meet the IT industry’s requirements. The Committee have been informed
that C-DAC with the help of about 50 training centres is offering various
education and training programmes to build and enhance skills in critical
areas of Information Technology, therefore, playing an important role in
making available skilled workforce. Further, C-DAC is conducting various
industry oriented education programmes and looking at the growing
demand from industry, they are open to expand their training network
to make available greater number of skilled manpower to the IT industry.
However, large scale increase in its activities may not be viable with
existing infrastructure. C-DAC is, therefore, looking into the mode of
e-learning solutions in this area. The Committee appreciate the
coordinated efforts of C-DAC and the vital role being played by C-DAC
in creating high quality manpower for ICT industry. They would,
however, simultaneously like to impress upon C-DAC to further expand
its network of training centres by expeditiously including more and
more authorised training centres in it. Further, in view of the huge
estimated demand of the industry, C-DAC should start e-learning courses
without any further delay. The Department, on their part, should
make available adequate funds to C-DAC for this purpose so that the
valuable initiatives of C-DAC in this direction bear fruits forthwith. The
Committee would like to be kept informed about steps taken in this
direction.
16

Action Taken by the Government
C-DAC expands its Authorised Training Centre (ATC) network by
inviting applications for setting up ATCs through advertisement on its
Web-site. A transparent selection process is in place. The quality of
education / training through ATCs is ensured . Five new ATCs have been
added recently.
The C-DAC courses emphasize on training as well as hands on
experience. As regards e-Learning courses, Pune had earlier offered e-
Vidyapeeth with moderate success. C-DAC Hyderabad has been offering
pilot-level courses on Core Competency in Software Process Management
(CCSPM) and Certificate Course on Cyber Security (CCCS) in e-Learning
mode.
The Department, under its new Scheme of Manpower Development
for Software Export Industry, has supported CDAC to (i) expand the
state-of-art facility for advanced IT training programmes (CDAC, DVLSI,
WiMC, DESD), (ii) create a National On-Line System for Bench-Marking
of Graduate Engineers in Information Technology for self assessment,
supervised learning and placement in the Industry, and (iii) impart
Advanced Training for engineering faculties in the areas of Information
Technology.
Recommendation (Paragraph Nos. 21 & 22)
The Committee note with appreciation the laudable contributions
of C-DAC in the field of health informatics and related fields. A small
but significant beginning has been made in developing remote software
diagnostic assistance for cancer patients in rural areas of Kerala through
Regional Cancer Center, Thiruvananthpuram. The Committee are sure
that C-DAC will ensure a quick dissemination of this Scheme to other
parts of rural India.
The development of Ayusoft Solutions is another feather in the cap
of C-DAC. The Committee are sure that C-DAC will take this project to
its logical conclusion by spreading knowledge of the ancient system of
Ayurved to every corner of the globe so that the mankind benefits
therefrom.
Action Taken by the Government
C-DAC is implementing another project in Tamil Nadu for providing
telemedicine services to cancer patients. The referral Cancer Institute,
17

Adyar, Chennai is being connected through the telemedicine network
with seven peripheral centers to provide cancer detection and patient
follow-up services. Encouraged by success of Onconet pilot project by
C-DAC in Kerala, a roll-out project for establishing a telemedicine network
connecting 100 peripheral centers with 25 Regional Cancer Centres in the
country has been approved by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.
Besides India, AyuSoft is being deployed in other countries such
as Norway, Brazil and UK. Moreover, “Global Information Hub on
Integrative Medicine”, an initiative of 54 Commonwealth countries is
planning to host AyuSoft on their web-site at Malaysia for access by
international community.
18

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 9)
One such organization that comes into the mind of the Committee
in this context is the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC),
an organization under the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research,
Ministry of Science and Technology. NRDC is stated to be wholly dedicated
to transfer of technologies from R&D laboratories to industry covering
the entire spectrum of industrial technologies. NRDC is also stated to
be engaged in the development, promotion and commercialization of the
R&D results/ technologies emanating from Research Institutes/
Universities/ Industries, etc. Similarly, the Antrix Corporation Limited,
the commercial arm of Department of Space is also stated to be working
successfully for the promotion and commercial exploration of products
and services from Indian Space Programme since 1992. The Committee
are of the opinion that, pending the formation of its own commercial
arm, C-DAC should explore tying-up with such/similar organisations for
commercialisation of their technologies.
Action Taken by the Government
Preparatory work relating to setting up of Adjunct Corporate Entity
for marketing and commercialization was completed. The proposal was
presented to DIT and Governing Council (GC). The GC in its 24th meeting
accorded in principle approval to bring in place the corporate entity as
proposed.
19

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS INRESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4)
During the examination of the subject, C-DAC pleaded before the
Committee that its headquarters (Corporate Office) need to be
strengthened with suitable staffing at various levels. According to
C-DAC, this will help the body to effectively undertake mission mode
programmes leveraging the resources of groups/Centres across the country.
The Committee find force in the demand raised by the Organisation. The
Committee find it relevant to point out here that after the merger of three
organisations, viz., Electronics Research & Development Centre of India
(ER&DCI), National Centre for Software Technologies (NCST) and Mohali
Centre of the Centre for Electronics Design & Technology of India (CEDTI),
C-DAC is undergoing a consolidation phase, as the merger has increased
the number of units under C-DAC and their presence across country.
These factors also necessitate a strong Corporate Office for effective
supervision of the units as well as co-ordination among them. The
Committee have been informed that C-DAC has submitted a proposal
for manpower requirement for the Corporate Office to the Coordination
Committee, which is headed by the Secretary, DIT, way back on 23 June,
2005. After about nine months, C-DAC have been informed that the matter
required to be referred to the Ministry of Finance. Since no further inputs
in the matter have been provided by the Department in the written
information submitted to the Committee or during their oral evidence,
it can very well be assumed by the Committee that nothing tangible has
been done in this regard during the last 16 months. The Committee are
constrained to point out that a premier scientific body like C-DAC certainly
deserved a better handling. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Department should now atleast take up the matter with the Ministry
of Finance without any further delay. Meanwhile C-DAC should also
take interim measures to strengthen its Corporate Office by way of suitable
redeployment so that effective functioning of the Organisation is not
hampered. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress
made in this matter.
20

Action Taken by the Government
The matter was discussed in the 24th meeting of Governing Council
(GC) held in November 2007. The GC has recommended a sub-committee
to examine the matter.
As an interim measure, C-DAC has appointed a few members on
contract basis for the corporate office.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5)
The Committee note with concern that the Government have not
been considering the financial requirements of C-DAC with due
seriousness. Against sums of Rs. 46 crore, Rs. 87 crore, Rs. 90 crore and
Rs. 127 crore sought by C-DAC during the years 2004-05 to 2007-08
respectively, only Rs. 43 crore, Rs. 60 crore, Rs. 67.5 crore and Rs. 78 crore
respectively have been allocated to them. C-DAC has submitted that
reduced allocation of funds vis-a-vis projections have resulted in slow
down of progress/achievements in some areas like Grid Computing, shared
e-science resources/facilities and pace of other core R&D programmes.
Further, it has been stated that in many high technology and high
obsolescence areas, timely and critical quantum of investments is necessary.
The Committee are full in agreement with C-DAC and express their
unhappiness over the way DIT has been deciding upon the funds
requirements of C-DAC. The Committee would like to make it clear to
the Department that in frontier areas of supercomputing and related
matters the R&D scenarios are changing rapidly. Hence, delay in provision
of funds and infrastructure have the portents of causing irreparable losses.
The Committee, therefore, expect that DIT will consider the pending and
future proposals of C-DAC for release of funds with due promptitude
and diligence.
Action Taken by the Government
The allocations for CDAC for the FY 2008-09 have been increased.
In addition to core grants, C-DAC has also been provided with
additional funds via sponsored R&D projects.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I)
21

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 6 & 7)
During the course of the examination of C-DAC the Committee
also found that one of the major reasons behind the slippages in the
performance is the inability of C-DAC to attract and retain talent in
current market conditions. During the years 2004-06, the attrition
rates varied between 5 to 38% at various centres of C-DAC. The attrition
rates in scientific and technical categories of employees was stated
to be very high. The differential salary compensation between
C-DAC and the Industry is the main factor behind this problem. A proposal
from C-DAC regarding performance linked incentive and rewards
did not find favour with DIT in view of the Ministry of Finance
guidelines. The Committee cannot but express their grave concern over
this issue.
From the materials submitted by the Department the Committee
have observed several instances where projects and research activities of
C-DAC suffered due to the large scale attrition of skilled manpower from
its various centres/laboratories. The rapid growth per-se in the IT Sector
and the resultant demand of skilled manpower which has created a
situation of huge shortage of manpower in IT sector has further aggravated
the situation. Therefore, in such a background, there is an inherent need
to somehow incentivise employees to avoid attrition and resultant work
delays. The Committee are of the opinion that once the commercial arm
of C-DAC is in place, C-DAC with approval of concerned authorities
may consider sharing certain percentage of revenue generated by the
commercial arm as incentive among its technical staff. In the interest of
functioning of C-DAC and with a view to retaining the best scientific
talent, the Department should also take up the matter with Ministry of
Finance for special salary compensation/allowance, scheme/package for
personnel deployed in such high end technology areas. At the same time
C-DAC should also take steps like creating a conducive and strongly
motivational work environment , providing challenging assignments,
providing some kind of patent sharing arrangement with adequate bonds/
conditions and restructuring of their human resource policy to attract
and retain talent. The Committee would like to be informed about the
decisions taken in this regard at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
Proposal of setting up of adjunct entity has been approved in
principle by the Governing Council (GC) in its 24th meeting held in
November 2007. It also contains components of incentivization to
22

manpower of C-DAC, based on the turn-over/profits of the adjunct
entity.
Some items pertaining to staff benefits are receiving attention and
were tabled in the 24th GC meeting for approval. GC suggested further
examination of the staff benefits.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 12)
The Committee also desire that DIT/C-DAC should take suitable
action against such defaulting vendors. They would like to be informed
of the precise action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
HPC is one of the thrust areas of C-DAC, and has delivered
PARAM series of High Performance Computers with the support of
DIT.
C-DAC is working with renewed energy and vigour for
commissioning the next generation HPC systems. Work on building next
generation HPC system of PARAM series with architectures involving
multi-core multi-threaded processors, inter-connects with lower latencies
and standard interfaces, hybrid systems with accelerators, associated
software stack, libraries, tools for programming and debugging, algorithms
which exploit underlying architecture for specific applications, three tier
storage architecture scalable to Petabytes of low latency, File Systems, etc.
— is progressing. Towards this, component procurement process has been
initiated; site preparation is in progress; in-house designing and building
of sub-systems completed (such as PARAM Net III HPC interconnect,
Reconfigurable Computing System accelerators, and overall design of the
facility including mechanical, EMI, thermal aspects).
As regards delays in the availability vis-a-vis announcements of
processors at times by vendors, C-DAC has held meetings with vendors
at very senior levels to share its concerns and appraise itself on roll out
plans.
C-DAC has completed the development of 10 GB/Sec interconnect
system. It is targeting synchronized operationalization of the same with
the commissioning of new HPC system.
23

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14)
The Committee note that there is a serious short supply of
supercomputing resources in the country. The Committee have been
informed that various steps proposed to be taken takes to meet the
supercomputing resources requirement like building large
supercomputing facilities, Grid enabling HPC infrastructure, etc..
However, C-DAC submitted that it is facing some constraints like non-
availability of necessary infrastructure, funds and skilled professionals
in this regard and have taken up the matter with DIT. Further, the
Committee have been informed that utilization of P ARAM Padma is
approximately 70%. The Committee are of the opinion that since India
is a leading light in IT revolution, more and more multi national
corporations (MNCs) involved in high end research are making it as their
R&D base. To further boost R&D activities by Government and private
sector, varied infrastructural support is needed and supercomputing
facilities are one among them. However, the Committee note with concern
that the country is facing severe shortage of supercomputing resources.
To aggravate the situation further, C-DAC are facing shortage of funds,
infrastructure and skilled manpower and therefore are seriously
constrained in meeting the requirements of supercomputing resources.
In the opinion of the Committee this situation deserves to be remedied
forthwith. The Committee, therefore, recommend, even at the cost of
repetition that the Department should provide C-DAC with adequate
funds and infrastructural facilities for the purpose of development
of requisite supercomputing resources. Further C-DAC on its part
should make efforts to attract talents in supercomputing field by
tying-up with institutions of excellence and also take necessary steps for
optimum utilization of Super Computing Resources presently available
with it.
Action Taken by the Government
C-DAC is being provided with adequate financial support for
building the HPC systems. Government has also approved the fund
requirements for creating the R&D infrastructure for C-DAC at five
locations. The fund allocations for the financial year 2008-09 have also
been increased. In addition to core grants, C-DAC has been provided
with additional funds via sponsored R&D projects.
24

C-DAC, through the Grid initiative project — Garuda, is partnering
with the leading academic and research institutes that are working in
HPC, Grid Computing, and related areas. This has sensitized the
researchers in the participating institutions about the opportunities in
this area and has also enabled C-DAC to attract a few professionals into
its core team.
Towards optimum utilisation of HPC resources, CDAC, in addition
to its own HPC resources, is making available the resources at Grid
partner institutions to researchers.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 23)
Last but not the least, the Committee have noted the efforts of
C-DAC in the direction of evolving a Rural Health Management
Information System for Primary Health Care. Inspite of concerted attempts
of Government the primary health care in rural areas is not only in crying
need of better management but of complete overhaul. A Rural Health
Management Information System will go a long way in improving the
reach, spread and efficacy of the primary health care and in the process
the lot of teeming millions in our rural areas. The Committee desire top
priority to this venture by C-DAC and DIT. They would like to be apprised
of the roadmap charted out for the expeditious fructification of the System
at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
C-DAC is implementing another project in Tamil Nadu for
providing telemedicine services to cancer patients. The referral Cancer
Institute, Adyar, Chennai is being connected through the telemedicine
network with seven peripheral centers to provide cancer detection and
patient follow-up services. Encouraged by success of Onconet pilot project
by C-DAC in Kerala, a roll-out project for establishing a telemedicine
network connecting 100 peripheral centers with 25 Regional Cancer
Centres in the country has been approved by the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare.
Besides India, AyuSoft is being deployed in other countries such
as Norway, Brazil and UK. Moreover, “Global Information Hub on
25

Integrative Medicine”, an initiative of 54 Commonwealth countries is
planning to host AyuSoft on their web-site at Malaysia for access by
international community.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter I)
26

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 10 & 11)
The core competency of C-DAC is stated to have been developed
in High Performance Computing (HPC) which is very much evident from
the kind of progress/achievements shown by C-DAC in developing
advanced computing infrastructure in the country over the years. The
Committee observe that in pursuance of its objective of developing high
end computing resources, C-DAC was assigned the project of
commissioning 5 Teraflops (TFs) systems by December, 2005. However,
this project was delayed and subsequently targets were revised for
upgraded 10 Teraflops (TFs) systems. This crucial delay and non
achievement of target was besides financial constraints, due to delay in
supply of critical components by the vendors of C-DAC.
The Committee are disappointed to learn that C-DAC has missed
the target of commissioning 5 Teraflops (TFs) systems. It is even more
worrisome when technology is changing very fast and any delay can
seriously jeopardise a project and subsequently result in not only cost
overruns but also costly delays in nation building efforts which cannot
be quantified. The country is already facing shortage of advanced
computing infrastructure and in such a background any slippage in
development of new infrastructure is disappointing. The Committee,
therefore, emphasise that C-DAC should attach highest priority to such
projects and complete them on time, if not before. The Committee also
expect DIT to be fully supportive of all such endeavours of C-DAC so
that there is no scope for any slippages.
Action Taken by the Government
HPC is one of the thrust areas of C-DAC, and has delivered PARAM
series of High Performance Computers with the support of DIT.
C-DAC is working with renewed energy and vigour for
commissioning the next generation HPC systems. Work on building next
27

generation HPC system of PARAM series with architectures involving
multi-core multi-threaded processors, inter-connects with lower latencies
and standard interfaces, hybrid systems with accelerators, associated
software stack, libraries, tools for programming and debugging, algorithms
which exploit underlying architecture for specific applications, three tier
storage architecture scalable to Petabytes of low latency, File Systems, etc.
— is progressing. Towards this, component procurement process has been
initiated; site preparation is in progress; in-house designing and building
of sub-systems completed (such as PARAM Net III HPC interconnect,
Reconfigurable Computing System accelerators, and overall design of the
facility including mechanical, EMI, thermal aspects).
As regards delays in the availability vis-a-vis announcements of
processors at times by vendors, C-DAC has held meetings with vendors
at very senior levels to share its concerns and appraise itself on roll out
plans.
CDAC has completed the development of 10 GB/Sec interconnect
system. It is targeting synchronized operationalization of the same with
the commissioning of new HPC system.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 26 of Chapter I)
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL  KUMAR,
16 July, 2008 Chairman,
25 Ashadha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
28

APPENDIX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16th July, 2008 from
1500 hrs to 1720 hrs in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Narahari Mahato
6. Shri G. Nizamuddin
7. Shri Sohan Potai
8. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
11. Shri P.C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
13. Shri Dara Singh
29

14. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
15. Dr. C.P. Thakur
16. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P.C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
Sl.No. Name Desingation
1. *** ***
2. *** ***
3. *** ***
4. *** ***
5. *** ***
6. *** ***
7. *** ***
8. *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting to the sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by
the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
30

5. The Committee, then took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:—
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on A ction Taken by the Government on
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-ninth Report on ‘Functioning of Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)’.
6. The Committee then decided to present the above Reports to
the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction 71 (A) of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Committee, also, authorised the Chairman to
finalise the above Draft Reports and present the same to the Speaker on
a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this report
31

ANNEXURE
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FORTY-NINTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. : l, 2, 3, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21 & 22
Total : 13
Percentage : 56.5
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Replies of the Government:
Paragraph No. : 9
Total : 01
Percentage : 4.5
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. : 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14 & 23
Total : 07
Percentage : 30.4
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. : 10 & 11
Total : 02
Percentage : 8.6
32