6
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their fortieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Direct To Home (DTH) Telecast’]
SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)
SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee contained in their fortieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Direct To Home (DTH) Telecast’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.12.2004


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government. ..................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 15
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 19
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature. .................. 27
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2004-05)
held on 25.11.2004 ................................................................... 28
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fortieth
Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee .......... 30

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
5. Shri M.C. Suresh — Executive Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Report on Action Taken by
the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Direct to Home (DTH) Telecast” relating to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 November
2002 and was laid in Rajya Sabha the same day. The Department
furnished Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in
the Report on 21 February 2003.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 25.11.2004.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fortieth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their
Fortieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Direct to Home (DTH)
Telecast” relating to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 November
2002 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It
contained nine Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 50, 53
Total: 2
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 49, 52
Total: 2
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 45, 46, 47, 48, 51
Total: 5
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are interim in nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil.
Total: Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in their letter and spirit for any
reason the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of its recommendations.
A. Need for Comprehensive Legislation
(Recommendation Para No. 45)
6. In its Fortieth Report, the Committee were deeply concerned to
note that the Government allowed telecast of Direct to Home services
all of a sudden without any indepth study though DTH was considered
to be a very powerful media. Further, it was allowed for private
telecasters much before formulating a regulatory framework even
though on an earlier occasion Government had not allowed it, for
want of comprehensive regulatory framework. Propriety demanded
providing opportunity to Parliament to discuss such an important issue.
Even the decision to allow DTH was announced outside the Parliament.
The Committee deprecated the unseemly and unnecessary hurry shown
in the matter without getting any study done about the viewership,
cost, subscription rates etc., particularly when there was only one
contender for the license. Even though the matter was under
consideration for three years, no spadework worth the name was done.
The Committee further noted that the detailed guidelines as formulated
by the Government for DTH telecast, incorporated stringent provisions
against violation of an terms and conditions of the licence, which
included monetary penalties and even cancellation of license. The
guidelines also provided for taking over of the entire network of DTH
service in case of emergency and national security. The Committee
was at a loss to understand how Government could take over a service
when no law or procedure had been laid down for the same. The
guidelines were thus ambiguous and required to be made enforceable
through adequate legal framework, which has been absent. The
Committee felt that when operations of DTH telecast start, there would
be unrestricted availability of TV channels in the country. However, it

3
was difficult to visualize at that stage what long term “benefits” or
impact it would accrue to or have on the people.
7. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have submitted the
following reply:
“The Government took the decision to start DTH service in
the country in November 2000 after the group of Ministers (GoM)
had deliberated and considered all the issues connected thereto.
Detailed guidelines for starting DTH service were issued in 2001
after inter-Ministerial consultations. Two applications have been
received, seeking permission to start DTH service, and are under
active consideration.
In 1996, when some foreign satellite broadcasters started
planning for introduction of DTH service in KU band in India, it
was felt that reception and distribution of the signals in KU band
should be restricted. The Committee of Secretaries had noted the
adverse impact of foreign TV programmes. The Ministry of I & B
had initiated the process of formulating a comprehensive law on
broadcasting with a view to effectively regulate foreign satellite
channels. However, this would have taken time and there was a
possibility of foreign channels starting DTH services. Apart from
resulting in a loss of revenue, these channels would not have been
subject to any regulatory mechanism, particularly relating to the
content of the programmes. In view of the experience with the
haphazard and unregulated growth of cable networks all over the
country, it was felt necessary to take measures to prevent a similar
situation developing in DTH services. Though the proposed
Broadcasting Law was also covering the DTH services, there was
a felt need in the interim period, before the regulation came into
force, of barring entry in the KU band. Hence, operation in KU
band was banned in 1997.
The matter was discussed by the GoM in March, 2000 when
it was observed that with changes in the information technology
and in the broadcasting and communication scenario, the reasons
for which DTH had not been allowed in 1997, were no longer
relevant. Moreover, DTH as a superior technology offered an
alternative for reception and distribution of television of
programmes, both to the programme providers as well as to the
consumers. The GoM considered the issues in its meetings between

4
March and October, 2000 and concluded that DTH should be
permitted in India, with suitable safeguards. It also weighed the
advantages of DTH technology in convergence and in providing
various IT enabled services. The GoM, therefore, unanimously
recommended that DTH television services should be permitted in
India, so as to take advantage of the latest technology, while
ensuring that the concerns relating to national security, morality
and monopoly were duly taken care of by providing conditions.
It has been worldwide documented experience that DTH system
generally targets niche audiences and encourages spread of
information technology. It is expected that in the initial stages,
persons with higher disposable income will opt for DTH and only
when the prices fall with demand, will DTH have widespread
acceptance. It is also expected that DTH operators will subsidise
the cost of the hardware to increase viewership and accessibility.
As regards enforceability of the provisions of the guidelines,
especially relating to penalties and of taking over of the service,
these provisions are contained under Articles 6, 8, 9, 15 etc. of the
Schedule to Form B i.e. the License Agreement to be signed between
the Licensor (Government of India) and Licensee.
DTH has the advantage of offering a wide choice to the
viewers, along with quality and convenience. Specific advantages
of DTH include:
• Need for a small receive dish antenna, which is convenient
to install and maintain.
• Easier to regulate as compared to cable services.
• More choice to consumers.
• Better quality of reception, as it  is based on digital
technology.
• Ideally suited for sparsely populated areas (rural areas and
small towns) since it is not dependent on terrestrial
infrastructure.”
8. The Committee note that in 1997 the operation of KU Band
was banned because of the adverse impact of foreign TV programmes
and the absence of a comprehensive law on broadcasting. In 2000 a

5
GOM felt that these reasons were no longer relevant and since DTH
is considered to be a superior technology and useful in convergence
and in providing IT enabled services and in order to take advantages
of the changes in the information technology and in the broadcasting
and communication scenario, the Government gave their permission
to start DTH services in India subject to observance of some
guidelines.
9. The Committee fail to understand how in the year 2000, the
social impact of foreign TV programmes on Indian citizens was no
longer relevant and the GoM decided in favour of superior
technology. Further, what were the reasons before the GoM that made
to address sensitive issues pertaining to morality, security and
monopoly to be regulated through guidelines rather than through a
comprehensive legislation.
10. While acknowledging the need to take advantages of the
changes in the information technology and communication scenario,
the Committee strongly feel that the social cause of the effect of
foreign TV channels on Indian citizen is of paramount importance
and cannot be sacrificed. The Committee are also of the considered
view that the guidelines cannot be a substitute for a comprehensive
legal framework.
11. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and urge the Government to enact the relevant law
to regulate the entry/growth of DTH services encompassing all the
aspects in view of the changed scenario without further delay. The
Committee would also like to be kept informed about the steps
taken in this regard.
B. Areas of concern
(Recommendation Para No. 46)
12. The Committee were not able to accept the Government’s
contention that the matter had not been brought before Parliament/
Parliamentary Committee as the Parliament was not in session when
decision was taken to allow DTH. There were sessions of Parliament
between the periods of submitting report by GoM and its acceptancy
by the Cabinet. The Committee was of the opinion that if the
Government was really interested in having the opinion of Parliament

6
on the vital issue, it could have sought the views at least of this
Committee which consisted of representatives of different section of
Parliament. The Committee felt that the Government could have even
introduced a bill on DTH in either House, as the issue was very
sensitive and agitating. The Committee felt that validity period of ten
years for License was an unusually long period. The Committee also
did not appreciate regulation of such a highly sensitive and powerful
media merely through administrative orders and not by legislation.
Such ambiguities and lacunae could be overcome easily if Government
had decided to place the matter before Parliament, specially as there
was no emergency and significantly, no licence had been issued till
date and there had been only one applicant so far. The Committee
urged the government to take Parliament into confidence over such an
important matter and consider bringing about a comprehensive
legislation covering all aspects of DTH.
13. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has stated as under:
“All issues connected with opening up of KU band and for
introduction of DTH broadcasting were examined by a Group of
Ministers (GoM) constituted on 31.01.2000.
The GoM considered the issues in its entirety at meetings held
between March and October, 2000 and concluded that DTH should
be permitted in India with suitable safeguards to take care of
concerns relating to security, morality and vertical monopoly in
distribution and broadcasting of television services. GoM also
considered the advantages of DTH technology, not only in
distribution of television channels but also for its role in
convergence and providing various IT enabled services. DTH
services were allowed, subject to terms and conditions incorporated
in the Guidelines issued on 15.03.2001.
DTH is a mode of broadcasting in which the broadcaster
collects all the channels to be carried on the DTH platform and
uplinks them for reception directly by the authorized subscriber.
The COS, in December, 1996, had also recommended that there
was an unequivocal need to restrict the unregulated entry/growth
of DTH services. In case there were no restrictions on the reception
of signals in the KU Band, foreign companies could have started
DTH services and subsequently claim exemption/indemnity from
the related provisions of the Broadcasting Law on the grounds

7
that no restrictions could be placed retrospectively. The COS
advised that the proposed Broadcasting Law be approved at the
earliest. The regulatory framework for the entire broadcasting sector
was sought to be established under the Broadcasting Bill, 1997,
which was introduced in Parliament in May 1997. The Bill,
inter alia , provided for licensing and regulating of DTH service
and was referred to the Select Committee of Parliament for
examination. The Select Committee held several meetings, but
before it could finalize its recommendations the Parliament was
dissolved. The Broadcasting Bill, 1997 lapsed. The provisions of
1997 Bill were re-examined in light of the technological
developments and the Broadcasting Regulatory Bill, 2000 was
drafted and circulated to concerned Ministries.
The Group on Telecom and IT Convergence, at its meeting on
14th February, 2000, decided that Ministry of Law will consider
the possibility of drafting a comprehensive statute covering both
carriage and content of transmitted information and thereby
integrate the relevant laws. The Sub-Group of the main Group
proposed a draft Communication Convergence Bill, which was
considered by the Group and finally approved by the Cabinet.
The Communication Convergence Bill 2001 was introduced in
Lok Sabha on 31st August, 2001 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on IT for examination and recommendation. The
Committee has submitted its report to Parliament on 20.11.2002”.
14. The Committee would like to point out that the Parliament
was in session during February-May, 2000, July-August, 2000,
November to December, 2000, February-April, 2001 etc. There could
have been no reason before the Ministry not to bring the vital issue
before Parliament or before the Committee.
15. It appears to the Committee that the Ministry has not only
failed to appreciate the thrust of this recommendation but has also
not taken its recommendation seriously. The concern of the
Committee is that the Government gave its permission on 15.03.2001
to DTH services in India and thereafter introduced the
Communication Convergence Bill on 31 August, 2001. The Bill is
still under consideration of the august House. The Committee feel
that the Government should have framed a legislative framework
on DTH services before granting permission to start it. Had the
Government introduced a Bill on DTH in either of the House, it

8
would have not only paved the way for a wider and meaningful
discussion on a wide spectrum of complex issues involved in
regulation of DTH services, but would have also helped in removing
the ambiguities and lacunae present in the guidelines framed by the
Government.
16. The Committee deplore the inexplicable haste shown by the
Government in introducing DTH services without a comprehensive
law and also the manner in which the DTH services are sought to
be regulated through administrative orders rather than through an
effective legislation. The Committee, therefore, would like to stress
the paramount importance of taking the Parliament into confidence
and for enacting a law on DTH services so as to allay the
apprehensions concerning the sensitive issues of morality, security
and monopoly.
C. Communications Convergence Bill
(Recommendation Para No. 47)
17. The Committee found it significant to note that certain
provisions in the guidelines will take effect only on the enactment of
the proposed Communication Convergence Bill. Therefore, the
Committee felt that before allowing DTH telecast, the Government
should have not only framed the requisite law as admitted by the
Secretary, I&B during evidence but also waited till the enactment of
the Communication Convergence Bill (on which the Committee has
submitted its Report on 20 November, 2002 in Lok Sabha and on
21 November, 2002 in Rajya Sabha).
18. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has furnished the
following reply:
“It is accepted that there is a need for a comprehensive broadcast
law in the country, to address all issues relating to broadcasting.
The DTH guidelines contain provisions that future regulatory laws
on broadcasting would be applicable to the licensee, as and when
they come into force. DTH is only a mode of broadcasting, in
which the broadcaster collects all the channels at one platform
and then uplinks them for reception directly by the authorized
subscriber. The GoM considered the advantages of DTH not only
in distribution of television channels but also for its role in
convergence and providing various IT enabled services”.

9
19. The Ministry’s reply is not convincing to the Committee.
Though the Ministry had accepted the need for a comprehensive
broadcast law in the country, yet they have not clearly outlined the
steps taken by them to introduce such a law to regulate DTH services
in the country. Further, the Ministry has not stated in their reply
about the initiatives taken by them to get the Communication
Convergence Bill passed, even though this Committee had submitted
its report on the said Bill in 2002 itself. The Committee, therefore,
would like to impress upon the Government the urgency of framing
a requisite law to regulate the DTH services without further loss of
time to address the issues relating to broadcasting. The Committee
desire to be informed about the steps taken in this regard.
D. Classification of Penalties
(Recommendation Para No. 48)
20. The Committee noted with concern that the terms and
conditions provided under various Articles which were of minor nature
and violation thereof empowered the Government to take severe action,
viz., cancellation, revocation, suspension of a licence or taking over
service etc. The Committee apprehended that in the absence of detailed
regulations the Licensor can impose arbitrarily any penalty even for
minor omissions. Therefore, the Committee recommended that
irregularities should be classified under heads major and minor with
appropriate legal consequences.
21. The Ministry in response has submitted the following reply:
“The terms and conditions contained in Schedule to From B form
part of the licence agreement and the parties to the Agreement
would be bound by these. Breach of the terms and conditions is
thus a breach of contract, which has to be settled in terms of the
provisions of the Agreement. It would be difficult to classify the
violations as major or minor but the principles of natural justice
and fairness would apply, while deciding the penalty”.
22. The Committee are unable to accept the reasons forwarded
by the Government that it is difficult to classify the violations as
major or minor. In the absence of clear-cut classification of the
violations as major or minor, there is always a possibility that the
minor violation may be construed as a major one an vice versa and

10
arbitrary action could be taken against the licensee. This might entail
a protracted legal battle between two parties unnecessarily. Hence,
for the dispensation of justice in fairness, the Committee reiterate
that the Government must classify the irregularities as minor and
major and also classify the nature of violation, viz., security,
economic/financial or content violation and frame appropriate legal
consequences without further delay. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the steps taken by the Government in this regard.
E. Areas of Monitoring
(Recommendation Para no. 51)
23. The Committee noted that the Government was empowered
under the Cable Television Networks Act to take prompt corrective
measures in the interest to security, sovereignty and integrity of India,
public order, decency, morality through designated District Magistrate/
SDM/Commissioner of Police as the authorized officers for taking
action against the erring cable operators. The Committee felt that the
DTH telecast would be more powerful and sensitive compared to Cable
TV and this might need stronger measures to be taken, but the
Government instead of extending the areas of monitoring had restricted
it only to the issue of security, morality and vertical monopoly.
Therefore, the Government owned an explanation in that regard.
24. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has responded as
follows:
“The areas of monitoring include issues of security, morality and
vertical monopoly. The terms and conditions of licence broadly
encompass the following areas of activities of the licensee viz.,
(i) adherence to the programme and advertisement codes, as
laid down by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
from time to time; (Article 5)
(ii) non-carriage of any channels prohibited by the Ministry of
I&B and ensuring that its facilities are not used for
transmission of any objectionable or obscene content,
messages or communication inconsistent with the laws of
India. Save with the approval of the licensor, the licensee is
prohibited from assigning or transferring, either directly or
indirectly, its right in any manner whatsoever under the

11
Agreement to any other party or enter into any agreement
for sub-licence and/or partnership relating to any subject
matter of the licence to any third party either in whole or
in part; (Article 6)
(iii) compliance with the specifications of the open architecture
(non-proprietary) set top box as laid down by the
Government from time to time and provision of access to
various content providers/channels on a non-discriminatory
basis. All content provided by the DTH platform to the
subscribers, irrespective of its source, shall pass through the
encryption and conditional access system, located within the
Earth station, situated on the Indian soil; (Article 7)
(iv) Adherence to any guidelines/regulations which may be laid
down by the Licenser in the interests of consumer such as
pricing of bouquet(s) or tier(s) of channels, etc. and carriage
of channels of Prasar Bharati on the most favourable
financial terms offered to any other channel; (Article 7)
(v) Provision of access to the licensing authority or its duly
authorized representative all its facilities including
equipment, record systems etc. and the requirement of the
Licensee to furnish periodical information concerning
channels or contents being transmitted or provided under
the services, technical parameters, etc. in the format as may
be prescribed for the purpose; (Article 8); and
(vi) Prohibition of DTH facility to be used for other modes of
communication, including voice, fax, data, communication,
internet, etc. unless specific licence for these value-added
services has been obtained from the competent authority;
(Article 10)
Violation of any of these, as well as other terms and conditions,
would amount to breach of the terms of licence and
notwithstanding any other recourse under the terms and conditions
of the Licence or any other law, would invite action in terms of
the different provisions such as Article 4.2, Article 15 etc., which
may include revocation of licence, or imposition of a penalty upto
Rs. 50 crore by the Licensor on the Licensee”.

12
25. The Committee perceive that under Cable TV Network Act,
the authorized officers have been empowered to take corrective
measures against the erring Cable TV Operators for acts which are
prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India, public order,
decency, morality etc. But such provisions are conspicuous by their
absence in the guidelines framed by the Government to regulate
DTH services. On the contrary, the Government has incorporated a
penalty clause in the guidelines to be imposed on the licensee for
violation of terms and conditions of the licence. The Committee feel
that stringent penalty clause alone will not be deterrent enough to
curb the undesirable and nefarious activities, if any, carried out by
the licensee. As such, a suitable regulatory mechanism should be
put in place to protect the interests of sovereignty and integrity of
India, public order, decency etc. The Committee may be kept
informed of the initiatives taken in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee notes that under the draft licence agreement which
has been vetted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, it has been provided
that the licensee is required to maintain recording of the programmes
and advertisements for a period of 90 days so that it could be examined
subsequently. The Committee observes that thus only after the
happening of an incident or a telecast it would be possible to take
any action against the licensee. It is also a matter of serious concern
that the Ministry which would take necessary action against the licensee
for violations of the licence agreement does not have a regular
monitoring facility as such and has been maintaining an old facility
for monitoring foreign broadcasting. The Committee does not share
the optimism of Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting that with the current monitoring mechanism they
would be able to effectively monitor DTH telecast in the country. The
Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to modernise and update
their monitoring mechanism commensurate with the technological
sophistication of DTH.
Action Taken
One of the advantages of DTH would be that since there would
be a limited number of service providers, as is the experience
worldwide, the service would lend itself to better monitoring.
Government has initiated efforts for modernisation & upgradation of
the Central Monitoring Service at Aya Nagar.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of Prasar Bharati in exploring
the possibilities to employ KU-Band DTH technology to provide
broadcasting in remote and hitherto uncovered areas. During a recent
13

14
tour to the North-East, the Committee observed that the current means
of broadcasting were neither providing quality reception nor were
available in shadow areas. The Committee notes that as per Prasar
Bharati’s own estimate, an investment of Rs. 700 crore was required to
set up a viable DTH platform, therefore, the Committee feels that a
provision of Rs. 10 crore in the 10th Plan for carrying out experimental
studies on DTH will be illusory. The Committee recommends that the
Government should provide all out support to Prasar Bharati in its
efforts to provide DTH Services in remote areas of the country.
Action Taken
With the objective of making new technologies available to the
people in remote areas and improving the quality of transmission,
Doordarshan has made a pilot proposal for setting up 1000 Cable
Head-Ends, where each Head-end proposes to cover a population of
100 households, for distributing 20 channels in free-to-air mode. The
proposal envisages setting up of a KU-Band up-linking facility & hiring
of transponders for transmission of al channels of Doordarshan in
free-to-air mode as well as setting up the distribution infrastructure
for receiving the signals of Doordarshan. The proposed capital cost of
this pilot project is Rs. 93.00 crores. The scheme would be extended to
a larger target group, based on the success/efficacy of the pilot scheme.
During the 10th Five Year Plan, a provision of Rs. 500 crores has been
made by DD for KU Band transmission project. Further, for expanding
Doordarshan coverage in the North-Eastern Region, a Special Package
for the NE region has been approved with an estimated cost of
Rs. 334.28 crores for, inter-alia, upgradation of transmitters, augmentation
of outdoor broadcasting and post production facilities in N-E region,
DSNG system for NE and setting up of cable headends in NE region.
After implementation of this package, Doordarshan’s coverage in the
NE region is expected to go up to 94.8% by population and the quality
of signals in the coverage zone will improve significantly.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol II)
Dated 21.02.2003]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Committee share the apprehensions of the Government on
security and morality related issues emanating from DTH telecast. The
country still remains under constant threat from cross border terrorism,
hostile foreign intelligence agencies and there is a possibility to remotely
control things so as to cause a chain reaction leading to undesignable
activities against national interest.
Action Taken
Appreciating the concerns on security and morality , provisions have
been kept in the Guidelines for checking activities that may be against
national interest or security and integrity of the country. The security
related concerns arising out of the decision to introduce DTH service
in India are sought to be safeguarded through provisions detailed
hereunder:
Eligibility Criteria [Clause (i) of the guidelines read with Article 1
of the terms and conditions]
(i) The Applicant-Company should be an Indian Company
registered under Indian Companies Act, 1956.
(ii) The total foreign equity holding including FDI/NRI/OCB/
FII in the applicant company should not exceed 49%.
(iii) Within the foreign equity, the FDI component should not
exceed 20%. The quantum represented by that proportion
of the paid up equity share capital to the total issued equity
capital of the Indian promoter Company, held or controlled
by the foreign investors through FDI/NRI/OCB investments,
shall form part of the above said FDI limit of 20%.
(iv) The Applicant Company must have Indian Management
Control with majority representatives on the Board as well
as the Chief Executive of the company being resident Indian.
15

16
Security Safeguards include
(v) the application will be subjected to security clearance in
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and for
clearance of satellite use with the Department of Space
(Satellite Communications Programmes Office).
(vi) The Licensee shall not carry any channels prohibited by the
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
(vii) The use of the facility of service for anti-national activities
would be construed as an offence punishable under the
India Penal Code as well as other relevant laws that may
be applicable and will entail immediate termination of the
Licence.
(viii) The Licensor reserves the right to prohibit the transmission
or reception of programmes in the interest of national
security or in the event of emergency/war of similar type
of situation. Notwithstanding any agreement between the
Licensee and the content providers, the Licensee shall stop
forthwith, transmission of TV channels or any content, as
and when directed to do so by the Licensor or any other
designated lawful authority.
(ix) Except with prior approval of the Licensor, the Licensee
shall not directly of indirectly assign or transfer its right in
any manner whatsoever under the agreement to any other
party or enter into any agreement for sub-licence and/or
partnership relating to any subject matter of the Licence to
any third party either in whole or in part. Any violation of
the terms shall be construed as breach of the Licence
Agreement and the Licence shall be terminated immediately .
(x) The Licensee will, if required by the Licensor or its
authorized representative, provide necessary facilities for
continuous monitoring for any particular aspect of the
Licensee’s activities and operations.
(xi) The Licensor reserves the right to take over the entire
services and networks of the Licensee or revoke/cancel/
suspend the License in the interest of national security or
in the event of an emergency/war or low intensity conflict
or similar type of situations. Further, the Licensor reserves

17
the right to direct the Licensee to close down the service if
implications of security so requires. Any specific order or
direction from the Government issued in this regard shall
be strictly complied with by the Licensee.
(xii) The Licensee shall not use any equipment which are
identified as unlawful and/or render network security
vulnerable.
(xiii) All foreign personnel likely to be deployed by way of
appointment, contract, consultancy etc. by the Licensee for
installation, maintenance and operation of the Licensee’s
services shall be required to obtain security clearance from
the Government of India prior to their deployment.
(xiv) The Licensee shall ensure adherence to the programme and
advertisement codes as laid down by the Ministry of I&B
from time to time.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Recommendation (Para No. 52)
The Committee notes that while recommending DTH in the country,
the Group of Ministers considered the benefits, which DTH could
provide to the population all over the country. However, the Committee
notes that DTH would remain beyond the reach of the common people
on account of expensive subscription rates, which have been left to
the market forces and to the whims of the service providers. The
Committee feels that Art. 7.7 of the guidelines empowered the licensor
to lay down guidelines/regulation in the interest of the consumer such
as pricing of bouquet(s) or tier(s) of channels etc. but the Government
seems to have no materials to decide as there is no reliable estimate
about the revenues and the cost involved to the DTH operator as well
as the number of prospective subscribers. So the Government has
completely left this service to the discretion of a service provider and
market forces. The Committee observes that the private service provider
being driven by profit motive only will not be under any obligation/
compulsion to expand their infrastructure expeditiously to less profitable
areas. They will operate in those areas only where they can maximise
their profits. The Committee, therefore, feels DTH would be available
only to niche segment of viewers having higher disposable income

18
and this segment as per the submission of the Ministry would constitute
only one tenth of the cable TV subscribers. The Committee is of the
view that the aim of any new media technology should be an
egalitarian diffusion of information and entertainment. The Committee,
therefore, calls upon the Government to ensure that the benefits of
DTH telecast are available all over the country especially in rural and
hilly areas and also that the service remains within the reach of the
common man.
Action Taken
Worldwide experience has been that DTH system generally targets
niche audience, at least in its initial stages of growth. The system
usually operates in Ku band transmission and has the potential for
being used for the spread of Information Technology. It is expected
that in the initial stages persons having higher levels of disposable
income will go for DTH in preference to cable television. With falling
prices, DTH may gain wider acceptance. In line with the experience of
other countries, to exploit the full potential of DTH services, it is
expected that the DTH operators will subsidise the cost of the hardware
to the consumers, in order to increase viewership and accessibility.
In order to use the DTH mode for egalitarian diffusion of
information and entertainment, a sum of Rs. 500 crore has been
earmarked by Prasar Bharati in the 10th plan for coverage of uncovered
areas & sparsely populated areas through satellite distribution in Ku
band. To increase the coverage of Doordarshan in the North-eastern
States, including Sikkim, a pilot project was sanctioned in the Annual
Plan 2002-03, for setting up cable headend equipment, for down linking
the satellite signals of Doordarshan and their distribution to individual
households in 160 villages. The project is under implementation, and
after evaluation, the scheme will be extended to other areas having
thick clusters of population.
For sparsely populated uncovered areas, Doordarshan proposes to
take up, on experimental basis, the transmission of its channels in Ku
band. All the channels of Doordarshan so transmitted will be available
to the viewers on free-to-air basis. It will be a less expensive option
for increasing Doordarshan’s reach in sparsely populated uncovered
areas. The platform proposed to be set up by DDn will not only cater
to the cultural needs of a multi-lingual society, but could also be used
by institutions like the Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) for its free-to-air Distance Learning Programme.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
The Committee is deeply concerned to note that the Government
allowed telecast of Direct to Home services all of a sudden without
any indepth study though DTH is considered to be a very powerful
media. Further, it was allowed for private telecasters much before
formulating a regulatory framework even though on an earlier occasion
Government had not allowed it, for want of comprehensive regulatory
framework. Propriety demanded providing opportunity to Parliament
to discuss such an important issue. Even the decision to allow DTH
was announced outside the Parliament. The Committee deprecates the
unseemly and unnecessary hurry shown in the matter without getting
any study done about the viewership, cost, subscription rates etc.,
particularly when there was only one contender for the licence. Even
though the matter was under consideration for three years, no spade
work worth the name was done. The Committee further notes that the
detailed guidelines as formulated by the Government for DTH telecast,
incorporate stringent provisions against violation of any terms and
conditions of the licence, which include monetary penalties and even
cancellation of license. The guidelines also provide for taking over of
the entire network of DTH service in case of emergency and national
security. The Committee is at loss to understand how Government can
take over a service when no law or procedure has been laid down for
the same. The guidelines are thus ambiguous and require to be made
enforceable through adequate legal framework, which is absent now.
The Committee feels that when operations of DTH telecast start, there
will be unrestricted availability of TV channels in the country. However,
it is difficult to visualise at this stage what long term “benefits” or
impact it will accrue to or have on the people.
Action Taken
The Government took the decision to start DTH service in the
country in November 2000 after the Group of Ministers (GoM) had
19

20
deliberated and considered all the issues connected thereto. Detailed
guidelines for starting DTH service were issued in March 2001 after
inter-Ministerial consultations. Two applications have been received,
seeking permission to start DTH service, and are under active
consideration.
In 1996, when some foreign satellite broadcasters started planning
for introduction of DTH service in KU band in India, it was felt that
reception and distribution of the signals in KU band should be
restricted. The Committee of Secretaries had noted the adverse impact
of foreign TV programmes. The Ministry if I&B had initiated the
process of formulating a comprehensive law on broadcasting with a
view to effectively regulate foreign satellite channels. However, this
would have taken time and there was the possibility of foreign channels
starting DTH services. Apart from resulting in a loss of revenue, these
channels would not have been subject to any regulatory mechanism,
particularly relating to the content of the programmes. In view of the
experience with the haphazard and unregulated growth of cable
networks all over the country, it was felt necessary to take measures
to prevent a similar situation developing in DTH services. Though the
proposed Broadcasting Law was also covering the DTH services, there
was a felt need in the interim period, before the regulation came into
force, of barring entry in the KU band. Hence operation in KU band
was banned in 1997.
The matter was discussed by the GoM in March, 2000 when it
was observed that with changes in the information technology and in
the broadcasting and communication scenario, the reasons for which
DTH had not been allowed in 1997, were no longer relevant. Moreover,
DTH as a superior technology offered an alternative for reception and
distribution of television of programmes, both to the programme
providers as well as to the consumers. The GoM considered the issues
in its meetings between March and October, 2000 and concluded that
DTH should be permitted in India, with suitable safeguards. It also
weighed the advantages of DTH technology in convergence and in
providing various IT enabled services. The GoM, therefore, unanimously
recommended that DTH television services should be permitted in
India, so as to take advantage of the latest technology, while ensuring
that the concerns relating to national security , morality and monopoly
were duly taken care of by providing conditions.
It has been worldwide documented experience that DTH system
generally targets niche audiences and encourages spread of information

21
technology. It is expected that in the initial stages, persons with higher
disposable income will opt for DTH and only when the prices fall
with demand, will DTH have widespread acceptance. It is also expected
that DTH operators will subsidise the cost of the hardware to increase
viewership and accessibility.
As regards enforceability of the provisions of the guidelines,
especially relating to penalties and of taking over of the service, these
provisions are contained under Articles 6, 8, 9, 15 etc. of the Schedule
to Form B i.e. the License Agreement to be signed between the Licensor
(Government of India) and Licensee.
DTH has the advantage of offering a wide choice to the viewers,
along with quality and convenience. Specific advantages of DTH
include:
• Need for a small receive dish antenna, which is convenient
to install and maintain.
• Easier to regulate as compared to cable services.
• More choice to consumers.
• Better quality of reception, as it is based on digital
technology.
• Ideally suited for sparsely populated areas (rural areas and
small towns) since it is not dependent on terrestrial
infrastructure.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para Nos. 8 to 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee is not able to accept the Government’s contention
that the matter was not brought before Parliament/Parliamentary
Committee as the Parliament was not in session when decision was
taken to allow DTH. There were sessions of Parliament between the
periods of submitting report by GoM and its acceptance by the Cabinet.
The Committee is of the opinion that if the Government was really

22
interested in having the opinion of Parliament on the vital issue, it
could have sought the views at least of this Committee which consists
of representatives of different section of Parliament. The Committee
feels that the Government could have even introduced a bill on DTH
in either House, as the issue is very sensitive and agitating. The
Committee feels that validity period of ten years for Licence is an
unusually long period. The Committee also does not appreciate
regulation of such a highly sensitive and powerful media merely
through administrative orders and not by legislation. Such ambiguities
and lacunae could be overcome easily if Government had decided to
place the matter before Parliament, specially as there was no emergency
and significantly, no licence has been issued till date and there has
been only one applicant so far. The Committee urges the Government
to take Parliament into confidence over such on important matter and
consider bringing about a comprehensive legislation covering all aspects
of DTH.
Action Taken
All issues connected with opening up of KU band and for
introduction of DTH broadcasting were examined by a Group of
Ministers (GoM) constituted on 31/1/2000.
The GoM considered the issues in its entirety at meetings held
between March and October, 2000 and concluded that DTH should be
permitted in India with suitable safeguards to take care of concerns
relating to security, morality and vertical monopoly in distribution and
broadcasting of television services. GoM also considered the advantages
of DTH technology, not only in distribution of television channels but
also for its role in convergence and providing various IT enabled
services. DTH services were allowed, subject to terms and conditions
incorporated in the Guidelines issued on 15/3/2001.
DTH is a mode of broadcasting in which the broadcaster collects
all the channels to be carried on the DTH platform and uplinks them
for reception directly by the authorized subscriber. The COS, in
December 1996, had also recommended that there was an unequivocal
need to restrict the unregulated entry/growth of DTH services. In
case there were no restrictions on the reception of signals in the KU
Band, foreign companies could have started DTH services and
subsequently claim exemption/indemnity from the related provisions
of the Broadcasting Law on the grounds that no restrictions could be
placed retrospectively. The COS advised that the proposed Broadcasting

23
Law be approved at the earliest. The regulatory framework for the
entire broadcasting sector was sought to be established under the
Broadcasting Bill, 1997, which was introduced in Parliament in May
1997. The Bill, inter-alia, provided for licensing and regulating of DTH
service and was referred to the Select Committee of Parliament for
examination. The Select Committee held several meetings, but before
it could finalize its recommendations the Parliament was dissolved.
The Broadcasting Bill 1997 lapsed. The provisions of 1997 Bill were re-
examined in light of the technological developments and the
Broadcasting Regulatory Authority Bill, 2000 was drafted and circulated
to concerned Ministries.
The Group of Telecom and IT Convergence, at its meeting on 14th
February, 2000, decided that Ministry of Law will consider the
possibility of drafting a comprehensive statute covering both carriage
and content of transmitted information and thereby integrate the
relevant laws. The Sub-Group of the main Group proposed a draft
Communication Convergence Bill, which was considered by the Group
and finally approved by the Cabinet. The Communication Convergence
Bill 2001 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 31st August 2001 and was
referred to the Standing Committee on IT for examination and
recommendation. The Committee has submitted its Report to Parliament
on 20/11/2002.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para Nos. 14 to 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee finds it is significant to note that certain provisions
in the guidelines will take effect only on the enactment of the proposed
Communication Convergence Bill. Therefore, the Committee feels that
before allowing DTH telecast, the Government should have not only
framed the requisite law as admitted by the Secretary , I&B during
evidence but also waited till the enactment of the Communication
Convergence Bill (on which the Committee has submitted its Report
on 20 November, 2002 in Lok Sabha and on 21 November, 2002 in
Rajya Sabha)

24
Action Taken
It is accepted that there is a need for a comprehensive broadcast
law in the country, to address all issues relating to broadcasting. The
DTH guidelines contain provisions that future regulatory laws on
broadcasting would be applicable to the licensee, as and when they
come into force. DTH is only a mode of broadcasting, in which the
broadcaster collects all the channels at one platform and then uplinks
them for reception directly by the authorized subscriber. The GoM
considered the advantages of DTH not only in distribution of television
channels but also for its role in convergence and providing various IT
enabled services.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
The Committee notes with concern that the terms and conditions
provided under various Articles which are of minor nature and
violation thereof empowers the Government to take severe action, viz.,
concellation, revocation, suspension of a licence or taking over service
etc. The Committee apprehends that in the absence of detailed
regulations the Licensor can impose arbitrarily any penalty even for
minor omissions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
irregularities should be classified under heads major and minor with
appropriate legal consequences.
Action Taken
The Terms and Conditions contained in Schedule to From B form
part of the licence agreement and the parties to the Agreement would
be bound by these. Breach of the terms and conditions is thus a breach
of contract, which has to be settled in terms of the provisions of the
Agreement. It would be difficult to classify the violations as major or
minor but the principles of natural justice and fairness would apply,
while deciding the penalty.
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Comments of the Committee
Please refer Para No. 22 of Chapter 2 of the Report.

25
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
The Committee notes that the Government is empowered under
the Cable Television Networks Act to take prompt corrective measures
in the interest of security, sovereignty and integrity of India, public
order, decency, morality through designated District Magistrate/SDM/
Commissioner of Police as the authorised officers for taking action
against the erring cable operators. The Committee feels that the DTH
telecast will be more powerful and sensitive compared to Cable TV
and this may need stronger measures to be taken, but the Government
instead of extending the areas of monitoring has restricted it only to
the issue of security, morality and vertical monopoly. Therefore, the
Government owes an explanation in this regard.
Action Taken
The areas of monitoring include issues of security, morality and
vertical monopoly. The terms and conditions of licence broadly
encompass the following areas of activities of the licensee viz.,
(i) adherence to the programme and advertisement codes, as
laid down by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
from time-to-time; (Article 5)
(ii) non-carriage of any channels prohibited by the Ministry of
I&B and ensuring that its facilities are not used for
transmission of any objectionable or obscene content,
messages or communication inconsistent with the laws of
India. Save with the approval of the licensor, the licensee is
prohibited from assigning or transferring, either directly or
indirectly, its right in any manner whatsoever under the
Agreement to any other party or enter into any agreement
for sub-licence and/or partnership relating to any subject
matter of the licence to any third party either in whole or
in part; (Article 6)
(iii) compliance with the specifications of the open architecture
(non-proprietary) set top box as laid down by the
Government from time-to-time and provision of access to
various content providers/channels on a non-discriminatory
basis. All content provided by the DTH platform to the
subscribers, irrespective of its source, shall pass through the
encryption and conditional access system, located within the
Earth station, situated on the Indian soil. (Article 7)

26
(iv) Adherence to any guidelines/regulations which may be laid
down by the Licensor in the interests of consumer such as
pricing of bouquet(s) or tier(s) of channels, etc. and carriage
of channels of Prasar Bharati on the most favourable
financial terms offered to any other channel; (Article 7)
(v) provision of access to the licensing authority or its duly
authorized representative all its facilities including
equipment, record systems etc. and the requirement of the
Licensee to furnish periodical information concerning
channels or contents being transmitted or provided under
the services, technical parameters, etc. in the format as may
be prescribed for the purpose; (Article 8); and
(vi) Prohibition of DTH facility to be used for other modes of
communication, including voice, fax, data, communication,
internet, etc. unless specific licence for these value-added
services has been obtained from the competent authority;
(Article 10)
Violation of any of these, as well as other terms and conditions,
would amount to breach of the terms of licence and notwithstanding
any other recourse under the terms and conditions of the Licence or
any other law, would invite action in terms of the different provisions
such as Article 4.2, Article 15 etc., which may include revocation of
licence, or imposition of a penalty upto Rs. 50 crore by the Licensor
on the Licensee
[Ref: Ministry of I&B’s, O.M. No. 16/6/2000-BP&L (V ol. II)
Dated 21.02.2003]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
27

APPPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 25 November, 2004 from 1100
hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room No. ‘G-074, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Sohan Potai
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
12. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
14. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
28

29
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with certain
amendments/modifications:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Fortieth Report on “Direct to Home (DTH)” relating
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above mentioned Reports to the House.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FORTIETH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which
have been  accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 50, 53
Total: 2
Percentage: 22.22%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 49, 52
Total: 2
Percentage: 22.22%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 45, 46, 47, 48 & 51
Total: 5
Percentage: 55.56%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim in nature:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total Nil
Percentage: Nil
30