14
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of
the  Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)
FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of
the  Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………


C.I.T. No. 136
Price : Rs. 18.00
© 2004 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations  which  have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations  which  the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 30
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government  have  not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 32
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 36
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth  sitting  of  the  Standing
Committee  on  Information  Technology  (2004-05)
held on 20.01.2005 .................................................................. 37
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations  contained  in  the
Fourth  Report  (Fourteenth  Lok  Sabha)  of  the
Committee ................................................................................. 39

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2004-2005)’ relating to the Ministry
of Information and Technology.
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.08.2004
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.8.2004. The Ministry furnished Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report on
23.12.2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.01.2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands
for Grants (2004-05)” relating to the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting.
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.08.2004
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24.08.2004. It contained
16 recommendations.
3. Action taken notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3-6, 8-11, 13, 15-16
Total: 12
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Recommendation No. 14
Total: 1
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Recommendation Nos. 2, 7, 12
Total: 3
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Recommendation No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case,  for any reason it is not possible for the
Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to it urgently and in no case later than
six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations.
All India Radio
Recommendation (No. 2)
6.  The Committee had noted with serious concern that the under
utilisation of funds during 2003-2004 had been in respect of continuing
schemes including J&K Special Package and Upgradation/expansion
schemes, primarily, due to non-procurement of equipments, problem
in tendering, early closure of roads in Kargil and non-operational and
maintenance staff as a result of which the AIR could meet a physical
target of 28 Nos. against the desired target of 36 Nos. The Committee
felt that due to the non-execution of projects envisaged during
2003-2004, the benefits intended to be derived from the projects could
not reach the people especially with reference to projects in Jammu &
Kashmir and North-Eastern Region.
The Committee, therefore, opined that for prudent and realistic
utilization of budgetary allocations, the Ministry must go in for correct
tendering, timely placement of orders and take prudent decisions apart
from primarily redeploying existing staff wherever possible recruiting
operational & maintenance staff only if unavoidable to put into use
the existing assets. The Committee also expressed trust that AIR would
put in all efforts to utilise the higher budgetary allocations provided
for in 2004-2005 judiciously and timely for execution of schemes
envisaged by the Ministry. The Committee desired to be apprised of
the matter in this regard.

3
7. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“While taking note of the observation of the Committee, it may be
mentioned that during 2003-04, shortfall of physical targets under
J&K Special package was in respect of only one project namely
the 200 KW MW project at Kargil which would also be achieved
during the current financial year. However, technically ready
projects of J&K package are awaiting commissioning as approval
of the competent authority for continuation of posts is awaited. As
regards staff redeployment, Prasar Bharati has stated that this
exercise has already been carried out and even after redeployment
it is not possible to commission many stations. Moreover there is
a ban on recruitment of staff. As a special case, permission for
recruitment has been sought to fill up the vacancies in respect of
J&K and North-East projects. The issue of filling up vacancies in
relaxation of the ban on direct recruitment was discussed in the
recently held J&K Empowered Committee Meeting. Decision of
the competent authority is likely to be conveyed to All India Radio
and Doordarshan shortly.
As regards utilisation of budgetary allocations and fulfillment
of targets for the year 2004-05, all efforts are being made and
trend of expenditure and execution of schemes is being closely
monitored.”
8. The Committee take a serious note of the fact that technically
ready projects especially in J&K package are awaiting commissioning
as approval of the competent authority for continuation of posts for
operational and maintenance staff is awaited. The inordinate delay
in commissioning of projects, not only frustrates the purpose for
which these projects in J&K have been envisaged but also tantamount
to blocking of funds when the same could have been used on some
other schemes. The Committee reiterate that Prasar Bharati should
take up the matter of filling up vacancies/continuation of posts at
highest level, so that the commissioning of technically ready projects
could be completed and benefits intended to be derived from the
projects could reach the people of J&K including Kargil. The
Committee would like to be apprised continuously of the progress
by the Ministry in this regard.
J&K Special Plan
Recommendation (No. 5)
9. The Committee find that under J&K Special Plan, out of
budgetary allocation of Rs. 8.40 crores during 2003-04 in the Capital

4
Section, actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 5.05 crores in respect of
Doordarshan. For AIR, the amount allocated towards Capital and
Revenue Section was Rs. 10.50 crore and actual expenditure incurred
was Rs. 4.69 crore.
The Committee find that five projects with 1 KW MW Tr. are
technically ready at Diskit, Drass, Nyoma, Padum and Tiesuru but
they could not be commissioned for want of operational and
maintenance staff as the Government’s approval for continuance of
sanctioned posts beyond February, 2004 is awaited. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should take immediate steps to fill up the
vacancies for commissioning the projects which are technically ready
as they are strategically important for the country. The feasibility of
redeployment of staff should be initially explored. The Committee hope
that the funds to the tune of Rs. 22.65 crores towards Capital and
Revenue Section for 2004-2005 for AIR and Doordarshan will be
judiciously utilised within the period so as to ensure the benefits reach
the people of the region. The Committee may be kept informed about
the outcome of the steps taken in this regard.
10. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“The present position regarding the implementation of J&K Special
plan is given below:
• 12 projects were included in the Special Package approved
by the government for improvement of radio coverage in
Jammu & Kashmir.
• Six projects have already been commissioned at Kathua—
10 KW FM Tr., Srinagar—300 KW MW Tr., Kupwara—20
KW MW Tr., Naushera—20 KW MW Tr., Rajouri—10 KW
MW Tr. and khalsi-1 KW MW Tr.
• Five projects with 1 KW MW Tr. are technically ready at
Diskit, Drass, Nyoma, Padum and Tiesuru. The remaining
project namely, the 200 KW MW Tr. Project at Kargil, is in
progress and would be completed in the current financial
year 2004-05.
•T echnically ready projects would be commissioned on receipt
of approval from the competent authority for continuance
of posts. The matter regarding continuance of posts was

5
taken up in the Empowered committee meeting held recently
and the decision of the Government is likely to be conveyed
to All India Radio shortly. Prasar Bharati has stated that
the exercise of redeployment has already been done to the
extent possible and further re-deployment is not feasible.
The six projects already commissioned were operationalised
by diversion and sending staff on tour from nearby station.
The Committee has stressed that funds for J&K Plan allocated for
2004-2005 be judiciously utilized within the period. For J&K Plan, an
amount of Rs. 7.5 crores under capital has been provided for in Annual
Plan 2004-05. So far (till August, 2004) expenditure of Rs. 2.30 crores
has been incurred. In the Revised Estimates, an amount of Rs. 9.10
crores is being projected. Doordarshan is making every possible effort
to fully utilise allocated funds for J&K Special Plan, and the Planning
Commission has promised adequate support.”
11. The Committee reiterate that the Ministry should take steps
to give approval for continuance of posts so that technically ready
projects are commissioned at the earliest.
North-East Special Package
Recommendation (No. 6)
The Committee noted that approval for North Eastern Special
Package Phase II was to be accorded by the Government. Delay in
approval of the Scheme by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
was resulted in under utilization of funds earmarked for this purpose.
The Committee noted that one of the main thrust areas in 10th Plan
was special package for NE States and Island territories. If the projects
were not approved in time for their speedy implementation, it would
adversely affect the projects of North Eastern Region and hamper their
balanced growth. The Committee, therefore, had desired that the
Ministry should take up the matter with the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) for getting its approval without further delay so that
the coverage of Doordarshan and AIR would be maximized in North
Eastern Region and funds of Rs. 96.63 crores allocated for the year
2004-2005 might not get underutilized. The Committee had expressed
hope that utmost care would be taken by the Ministry for utilisation
of funds meant for the year 2004-2005 for implementation of the various
proposed schemes for the benefits of the NE Region.

6
13. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“All efforts are being made to get the approval of the competent
authority for Phase-II of North-East Special Plan. Preliminary work
regarding preparation of specifications, design work etc. have been
carried out to ensure that the purchase process can be initiated
immediately after the schemes of the package are sanctioned. Site
surveys have been conducted and some sites have been tentatively
finalized. EFC meeting to consider NE special package was held
on 30.07.2004. Minutes of the meeting have been circulated by the
Ministry. The matter is being processed for obtaining approval of
the Cabinet shortly. Further action for implementation of schemes
included in NE package (Phase-II) can be taken, only after the
approval of Cabinet is received”.
14. The Committee feel that the matter should be taken up
urgently for cabinet approval.
Vacancies in Prasar Bharati Board
Recommendation (No. 7)
15. The Committee noted that at present there were 4 vacancies
on Prasar Bharati Board. The Committee in its earlier Reports on
Demands for Grants 2002-03 and 2003-04 had recommended to fill up
the vacancies in Prasar Bharati. The Committee had desired that the
Ministry should take concerted steps for filling up the vacancies in
the Prasar Bharati Board including those of representatives of the
employees without further delay.
16. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“Presently Four positions in the Prasar Bharati Board are lying
vacant. Out of these, Ministry has already requested for the
recommendations of the Selection Committee headed by the Vice
President of India in respect of two Part-time Members, reply for
which is yet to be received. Besides, there are two vacancies
pertaining to the representatives of the employees. Since all the
employees of erstwhile AIR & DD continue to be Government
Servants, the election of the representatives cannot be held, till
their services are transferred to Prasar Bharati, in accordance with
the provisions of Prasar Bharati Act.”

7
17. The Committee take serious note of the fact that inspite of
earlier repeated recommendations of the Committee to fill up these
vacancies expeditiously, still there are four vacancies on Prasar Bharati
Board. The Committee are not inclined to accept the routine
explanation of the Ministry and reiterate that Ministry should take
all possible concrete measures to fill up the vacancies on Prasar
Bharati Board and also finalise the terms and conditions of the
services of the Prasar Bharati employees in a time bound manner so
that two vacancies pertaining to the representative of employees could
atleast be filled up expeditiously.
Shortage of staff in Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (No. 8)
18. The Committee were deeply concerned to note that there was
a projected shortage of staff in All India Radio and Doordarshan in
various categories and proposal for filling up the vacancies had been
pending with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee felt that in
respect of AIR and Doordarshan, redeployment of staff had not been
carried out to the maximum possible extent and hence, there were still
vacancies at various levels. The Committee also noted that many
projects which were technically ready, but could not be commissioned
for want of technical and maintenance staff. The Committee had
observed that due to shortage of staff, the Prasar Bharati could not
produce and telecast qualitative programmes which in turn has
adversely affected the revenue earning capacity of Prasar Bharati. The
Committee also noted that there had been a migration of staff from
Prasar Bharati to Private Channel/FM due to overloading of work on
the available personnel, better pay packet and environment.
In the light of above observations, the Committee had felt that the
recommendations of the Ministry of Finance to surrender existing
vacancies, should be accepted. This could facilitate, Prasar Bharati to
hire suitably qualified people who may be absolutely necessary.
19. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“Prasar Bharati has informed that in order to ensure the optimum
utilization of infrastructure and manpower, the exercise of
redeployment of staff has already been carried out to the maximum
extent possible and further redeployment is not feasible. Even after

8
redeployment many stations are facing shortage of staff due to
ban on recruitment. The matter regarding grant of permission as
a special case for recruitment to fill up the vacancies in respect of
J&K and North-East projects is being examined in the Ministry.
The meeting of the Empowered Committee on J&K, has already
been held and the decision of the competent authority on filling
up vacancies would be conveyed to Prasar Bharati shortly”.
20. The Committee note that even after the redeployment and
further redeployment of staff, still many stations of Prasar Bharati
are facing shortage of staff. The Committee hope that redeployment
has been carried out rationally and desire that the Ministry should
expeditiously pursue the matter regarding grant of permission for
recruitment as a special case to facilitate filling up of vacancies in
Prasar Bharati including that of J&K and North-East. The Committee
would also like to reiterate their observation that the
recommendations of the Ministry of Finance to surrender existing
vacancies, should be accepted, which would facilitate Prasar Bharati
to hire suitably qualified people to enrich the quality of their
programmes.
Outstanding Dues
Recommendation (No. 10)
21. The Committee noted with serious concern that there were
huge outstanding dues to the tune of Rs. 92.74 crores for the years
2002-03 and 2003-04 for sponsored serials and in-house programmes
against National Channels and Regional Kendras like Kolkata, Chennai,
Trivandrum, Bangalore, Mumbai and Hyderabad. The Committee had
observed that the Prasar Bharati could not recover even a portion of
outstanding dues from the defaulters. The Committee felt that
considering the quantum of dues involved and gravity of situation,
recovery of dues must engage the prime attention of the management
of Prasar Bharati. The Committee also opined that the Ministry should
not only initiate legal action against the defaulters but also pursue the
cases efficaciously to recover the outstanding dues from them. The
Committee were of the considered view that the strategy being adopted
by the Ministry to recover the outstanding dues viz., making
accreditation rules stringent, raising Bank guarantee limit, constant
monitoring, issuing notices and asking the producers to submit their
payment plans were soft measures for habitual defaulters. The

9
Committee, therefore, had felt that harsher measures should be taken
against the habitual defaulters by the Ministry.
22. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the
Committee and accordingly Prasar Bharati has initiated action
against defaulters at a very high level involving active legal action
or arbitration by retired Supreme Court & High Court judges”.
23. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress
made by the Ministry especially in respect to total amount recovered/
pending, numbers of defaulters against whom legal action has
actually been initiated, the success ratio and percentage of reduction
in outstanding dues over a corresponding year.
Press Information Bureau
Recommendation (No. 12)
24. The Committee note that the project “Setting up of National
Press Centre at New Delhi” was sanctioned as a plan scheme of
8th Five Year Plan and the actual possession of the whole land was
handed over to PIB on 16th October, 2002. The Scheme has been
pending completion for more than a decade. Since the time of
sanctioning of the Scheme, the project could hardly make any progress
and the construction of the centre has been inordinately delayed. The
Committee note that for the year 2004-2005, Rs. 5 crores have been
provided for appointing a Nodal Agency for implementing the project
and appointing the Architect. An EFC Memo at the cost of
Rs. 55.50 crores is under consideration with the Ministry. The project
has an approved outlay of Rs. 6.48 crores for 2004-2005.
The Committee feel that the way of working of the Ministry
evidently speaks of complete lack of planning and vision on its part.
The entire exercise appears to be nothing but an attempt by those
who are responsible for formulation and implementation of the project
to somehow keep out from the ambit of accountability. The Committee,
however, observe that the representative of the Ministry during
evidence has expressed confidence that there would be no further delay
and the project would be commissioned on time. Since the timely
execution is sine qua non of planning and implementation process,
the Committee trust that the optimism shown by the representative

10
will yield the desired results and the project will be completed
expeditiously. The Committee also earnestly desire that funds earmarked
for the year 2004-2005 would be utilised for the purpose for which
these have been allocated. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the matter in this regard.
25. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“A National Press Centre (NPC) at New Delhi is proposed to be
set up with separate building of its own to provide media facilities
to National and international media to one place having state of
the art facilities.
Efforts were made by the Ministry to finalize the issues
regarding selection of consultant/Architect/executing agency, space
requirements, preliminary design report, cost abstract etc. In
February, 2004, preliminary planning and design of the project was
finalized by the National Building Constructions Corporation
(NBCC) Limited, at a cost of Rs. 55.50 crores. It was circulated to
Appraising Agencies, viz., the Planning Commission, Department
of Expenditure, Planning Commission had then opined that the
Project Appraisal & Management Division (PAMD) of Planning
Commission took only those projects/schemes for appraisal which
had matching outlay. The outlay in this case was grossly inadequate
and could not be placed in the list of projects to be appraised by
PAMD. It has now been decided to revise the scheme and execute
the project within the approved project cost of Rs. 35.00 crores to
be completed in one phase, limiting the structural design for two
basements, ground, first, second floors only. The revised
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memo has been prepared
and is being circulated amongst Appraising Agencies. Efforts would
be made to expedite the clearance by the EFC.
Ministry is making all out efforts to ensure that funds to the
tune of Rs. 5.00 crores earmarked for the project during the Annual
Plan, 2004-2005 are fully utilized and that the project is completed
expeditiously.”
26. The Committee are highly perturbed over the way things are
progressing in the setting up of the National Press Centre at New
Delhi. Once the initial issue of occupation of land taken care of in
2 Plan Periods, the Department is still dragging its feet on the
implementation.

11
The Committee fail to understand how could an EFC Memo of
Rs. 55.50 crores be under consideration when the approved cost of
the project was only Rs. 35.00 crores. The preliminary planning,
design of the project which was finalized by the NBCC was a sheer
waste of time and money. The Committee are of the strong belief
that the Department simply lacks the will to go ahead with the
project. Considerable time has elapsed between the Eighth Plan and
the third year of the Tenth Plan and the Department has only got
a plot of land as site for the proposed project. There is every reason
for the Committee to believe that the escalation in the cost of the
project may now be a deterrent in the initiation of the construction
plan.
The Committee in sharing its concern impress upon the
Department to complete the project with utmost urgency.
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC)
Recommendation (No. 13)
27. The Committee have been informed that since the year 2003-
2004, JNU has been insisting upon prior clearance from its authorities
before taking any steps with regard to the construction of the Building
and Housing Project of IIMC, New Delhi. The clearance from Jawaharlal
Nehru University (JNU) is awaited.
The Committee are further informed that the collaboration with
Utkal University could not be formalized as Utkal University backed
out of the proposal at the eleventh hour. Bihar Government has been
requested for facilitating institutional arrangements and the response
is awaited. However, a MoU with Nagaland University has been
approved and is likely to be signed shortly.
The Committee note that a budgetary provision of Rs. 395 lakhs
has been made in the year 2004-2005 to continue with the activities
mentioned above.
The Committee are apprehensive about the progress of the project
and are afraid the obstacles are too many to achieve any physical or
financial targets in this project. The Committee would like to have a
factual note giving details such as the date of sanction of the projects,
the sequence of events thereafter till date, the cost escalation factor,
the reasons of selecting the present location as premises of IIMC etc.

12
28. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
Administrative approval for the Building and Housing Project,
consisting of a 14-room (triple sharing) hostel building. Director
Residence, 6 Sr. Faculty and 6 Officers/faculty flats, 18 staff quarters
and installations of projection and sound reinforcement system in the
auditorium was conveyed by the Ministry of I&B vide its letter No.
23/17/2002-IP&MC dated 31.3.2003.
During the year 2002-03 the work of installing Projection & Sound
Reinforcement System in the Auditorium was done and preliminary
work of construction of staff quarters was intimated. However, certain
institutional parameters of Institute’s agreement with JNU raised some
ecological concerns and these had to be addressed. The structural
drawings of the project required modifications/revisions within the
approved plan outlay of Rs. 386.30 lakh. The JNU has given its
clearance for construction of Director’s Residence and hostel building
during 2004. Further clearance for construction of staff quarters is yet
to be received. The request of the institute is being examined by a
committee constituted by JNU. Meanwhile, the Institute has requested
the Ministry to intervene in the matter.
So far the Projection and sound reinforcement system in the
Auditorium have been installed during 2002-03. Soil investigation,
presentation, drawings, development of land, construction of culvert
have been completed during 2003-04 and the construction work of
Director’s residence and hostel building has also been started.
The Cost escalation factor in comparison to the cost index-year
2001 is enhanced to 21% approximately as on date. Accordingly the
estimates need revision to the extent of 21%. However, in case of the
Housing Project, for which clearance from JNU is waited, the cost
escalation factor will be determined on receipt of NOC from them.
However, the escalation at this rate may be estimated for the Housing
Project.
The present location of IIMC was selected because of its suitability
for institutional and academic environment, surrounded greenery and
spacious piece of land and keeping in view its future expansion plans.
It may however be mentioned there that the construction work for
the building project of IIMC is being done by CCW, AIR which is a

13
Government controlled organization. For carrying out the construction
work sufficient amount is required to be advanced to them under the
“Deposit Work” scheme and any sum not utilised during a particular
year remains under the deposit work A/c for utilisation during
subsequent years.
Due to delay in starting the construction works, the CCW could
not fully utilise the funds advanced by the Institute to them during
2002-03 and 2003-04. It is therefore, considered necessary that further
funds may be advanced to them only after the funds already advanced
by the Institute during previous years are fully utilised. Hence against
the sanctioned Annual Plan 2004-05 allocation of Rs. 135 lakh, the
Institute will required only a provision of Rs. 15 lakh for renovation
works (as projected in its Revised Estimates 2004-05 submitted to the
Ministry).
The JNU have issued sanction for construction of Hostel &
Director’s residence only. Their approval for Housing-I yet to be
received. The Master Plan approved by the JNU contained provisions
for staff housing. The Concerns raised by the JNU regarding Housing
Project are being addressed by IIMC and the matter is being pursued
with them further.
29. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should take
up the matter with concerned authorities to clear the obstacles in
constructing staff quarters. Alternatively the Ministry may consider
some other sites for proposed construction of staff quarters so that
such delay could be avoided and allocated money for the project
could be utilised in time.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Provision
Recommendation (No. 1)
The Committee note that in the Annual Plan 2002-2003, the Ministry
was allocated Rs. 878.00 crores (Rs. 415 crores — DBS + Rs. 463 crores
— IEBR), in the year 2003-2004 it was allocated Rs. 890.00 crores
(Rs. 415 crores — DBS + Rs. 475 crores — IEBR) and in this financial
year 2004-2005 it has been allocated Rs. 955 crores (Rs. 480 crores —
DBS — Rs. 475 crores — IEBR).
The Committee note that a major chunk of the increase in allocation
in this Domestic Budgetary Support in the present financial year 2004-
2005 has been given to the Broadcasting Sector for the upgradation/
expansion of MW & FM services in All India Radio. In 2002-2003
these schemes were given Rs. 3.30 crores under Plan Budget, in
2003-2004 this allocation was Rs. 26.53 crores and this year it is
Rs. 62.28 crores. Although the Committee are extremely happy with
the increase in the allocation but they express regret over the shortfall
in expenditure during the first two years of the Tenth Plan i.e.
2002-2003 & 2003-2004. AIR has been able to utilise only Rs. 0.24 crores
in 2002-2003 and Rs. 3.78 crores in 2003-2004.
The Committee take a serious note of the pattern of utilisation of
funds in AIR and are somewhat convinced that an increase of
approximately Rs. 40 crores in the upgradation/expansion of MW &
FM programmes will mostly go unutilised at the end of 2004-2005.
The Committee, therefore, are compelled to put in a word of caution
to the Ministry to keep a tab on the months clicking by and the
expenditure in this sector through its empowered Committee.
Action Taken by Government
All efforts are being made to ensure that the funds allocated during
the current financial year are utilized as planned, by keeping a close
watch on the trend of expenditure.
14

15
AIR—Physical Targets
Recommendation (No. 3)
The Committee note that out of 36 schemes targeted for completion
during 2003-2004, 11 schemes have been carried over to 2004-205,
6 schemes could not be completed due to delay in tenders and two
schemes have been delayed due to adverse weather conditions and
delay in placing orders for transmitters. The Committee are not
convinced with the reasons adduced by the Ministry for delay in
execution of schemes. Adverse weather conditions at Kargil could not
have been unforeseen in advance in the case of J&K. Similarly the
delay in placing order for the transmitter in the case of Najibabad
project could have been avoided had appropriate steps been taken
well in advance. It clearly manifests lack of planning and foresight on
the part of Ministry. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to
made a comprehensive review of the projects well in advance and
take timely corrective measures to execute the projects in inhospitable
terrains well in time so as to avoid underutilization of funds. The
Committee also desire that responsibility should be fixed in the case
of delay in tendering and a report submitted to the Committee in this
context within 3 months of the presentation of this Report to
Parliament.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted and all efforts
are being made to ensure that the targets for the current financial year
2004-05 are achieved. The remaining project under the J&K package,
namely the 200 KW MW transmitter at Kargil has since been installed
and is under testing.
As regards delay in procurement of transmitters, it was not delay
in tendering which was the major cause, but the delay was largely
due to representations received from the bidders during the processing
of tenders. In the case of Najibabad, series of representations were
received from bidders, and it took considerable time to get the same
settled. Case was also referred to CVC for clarification, which also led
to delay. In the case of procurement of 10 KW FM transmitters also,
series of representations were received from bidders that led to
complexity of the case, and since the matter was not resolvable, it was
finally decided to scrap the tender. Fresh tenders have been received
and these are under technical evaluation.

16
Doordarshan
Recommendation (No. 4)
The Committee note that for Annual Plan 2003-2004, Doordarshan
had projected an outlay of Rs. 731.16 crores but the Planning
Commission allotted only Rs. 640 crores which was further reduced to
Rs. 449.82 crores at RE stage. The Ministry could utilize Rs. 373.62
crores only. There is a shortfall of Rs. 76.20 crores. The reasons
attributed for shortfall in utilization of funds have been reduction in
budget grants, delay in granting “in-principle” approval by the Planning
Commission, non-approval of North East Special Package—Phase II,
delay in sanctioning schemes for construction of New Staff Quarters
and other infrastructure facility, reduction in grants for North East
Schemes and J&K Special Plan and due to non-availability of adequate
amount of Internal External Budgetary Resources (IEBR), lesser
expenditure could be incurred under the head “Software acquisition/
production”. The Committee further note that in the financial year
2004-2005, Doordarshan have been allocated budgetary allocations of
Rs. 643.10 crores which is approximately the same as last year for
execution of various schemes. This is because of the utilisation potential
of Doordarshan and also their capacity to absorb funds.
The Committee regret to note that most of the projects/schemes
envisaged could not be executed due to delay in getting approval for
the schemes in time. The Committee are perturbed to note that there
has been gross under utilisation of the budgetary allocation provided
for important schemes envisaged for the development of Jammu and
Kashmir and North East Region for promotion of national integration
and in bringing them to the mainstream of the country. As the reason
for delay adduced by the Ministry is not convincing, the Committee
are of the opinion that delay in execution of these projects will not
only fail to deliver the desired results for the harmonious development
of these regions in particular but also to the country as a whole. The
Committee, therefore, earnestly desire that the Ministry should
vigorously pursue the schemes with the Planning Commission and
take timely corrective steps to ensure the uninterrupted progress in
execution of planned schemes/projects so that the funds provided
therefor could be utilized within the time frame envisaged and intended
benefits of the scheme reach the people. The Committee also desire
that the funds allocated for 2004-2005 may be utilised for execution of
various schemes in an efficient and efficacious manner so that higher

17
budgetary allocations may not get underutilised. The Committee also
address the Planning Commission and also request them to help the
faster clearance of schemes.
Action Taken by Government
There are four major scheme heads each of AIR and Doordarshan,
for which in principle approval of Planning Commission is required.
In principle approval of the Planning Commission has been received
for three All India Radio schemes. The proposal for the 4th scheme
has been taken up with the Planning Commission. The matter is being
sorted out in consultation with the Planning Commission.
The matter regarding “in-principle” approval of Doordarshan
schemes from Planning Commission is also being monitored very
closely by the Ministry. As far as Doordarshan is concerned, in principle
approval for one Scheme has been accorded by the Planning
Commission and part approval for another scheme has also been
received. Two schemes have been referred to Planning Commission
and are being sorted out in consultation with them. All out efforts are
being made by the Ministry and Prasar Bharati for obtaining “in-
principle” approval of schemes from Planning Commission. The matter
regarding “in-principle” approval of Doordarshan schemes was also
taken up with the Planning Commission at Secretary‘s level in July 04.
In a meeting with the Planning Commission on 21-12-2004 “in-
principle” approval requirements have been waived for one year. Prasar
Bharati is now facilitated in ensuring utilization of allocated funds to
the maximum possible extent.
J&K Special Plan
Recommendation (No. 5)
The Committee find that under J&K Special Plan, out of budgetary
allocation of Rs. 8.40 crores during 2003-04 in the Capital Section,
actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 5.05 crores in respect of
Doordarshan. For AIR, the amount allocated towards Capital and
Revenue Section was Rs. 10.50 crore and actual expenditure incurred
was Rs. 4.69 crore.
The Committee find that five projects with 1 KW MW Tr. are
technically ready at Diskit, Drass, Nyoma, Padum and Tiesuru but
they could not be commissioned for want of operational and

18
maintenance staff as the Government’s approval for continuance of
sanctioned posts beyond February, 2004 is awaited. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should take immediate steps to fill up the
vacancies for commissioning the projects which are technically ready
as they are strategically important for the country. The feasibility of
redeployment of staff should be initially explored. The Committee hope
that the funds to the tune of Rs. 22.65 crores towards Capital and
Revenue Section for 2004-2005 for AIR and Doordarshan will be
judiciously utilised within the period so as to ensure the benefits reach
the people of the region. The Committee may be kept informed about
the outcome of the steps taken in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
“The present position regarding the implementation of J&K Special
Plan is given below:
• 12 projects were included in the special package approved
by the Government for improvement of radio coverage in
Jammu & Kashmir.
• Six projects have already been commissioned at Kathuna—
10 KW FM Tr., Srinagar—300 KW MW Tr., Kupwara—20
KW MW Tr., Naushera—20 KW MW Tr., Rajouri—10 KW
MW Tr. and Khalsi-1 KW MW Tr.
• Five projects with 1 KW MW Tr. are technically ready at
Diskit, Drass, Nyoma, Padum and Tiesuru. The remaining
project namely, the 200 KW MW Tr. Project at Kargil, is in
progress and would be completed in the current financial
year 2004-05.
•T echnically ready projects would be commissioned on receipt
of approval from the competent authority for continuance
of posts. The matter regarding continuance of posts was
taken up in the Empowered Committee meeting held
recently and the decision of the Government is likely to be
conveyed to All India Radio shortly . Prasar Bharati has stated
that the exercise of redeployment has already been done to
the extent possible and further re-deployment is not feasible.
The six projects already commissioned were operationalised
by diversion and sending staff on tour from nearby
station.

19
The Committee has stressed that funds for J&K plan allocated for
2004-2005 be judiciously utilized within the period. For J&K plan, an
amount of Rs. 7.5 crores under capital has been provided for in Annual
Plan 2004-05. So far (till August, 2004) expenditure of Rs. 2.30 crores
has been incurred. In the Revised Estimates, an amount of Rs. 9.10
crores is being projected. Doordarshan is making every possible effort
to fully utilise allocated funds for J&K special plan, and the Planning
Commission has promised adequate support.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I)
North-East Special Package
Recommendation (No. 6)
The Committee note that approval for North Eastern special
package Phase II is yet to be accorded by the Government. Delay in
approval of the scheme by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
was resulted in under utilization of funds earmarked for this purpose.
The Committee note that one of the main thrust areas in 10th Plan
was special package for NE States and Island territories. If the projects
are not approved in time for their speedy implementation, it will
adversely affect the projects of North-Eastern Region and hamper their
balanced growth. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry
should take up the matter with the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) for getting its approval without further delay so that the coverage
of Doordarshan and AIR will be maximized in North Eastern Region
and funds of Rs. 96.63 crores allocated for the year 2004-2005 may not
get underutilised. The Committee hope that utmost care would be
taken by the Ministry for utilisation of funds meant for the year
2004-2005 for implementation of the various proposed schemes for the
benefits of the NE Region.
Action Taken by Government
“All efforts are being made to get the approval of the competent
authority for Phase-II of North-East special plan. Preliminary work
regarding preparation of specifications, design work etc. have been
carried out to ensure that the purchase process can be initiated
immediately after the schemes of the package are sanctioned. Site
surveys have been conducted and some sites have been tentatively

20
finalized. EFC meeting to consider NE special package was held
on 30.07.2004. Minutes of the meeting have been circulated by the
Ministry. The matter is being processed for obtaining approval of
the Cabinet shortly. Further action for implementation of schemes
included in NE package (Phase-II) can be taken, only after the
approval of Cabinet is received.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I)
Shortage of staff in Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (No. 8)
18. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that there is a
projected shortage of staff in All India Radio and Doordarshan in
various categories and proposal for filling up the vacancies has been
pending with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee feel that in
respect of AIR and Doordarshan, redeployment of staff has not been
carried out to the maximum possible extent and hence, there are still
vacancies at various levels. The Committee also note that there are
many projects which are technically ready, but could not be
commissioned for want of technical and maintenance staff. The
Committee observed that due to shortage of staff, the Prasar Bharati
could not produce and telecast qualitative programmes which in turn
has adversely affected the revenue earning capacity of Prasar Bharati.
The Committee also note that there has been a migration of staff from
Prasar Bharati to private channel/FM due to overloading of work on
the available personnel, better pay packet and environment.
In the light of above observations, the Committee feel that the
recommendations of the Ministry of Finance to surrender existing
vacancies, should be accepted. This could facilitate, Prasar Bharati to
hire suitably qualified people who may be absolutely necessary.
Action Taken by Government
“Prasar Bharati has informed that in order to ensure the optimum
utilization of infrastructure and manpower, the exercise of
redeployment of staff has already been carried out to the maximum
extent possible and further redeployment is not feasible. Even after
redeployment many stations are facing shortage of staff due to

21
ban on recruitment. The matter regarding grant of permission as
a special case for recruitment to fill up the vacancies in respect of
J&K and North-East projects is being examined in the Ministry.
The meeting of the Empowered Committee on J&K, has already
been held and the decision of the competent authority on filling
up vacancies would be conveyed to Prasar Bharati shortly.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I)
Need for Improvement in the Quality and content of the Programme
Recommendation (No. 9)
The Committee are of the considered view that Prasar Bharati
should take concerted steps to improve the quality and content of the
programmes telecast/broadcast by them so as to compete technically
with other private channels/FM in the country. In this era of stiff
competition faced from the proliferation of private channels/FM,
maintenance of quality is the hallmark to endure in the field of
broadcasting/telecasting. Compromise on the part of quality will result
in Prasar Bharati losing a sizeable chunk of their business to the private
channels/FM. The Committee feel that Prasar Bharati could not give
proper thrust to the quality and content of programmes due to
vacancies at various levels. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should take up the matter
with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level for getting sanction
of additional posts which are absolutely essential, subsequent to the
efforts of redeployment of existing staff, and surrendering existing
vacancies as recommended by Ministry of Finance so that the
operational efficiency and revenue earning capacity of Prasar Bharati
dose not suffer. The Committee would like to be kept informed about
the developments in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
Recommendation of the Committee for improvement in the quality
and control of progrmames has been noted. All India Radio maintains
a high tradition of trouble-free public broadcasting service to the people.
Steps have already been taken to induct digital technology into the
AIR network. Computer based recording, editing and playback system
has already been provided at many stations. In view of the superior

22
quality of FM broadcasts, it is gaining popularity in the country. AIR
has also therefore undertaken to expand its FM network to achieve
about 50 percent population coverage on completion of ongoing Tenth
Plan.
In so far as improvement in the content of programmes is
concerned, it may be submitted that both-in-house programmes, as
well as commissioned programmes are produced under three categories,
namely Normal Software Plan Scheme (General), North-East Special
package and J&K Special Package. AIR Stations have been instructed
to produce/clear only such programmes as are based on specific
formats/subjects especially identified and prescribed for each of these
categories. In addition, stations have been advised to generate more
programmes aimed at youth & women. Insofar as Doordarshan is
concerned, efforts are being made to improve the content so that it
competes/compares suitably with private TV channels. A proposal to
provide better and effective programmes for Kashir channel is also
under active consideration of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting.
The Ministry is also making all out efforts to get additional posts
sanctioned for various AIR/Doordarshan installations to improve the
efficacy of the electronic media.
Outstanding Dues
Recommendation (No. 10)
The Committee note with serious concern that there are huge
outstanding dues to the tune of Rs. 92.74 crores for the years 2002-03
and 2003-04 for sponsored serials and in-house programmes against
National Channels and Regional Kendras like Kolkata, Chennai,
Trivandrum, Bangalore, Mumbai and Hyderabad. The Committee
observed that the Prasar Bharati could not recover even a portion of
outstanding dues from the defaulters. The Committee feel that
considering the quantum of dues involved and gravity of situation,
recovery of dues must engage the prime attention of the management
of Prasar Bharati. The Committee also feel that the Ministry should
not only initiate legal action against the defaulters but also pursue the
cases efficaciously to recover the outstanding dues from them. The
Committee are of the considered view that the strategy being adopted
by the Ministry to recover the outstanding dues viz., accreditation rules

23
have been made stringent, limit of bank guarantee has been raised,
constant monitoring, issuing notices and asking the producers to submit
their payment plans are soft measures for habitual defaulters. The
Committee feel that harsher measures should be taken against the
habitual defaulters by the Ministry.
Action Taken by Government
“The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the
Committee and accordingly Prasar Bharati has initiated action
against defaulters at a very high level involving active legal action
or arbitration by retired Supreme Court & High Court judges”.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I)
Strengthening the Content Regulatory Mechanism
Recommendation (No. 11)
The Committee in principle do agree that it is absolutely imperative
to check, regulate and prohibit, indecent, immoral content in guise of
aesthetic, being telecast by Cable Operator or other operator. The
Committee also do agree that in this context relevant clauses of the
Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 could hardly serve
the purpose, for which it was enacted by the Govt. Keeping in view
the fact that the Prasar Bharati & Cable Operators are competitors to
each other, the Committee do not endorse its view with the Ministry
that Prasar Bharati should be empowered by law to check or regulate
the aesthetic quality of indecent and immoral programmes/
advertisement being broadcast by the Cable operators or satellite
channels. The Committee, in the interest of the public and nation at
large, earnestly recommend that Govt. should initiate amendments in
the existing Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995, in order
to constitute an independent and permanent Regulatory Body, at the
Center and State level to regulate indecent/immoral contents, in the
guise of aesthetic, being telecast by the Cable Operator including
satellite channels or any other Broadcaster. The Committee feel that
this is a matter of national image and relates to the building of the
character of the existing and future generation of the country.

24
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that it is imperative on the
part of the Government to take up this matter on top priority without
delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made
by the Government in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
“As regards strengthening the content regulatory mechanism, the
Government has decided to constitute a Broadcasting Content
Regulatory Authority . However, the detailed modalities would need
wider consultation. For this purpose, a Core Group is being
constituted in this Ministry to draft a Bill for setting up of
Broadcasting Content Regulatory Authority and define its scope,
objectives and functions. The matter has also been taken for inter-
ministerial consultation on the need to have a separate Broadcasting
Content Regulatory Authority Bill—Separate and district from the
Convergence Bill, 2001 which has lapsed. The proposed authority
would have jurisdiction over all broadcasts of radio cable, DTH or
terrestrial, while any authority set up under the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 would have limited scope”.
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC)
Recommendation (No. 13)
The Committee have been informed that since the year 2003-2004,
JNU has been insisting upon prior clearance from its authorities before
taking any steps with regard to the construction of the Building and
Housing Project of IIMC, new Delhi. The clearance from Jawaharlal
Nehru University (JNU) is awaited.
The Committee are further informed that the collaboration with
Utkal University could not be formalised as Utkal University backed
out of the proposal at the eleventh hour. Bihar Government has been
requested for facilitating institutional arrangements and the response
is awaited. However, a MoU with Nagaland University has been
approved and is likely to be signed shortly.
The Committee note that a budgetary provision of Rs. 3985 lakhs
has been made in the year 2004-2005 to continue with the activities
mentioned above.

25
The Committee are apprehensive about the progress of the project
and are afraid the obstacles are too many to achieve any physical or
financial targets in this project. The Committee would like to have a
factual note giving details such as the date of sanction of the projects,
the sequence of events thereafter till date, the cost escalation factor,
the reasons of selecting the present location as premises of IIMC etc.
Action Taken by Government
Administrative approval for the Building and Housing Project,
consisting of a 14-from (triple sharing) hostel building. Director
Residence, 6 Sr. Faculty and 6 Officers/faculty flats, 18 staff quarters
and installations of projection and sound reinforcement system in the
auditorium was conveyed by the Ministry of I&B vide its letter
No. 23/17/2002-IP&MC dated 31.3.2003.
During the year 2002-03 the working of installing Projection &
Sound Reinforcement System in the Auditorium was done and
preliminary work of construction of staff quarters was intimated.
However, certain institutional parameters of Institute’s agreement with
JNU raised some ecological concerns and these had to be addressed.
The structural drawings of the project required modifications/revisions
within the approved plan outlay of Rs. 386.30 lakh. The JNU has
given its clearance for construction of Director’s Residence and hostel
building during 2004. Further clearance for construction of staff quarters
is yet to be received. The request of the institute is being examined by
a committee constituted by JNU. Meanwhile, the Institute has requested
the Ministry to intervene in the matter.
So far the Projection and sound reinforcement system in the
Auditorium have been installed during 2002-03. Soil investigation,
presentation, drawings, development of land, construction of culvert
have been completed during 2003-04 and the construction work of
Directors residence and hostel building has also been started.
The Cost escalation factor in comparison to the cost index-year
2001 is enhanced to 21% approximately as on date. Accordingly the
estimates need revision to the extent of 21%. However, in case of the
Housing Project, for which clearance from JNU is waited, the cost
escalation factor will be determined on receipt of NOC from them.
However, the escalation at this rate may be estimated for the Housing
Project.

26
The present location of IIMC was selected because of its suitability
for institutional and academic environment, surrounded greenery and
spacious piece of land and keeping in view its future expansion plans.
It may however be mentioned there that the construction work for
the building project of IIMC is being done by CCW, AIR which is a
Government controlled organization. For carrying out the construction
work sufficient amount is required to be advanced to them under the
“Deposit Work” scheme and any sum not utilised during a particular
year remains under the deposit work A/c for utilisation during
subsequent years.
Due to delay in starting the construction works, the CCW could
not fully utilise the funds advanced by the Institute to them during
2002-03 and 2003-04. It is therefore, considered necessary that further
funds may be advanced to them only after the funds already advanced
by the Institute during previous years are fully utilised. Hence against
the sanctioned Annual Plan 2004-05 allocation of Rs. 135 lakh, the
Institute will require only a provision of Rs. 15 lakh for renovation
works (as projected in its Revised Estimates 2004-05 submitted to the
Ministry). The JNU have issued sanction for construction of Hostel &
Director’s residence only. Their approval for Housing I yet to be
received. The Master Plan approved by the JNU contained provision
for staff housing. The Concerns raised by the JNU regarding Housing
Project are being addressed by IIMC and the matter is being pursued
with them further.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 29 of Chapter I)
National Film Archives of India (NFAI)
Recommendation (No. 15)
The Committee express serious concern over the delay in
construction of Phase II Building complex of the National Film Archives
of India at Pune. The Committee understand that the administrative
approval was granted belatedly by the Ministry to National Film
Archives of India (NFAI) and that is the reason National Film Archives
of India (NFAI) could not spend Rs. 50 lakhs earmarked for 2003-2004
for the project.

27
Now that the spade work is over, the Committee hope that the
Ministry will take up the project on a priority basis and take steps for
the expeditious completion of the project to overcome the cost and
time overrun. The Committee also hope that budgetary allocations of
Rs. 250 lakhs provided for the year 2004-2005 would be utilised fully
for construction of Phase II Building complex of the National Film
Archives of India at Pune. The Committee may be kept informed about
the initiatives taken in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
The administrative approval for the 10th Plan Scheme “Construction
of Phase-II NFAI Building” was issued on 13-04-2004. The project is to
be executed by the Civil Construction Wing (CCW) of All India Radio.
The CCW authorities have assured that action is being taken in order
to execute the work in time. It has also been ascertained from CCW
that the tendering process is already over and the work is likely to be
awarded shortly. As such, it is expected that the amount of Rs. 250
lakhs provided for the year 2004-05 would be utilised fully.
Films Division
Recommendation (No. 16)
The Committee note that the Ministry could not fully utilise the
funds earmarked for the schemes “Modernisation and Replacement of
Obsolete Equipments of Films” and “Museum of Moving Images”
(MOMI) under the Films Division. Reasons for non-utilisation of funds
are stated to be “delay in getting administrative approval and the
project of “Museum of Moving Images” being in conceptual stage.
The Committee deplore this sorry state of affairs of seeking the funds
originally and then surrendering the funds at RE stage without
spending money at all. This tantamounts to negation of planning. The
Committee feel that Ministry must chalk out a comprehensive and
realistic strategy before embarking upon the projects/schemes so that
the funds of Rs. 100 lakhs provided for the year 2004-2005 could be
effectively utilised. The Ministry must also undertake periodic review
of the progress of the projects taken up for execution lest they might
lose their viability in the long run. The Committee desire that the
steps may be taken expeditiously for finalising the schemes of “Museum
of Moving Images” and executed without further delay. The Committee
would like to be kept informed about the progress made in this regard.

28
Action Taken by Government
“A provision of Rs. 375.00 lakhs is available in the Sanctioned
Budget Grant 2004-05 for the Scheme ‘Modernisation &
Replacement of Obsolete Equipments of Films Division’. This
provision is expected to be fully utilised during 2004-05.
In regard to the Scheme ‘Setting up of Museum of Moving
Images’ (MOMI), it may be mentioned that Mumbai, being the
birth place of cinema in India, the proposal is now to set-up the
museum in the Films Division Complex at 24-Gopalrao Deshmukh
Marg, Mumbai-26, spread over 4.5 acres of land, the nucleus of
which is a heritage building “Gulshan Mahal”. Today there is no
single point where film enthusiasts and the film industry in general
can converge. Gulshan Mahal would be ideal in providing such a
focus. If it is found necessary, a building in the Third Phase having
features of the Museum can be constructed in future in the Films
Division Complex. The purpose and objectives of the Scheme are
as under:
•T o provide a focal point in Mumbai for film industry, film
enthusiasts and visitors alike;
•T o acquaint the contemporary generation with the evolution
and journey of Indian cinema;
•T o establish a permanent Museum of artifacts, many of
which are valuable heritage items connected with film
making as well as exhibiting the work of noted directors,
producers, Institutions etc. for the benefit of visitors/film
enthusiasts;
•T o arrange seminars, screening of archival films, workshops
for film makers & film students, and thereby make it a
‘living’ entity;
•T o generate interest in the future generation in the field of
film movement.
Cinema has an enduring appeal, and many countries which
have less developed film industries, have created such spaces. The
proposed museum will also contribute to perpetuate the memory
of the great artists of yesteryear, and also expose our new
generation to the great veterans who had contributed immensely
in the building of the Indian film industry.

29
The aim and objective of the project being a unique one, the
conceptualization of the project has taken time. The renewed effort
is to create an ace institution that is both unique and self-sustaining.
There are diverse views in regard to the long-term status of the
proposed Museum viz. Whether it should be an institution run
directly by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting or whether
it could usefully be a joint venture with either the film industry
or in conjunction with a well recognized and reputed Trust, which
could run its day to day operations with the help of professional
Curator, while Government would remain the owner of the land,
building and external infrastructure. The involvement of an apex
body from the film industry is being explored.
To translate the present conceptualization if the project into a
reality and to answer the related issues, there is a proposal under
consideration to hire the services of Broadcasting Engineering
Consultant India Limited (BECIL) to prepare an Integrated Project
Report with the assistance of a suitable Consultant or Consulting
Firm.
For the current financial year 2004-05, the Government proposes
to fully utilize the Sanctioned Budget Grant of Rs. 100.00 lakhs.
A quarterly performance review report in respect of all the
Plan Scheme is being obtained from Films Division and the progress
of each Scheme, both physical and financial, is being monitored
by the Ministry”.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Training for Human Resource Development
Recommendation (No. 14)
The Committee note that for the year 2004-2005, Rs. 200 lakhs
have been provided for “Training for HRD in Institutions located
abroad”. The Committee note that in the year 2003-2004, Rs. 200 lakhs
had been provided for but the utilisation was only a meager amount
of Rs. 6,57,760.
That the scheme is a new one with no precedence in this regard
is the main reason for non-utilisation of funds is a matter of little
consolation. The Committee feel that Ministry should have done
adequate exercise well in advance before embarking upon this scheme.
Once the scheme has been conceptualised and objectives set forth,
coming up with specious reasons for not utilising the funds is
untenable. It speaks of lack of commitment on the part of Ministry.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to depute its officers
including IIS officers, professionals in the relevant field for training in
institutes of repute abroad, which will be a permanent asset for the
Ministry in terms of harnessing better HRD practices in this Ministry
and also in terms of fruitful utilisation of funds allocated for the year
2004-2005. The Committee would like to be kept informed about the
progress made in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
The training programme under the Plan sub-scheme “Training for
HRD in institutions located abroad” for 2004-05 has been finalised.
This includes training programmes viz. Columbia Publishing Course
in Columbia University, International Reporting Workshop, International
Broadcast Journalism and International Print Journalism courses in
Thomson Foundation, U.K., International Course on Broadcast
30

31
Journalism by Radio Netherland, ‘Senior Managers in Government’ in
Harvard University and conducting a course in ‘editing, writing,
interviewing’ by inviting a trainer from Thomson Foundation at Indian
Institute of Mass Communication, N. Delhi.
The training courses have been circulated among eligible officers
and applications received for different courses are being scrutinized.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
All India Radio
Recommendation (No. 2)
The Committee note that for the Annual Plan 2003-2004, the
Ministry had projected an outlay of Rs. 250 crores for All India Radio.
However, the Planning Commission allocated Rs. 201 crores. But this
has been reduced to Rs. 163.36 crores by the Ministry at RE stage. The
Ministry could utilize only Rs. 120.27 crores during 2003-04. During
2004-2005, the AIR has been allocated Rs. 252.00 crores.
The Committee note with serious concern that the underutilisation
of funds during 2003-2004 has been in respect of Continuing Schemes
including J&K Special Package and Upgradation/Expansion schemes,
primarily, due to non-procurement of equipments, problem in tendering,
early closure of roads in Kargil and non-commissioning of technically
ready projects for want of operational and maintenance staff as a result
of which the AIR could meet a physical target of 28 Nos. against the
desired target of 36 Nos. The Committee feel that due to the non-
execution of projects envisaged during 2003-04, the benefits intended
to be derived from the projects could not reach the people especially
with reference to projects in Jammu & Kashmir and North-Eastern
Region.
The Committee have been informed that the Physical target for
2004-2005 is 38. Looking at the achievement for the year 2003-2004,
the Committee are concerned for the fulfillment of targets for the year
2004-2005. The Committee, therefore, opine that for prudent and realistic
utilization of budgetary allocations, the Ministry must go in for correct
tendering, timely placement of orders and take prudent decisions apart
from primarily redeploying existing staff wherever possible recruiting
operational & maintenance staff only if unavoidable to put into use
the existing assets. The Committee trust that AIR will put in all efforts
to utilise the higher budgetary allocations provided for in 2004-2005
32

33
judiciously and timely for execution of schemes envisaged by the
Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the matter in
this regard.
Action Taken by Government
“While taking note of the observation of the Committee, it may be
mentioned that during 2003-04, shortfall of physical targets under
J&K Special package was in respect of only one project namely
the 200 KW MW project at Kargil which would also be achieved
during the current financial year. However, technically ready
projects of J&K package are awaiting commissioning as approval
of the competent authority for continuation Posts is awaited. As
regards staff redeployment, Prasar Bharati has stated that this
exercise has already been carried out and even after redeployment
it is not possible to commission many stations. Moreover there is
a ban on recruitment of staff. As a special case, permission for
recruitment has been sought to fill up the vacancies in respect of
J&K and North-East projects. The issue of filling up vacancies in
relaxation of the ban on direct recruitment was discussed in the
recently held J&K Empowered Committee Meeting. Decision of
the competent authority is likely to be conveyed to All India Radio
and Doordarshan shortly.
As regards utilisation of budgetary allocations and fulfillment
of targets for the year 2004-05, all efforts are being made and
trend of expenditure and execution of schemes is being closely
monitored.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I)
Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (No. 7)
The Committee note that at present there are 4 vacancies on Prasar
Bharati Board. The Committee in its earlier Reports on Demands for
Grants 2002-03 and 2003-04 had recommended to fill up the vacancies
in Prasar Bharati. The Committee desired that the Ministry should
take concerted steps for filling up the vacancies in the Prasar Bharati
Board including those of representatives of the employees without
further delay.

34
Action Taken by Government
“Presently Four positions in the Prasar Bharati Board are lying
vacant. Out of these, Ministry has already requested for the
recommendations of the Selection Committee headed by the Vice
President of India in respect of two Part-time Members, reply for
which is yet to be received. Besides, there are two vacancies
pertaining to the representatives of the employees. Since all the
employees of erstwhile AIR & DD continue to the Government
Servants, the election of the representatives cannot be held, till
their services are transferred to Prasar Bharati, in accordance with
the provisions of Prasar Bharati Act.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I)
Press Information Bureau
Recommendation (No. 12)
The Committee note that the project “Setting up of National Press
Centre at New Delhi” was sanctioned as a plan scheme of 8th Five
Year Plan and the actual possession of the whole land was handed
over to PIB on 16th October, 2002. The Scheme has been pending
completion for more than a decade. Since the time of sanctioning of
the Scheme, the project could hardly make any progress and the
construction of the centre has been inordinately delayed. The Committee
note that for the year 2004-2005, Rs. 5 crores have been provided for
appointing a Nodal Agency for implementing the project and
appointing the Architect. An EFC Memo at the cost of Rs. 55.50 crores
is under consideration with the Ministry. The project has an approved
outlay of Rs. 6.48 crores for 2004-2005.
The Committee feel that the way of working of the Ministry
evidently speaks of complete lack of planning and vision on its part.
The entire exercise appears to be nothing but an attempt by those
who are responsible for formulation and implementation of the project
to somehow keep out from the ambit of accountability. The Committee,
however, observe that the representative of the Ministry during
evidence has expressed confidence that there would be no further delay
and the project would be commissioned on time. Since the timely
execution is sine qua non of planning and implementation process, the

35
Committee trust that the optimism shown by the representative will
yield the desired results and the project will be completed expeditiously.
The Committee also earnestly desire that funds earmarked for the
year 2004-2005 would be utilised for the purpose for which these have
been allocated. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
matter in this regard.
Action Taken by Government
“The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the
Committee and accordingly Prasar Bharati has initiated action
against defaulters at a very high level involving active legal action
or arbitration by retired Supreme Court & High Court judges”.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
36

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 20 January, 2005 from 1100 hours
to 1325 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P . Karunakaran
6. Dr. P .P . Koya
7. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
8. Col. G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
10. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Vijay J. Darda
13. Shri Ashwani Kumar
14. Shri Balbir K. Punj
15. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
16. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
17. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
18. Shri Motiur Rahman
19. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
37

38
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its Fourth Report on “Demands for Grants’ (2004-2005)
relating to Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
3. The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Action Taken
Reports with some amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to the House, on a date and
time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FOURTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Recommendation Nos.: 1, 3-6, 8-11, 13, 15-16
Total: 12
Percentage: 75%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Recommendation No.: 14
Total: 1
Percentage: 6.25%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Recommendation Nos.: 2, 7, 12
Total: 3
Percentage: 18.75%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Recommendation No.: Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
39