STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
3838383838
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORTTHIRTY-EIGHTH REPORTTHIRTY-EIGHTH REPORTTHIRTY-EIGHTH REPORTTHIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
[Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of Prasar Bharati’]
lR;eso t;rs

THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of Prasar Bharati’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs

C.I.T. No. 160C.I.T. No. 160C.I.T. No. 160C.I.T. No. 160C.I.T. No. 160
Price : Rs. 78.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
16
57
63
65
66
68
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  C OMMITTEE
.........................................................................
I NTRODUC -
TION............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Re-
port...............................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government..................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Commit-
tee do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Govern-
ment....................................................................................
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration....................
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are interim in nature..................................................
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2006-07) held on
13.12.2006......................................................................................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twenty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Commit-
tee.....................................................................................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-07)
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
16. Shri P.C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri Narahari Mahato
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Eighth Report on action
taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Working of Prasar Bharati’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) was
presented to the Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2001 and laid on the Table
of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Ministry furnished updated
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Report on 27 November, 2006.
3. The Thirty-Eighth Report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 13 December, 2006.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommenda-
tions/Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations containted in the Twenty-Fifth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
 N
EW D ELHI;
13 December , 2006
22 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka)
NIKHIL KUMAR,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Information
Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technol-
ogy deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of Prasar Bharati’ pertaining to
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
13 August, 2001 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16.08.2001.
It contained 32 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 10, 16, 19, 51-58, 69, 79, 82, 83, 92, 95, 98, 103,
104, 107, 108 and 114-116
Total : 25
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para Nos: 68, 71, 78, 89 and 113
Total : 05
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Para Nos: 70 and 72
Total : 02
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos:  Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be
given to the implementation of the recommendations/observations
accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to them
at an early date.
5. In this context, it may be mentioned here that the
Committee have selected the subject, “The role of Prasar Bharati
and its future status” for examination during the current year and
have accorded top priority to the subject keeping in view the pivotal
role that Prasar Bharati, as a public service broadcaster, is expected
to play in determining the direction and thrust of broadcasting in
the country. The examination of the subject is expected to
cover a number of vital issues connected with the role and working
of Prasar Bharati. However, this report is confined to action
taken by Government on some of the recommendations contained
in their 25th Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Working of Prasar
Bharati”.
A. Time slot allotted to private producers by DD Kendra,
Kolkata
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
6. Commenting on certain disquieting aspects connected with
the allotment of slots to private producers by DD Kendra, Kolkata,

3
the Committee had made the following observations/
recommendations:—
“The examination of the time slot allotted by Prasar Bharati to
private producers at DD Kendra, Kolkata has brought out many
disquieting aspects as detailed in the following paragraphs which
require urgent corrective action on the part of Prasar Bharati Board
and the Ministry.
(i) A private producer has been able to monopolise
Doordarshan-I and Doordarshan-7 to the extent of 26% and
70% respectively to the total programmes telecast at Kolkata.
A private company-Rainbow Productions owned by
Shri Ramesh Gandhi secured 8 programmes on these
channels from Kolkata Doordarshan/Directorate at Delhi
namely, ‘Khas Khabar’, ‘Janmabhoomi’, Suprabhat’, ‘Aaj Ke’,
‘Mukhomukhi’ ‘Kankanjali’ ‘Ferrighat’ and feature film
programmes of nine hours duration daily, many of these
programmes have repeat telecast also;
(ii) As the inquiry into the allegations has revealed, it could not
have been without the connivance and active collusion of
the Doordarshan officials with ulterior motives. The
Committee is surprised that although enquiry has already
established involvement of 14 officers of the Prasar Bharati
no action, has yet been taken to punish the guilty or against
the private producer whose role is required to be probed in
depth;
(iii) M/s Rainbow Productions Private Limited had filed a court
case against Kolkata Doordarshan Kendra against the
decision of Prasar Bharati to discontinue the programme
“Khas Khabar”. The Committee views that the justification
offered by the Government representative for withdrawal of
the appeal filed by Doordarshan on the plea that the
litigation was not reaching its logical end and that on
revenue consideration outside the court settlement was
reached with the producer of “Khas Khabar” (Rainbow
Productions), is all by way of after though and not at all
convincing. In view of the fact that programme is repeated

4
four times a day and also taking note of the view of the
CEO Prasar Bharati that it is an aberration and also
considering the other information gathered by it, the
Committee holds the view that the programme “Khas
Khabar” which is a news bulletin based on hard daily news
rather a current affairs programme was deliberately allowed
in clear violation of the policy decision of Prasar Bharati
Board taken on 11 March, 1999 that private producers will
not be permitted to produce the telecast news programmes
on National or Regional Channels of Doordarshan. Instead
of complying with the decision of the Prasar Bharati Board
and the views expressed by this Committee during the
evidence taken on
5 September, 2000, the Prasar Bharati by way of an act of
defiance increased the duration of the programme ‘Khas
Khabar’ w.e.f. 18 September, 2000. The inept handling of the
issue since termination notice issued for the programme
“Khas Khabar”  and “Mukhomukhi” w.e.f. 16 October, 2000
and sudden withdrawal of the case and the basis for outside
settlement, raised many eyebrows and requires to be
investigated. In the correspondence and in the affidavits filed
before the High Court/Supreme Court the Prasar Bharati has
significantly taken the wholly erroneous plea that the
programme was a ‘news based current affairs programme’
and not a “News Bulletin” till March, 1999;
(iv) The officer dealing with the legal matters who was aware
of the facts of the case initially deliberately avoided
appearance before the Committee without any convincing
reason and when he subsequently attended, took up the
strange but significant attitude of passing on responsibility
to others.
(v) In allotment of time slots for various programmes the Prasar
Bharati has given more weightage to the commercial aspect
as admitted by the DDG (F&V) in his note that it would
be prudent to accept the additional revenue offered by the
producer of “Khas Khabar” which was very high, and they
should unnecessarily not lose the same especially when

5
Prasar Bharati was not having a strong case in the High
Court because of inconsistencies in their (Prasar Bharati)
approach to deal with the programme.
(vi) Even though news programmes are not awarded to private
producers, ‘Khas Khabar’ which was a hard news based
programme by the Ministry’s own reckoning, was allowed
in the garb of news based current affairs programme and
its frequency and time increased from 15 to 20 minutes
obviously with ulterior motives.
(vii) A serious mischief was played by the producer of the
programme ‘Khas Khabar’ in its telecast on 21 November,
2000 by describing the State of Jammu & Kashmir, which
is an integral part of India, as ‘India occupied Kashmir’. The
Committee desires a proper inquiry to be conducted on this
issue as it cannot be described merely as an innocuous error.
The Committee apprehends that there is every possibility of
recurrence of such mischief if the Prasar Bharati does not
review its policy and enforce strictly the regulation relating
to private producers.
(vii) Ministry of I&B had Prasar Bharati have not conducted any
proper inquiry as promised to the Committee into the whose
episode of awarding of Doordarshan slots to private
producers particularly into the irregularities made in
awarding of various slots to Rainbow Productions Pvt. Ltd.
The Committee is constrained to observe that even though
the former CEO expressed concern and held the view that
no private
producer should be allowed to produce and telecast news
on national or regional Channels and that the ‘Khas Khabar’
had ceased to be a ‘news and current affairs programme’
and acquired the character of a ‘news bulletin’, (thus fallen
in the prohibited category which was to be discontinued
forthwith) no effective step has been taken to discontinue
private
news telecast ‘Khas Khabar’ on Doordarshan. Nor any

6
action has been taken against the delinquent officials who
favoured a private producer at the cost of public exchequer.
Not only a meagre fee was collected from the said private
producer by misclassification of programme, he was also
favoured by not collecting bank guarantees of the appropri-
ate amount.
(ix) A single (private) producer was awarded 11 time  slots of
programmes for telecast from DD-1 and DD-II i.e.
Doordarshan and DD Bangla Channel and that no fair
procedure was adopted since other producers were not given
any opportunity to compete which resulted in a monopoly
of the Doordarshan Bangla Channel by a single private
producer. Some of the proposals for programmes were
directly entertained by the Doordarshan Directorate in utter
violation of established procedure which resulted in award
of time slot on a single bid. The Committee also regrets to
note that the then CEO Prasar Bharati did not take any action
in the matter as promised to the Committee during evidence.
The Committee cannot but express its deep concern about
the conduct of various officials of Prasar Bharati acting more
for the benefit of one private producer thereby violating the
conduct rules and damaging the interests of the nation. The
Committee strongly recommends to Prasar Bharati Board/
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to look into all such
alleged irregularities and take stern action as per relevant
rules.(x) Prasar Bharati management favoured the private
producer at the cost of exchequer in utter violation of rules
by accepting Bank Guarantees of inadequate amounts for the
programmes telecast by him. In the case of ‘Janmabhoomi’
Bank Guarantee required as per guidelines was to be of Rs.
54 lakh, but the guarantee given is of Rs. 60,000/- only. In
the case of
‘Khas Khabar’ no bank guarantee has been taken though he
was required to furnish the same for Rs.13 lakh. Similarly
for ‘Kankanjali’ Bank Guarantee of Rs.40,000 was accepted
against the requirement of Rs.2 lakh. It is thus a case of
blatant favouritism which cannot be without any consider-

7
ation.”
7. The Ministry in their updated action taken reply furnished on
27.11.2006 have stated as follows:–
“(i), (iii), (vii) and (ix): Prasar Bharati decided to reduce the
approved period of telecast of the programmes Janmabhoomi,
Khas Khabor and Suprabhat. It was further decided to
terminate the programme Mukho Mukhi and two out of four
bulletin of Khas Khabar. Accordingly, notices were issued
to the producer by DDK Calcutta on 29.9.2000. M/s Rainbow
Productions approached the Calcutta High Court through a
Writ Petition and got stay order against the notices issued
by DDK Calcutta. The Hon’ble High Court gave its final
verdict in the main case and, vide its order dated 14.2.2001,
quashed all the notices dated 29th September 2000 issued
by the Director DDK, Calcutta. However, the Court gave
liberty to Prasar Bharati to take further action in the matter
strictly in terms of the agreement. On the advice of the
Additional solicitor General, appeal duly vetted by the ASG
has been filed in Calcutta High Court before the Division
Bench on 19.3.2001 in respect of Khas Khabor and 21.3.2001
for Janmabhoomi and Suprabhat and Mukho Mukhi and
simultaneously notices were issued under Clause 22 of the
Agreements to the producers on 20.3.2001. The Producer filed
a Writ Petition against these notices before the single bench
of Calcutta High Court who ordered on 30.3.2001 to maintain
the status quo. Director, Doordarshan Kendra, Calcutta filed
an appeal against this order before the Division Bench on
10.4.2001 in respect of Khas Khabor, Janmabhoomi, Suprabhat,
and Mukho Mukhi on 17.4.2001. The matter came up for
hearing before the Court on 23.4.2001 and the appeal was
admitted and the Division Bench directed the appellant to
file paper book within three weeks. On 9th May, 2001,
another appeal was filed by Prasar Bharati before the
Division Bench against the order dated 30th March, 2001.
It was admitted, with direction to file paper book. It was
further directed that both the appeals will be heard
analogously. As the agreements for ‘Khas Khabor’ were

8
nearing their end by March, 2003,
M/s Rainbow Productions filed a writ petition, on which the
High Court passed interim order for maintaining status quo
regarding telecast on ‘Khas Khabar’ for 8 weeks and on
5.2.2003 the interim order was extended till further orders
by the Court. A vacation petition for this was filed by DDK,
Kolkata on 02.09.2003. On 18.9.2003 the Kolkata High Court
ordered M/s Rainbow Productions Ltd. to pay arrears as
admitted by them in 3 installments. Subsequently, they were
asked to make payment of current dues on regular basis.
Since they failed to make the requisite payment as per the
Court’s directive, the programme was stopped with effect
from 1.11.2004. Meanwhile, M/s Aarambh Advt. & Mktg.
had filed a writ petition in Kolkata High Court, in which
the Court on 9.10.2002 ordered status quo regarding all the
programmes being released by the agency. Serial
‘Janambhoomi’ came to its end after its extended period of
1300 days of telecast, on 29.8.2003, but other programmes
released by the agency continued to be telecast on the basis
of this stay order, for which the agency had stopped paying
the dues. Eventually, a comprehensive vacating petition was
filed by DDK, Kolkata against this stay order on 21.5.2004,
in which the Court ordered payment of current dues on
regular basis, for default on which Prasar Bharati was free
to take appropriate action. Since the agency failed to clear
the dues, all the programmes of the agency other than ‘Khas
Khabar’, namely, Aleya, Short, Jhankar and Mukho Mukhi
were taken off the air with effect from 14.7.2004. The Prasar
Bharati Board has decided not to allow telecast of any
“News” programme produced by the outside agency and
which are similar to “Khas Khabar” in any channel of
Doordarshan’s network. The process for recovery of all the
dues from the agency has been initiated. All the programmes
of M/s Rainbow Production as well as programmes released
by M/s Aarambh Advtg. & Mktg. Ltd. have been taken off
from DD-1/DD-7.

9
(ii) & (viii) : The Preliminary Enquiry Report submitted by
Sh. S.C. Tewari, former Director (BP&L), M/o I&B regarding
the irregularities committed in sanctioning of programmes
for DDK, Kolkata was examined by DG:DD and they had
forwarded proposals against 14 officers involved in the
matter regarding initiation of disciplinary proceedings
against them for the lapses committed by them. These 14
proposals were examined in detail in the Ministry in
consultation with DG:DD and Central Vigilance Commis-
sion. Out of these 14 cases,
4 cases have been closed, in one case CVC have advised for
closure, in 5 cases Government’s displeasure has been issued,
in one case CVC have advised for conveying of Govt.’s
displeasure and in one case regular Departmental Proceed-
ings for major penalty were initiated on 28.11.2003 that have
been concluded with the imposition of penalty of 10% cut-
in-pension for two years on 20.9.2006. In remaining 2 cases
major penalty has been recommended and these cases are
in different stages of progress.
(iv) : necessary action was taken against the officer who had
been looking after the legal Cell of DDK, Kolkata during
the relevant period. He was placed under suspension vide
Directorate General, Doordarshan’s Order dated 30.9.2003.
However, the High Court stayed Directorate’s Order dated
30.9.2003 and by virtue of this Order, the Officer joined duty
on 28.12.2003. Subsequently, he retired from service on
superannuation on 31.12.2003.
(v) & (vi) : Necessary action has already been taken by Prasar
Bharati in this regard, and responsibility has been fixed on
two officers for withdrawing the petition pending before the
High Court and for taking a decision to increase the duration
and periodicity of the programme Khas Khabar. The
explanation of both the officers in this regard has not
been found satisfactory by Prasar Bharati, which has
recommended to the Ministry of I&B for initiation of

10
disciplinary proceedings against them. Against one Officer,
Regular Departmental Proceedings for Major Penalty were
initiated against him. The same have been concluded with
the imposition of penalty of 10% cut-in-pension for two years
on 20.9.2006 and in respect of the other officer, the Cadre
Controlling Authority i.e. DOP&T, have initiated RDA for
major penalty against him.
(x) : Preliminary Enquiry Report submitted by Sh. S.C.
Tewari, former Director (BP&L), M/o I&B has brought out
the fact that required bank guarantee has not been collected
in case of programmes Khas Khabar, Janmabhoomi and
Kanakanjali and fixed responsibility on one officer for
alleged lapse. The explanation of the officer in this regard
has not been found satisfactory by Prasar Bharati, which has
recommended to the Ministry of I&B for initiation of
disciplinary proceedings against him. CVC’s advice for
closure of the case in respect of the allegations mentioned
in this para has since been received. The said advice is under
examination in this Ministry.”
8. The Committee note with concern that it was after
prolonged litigation that DD Kendra, Kolkata had taken off from
DD-1 and DD-7 the programmes produced by M/s Rainbow
Productions Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Aarambh Advertising & Marketing
Ltd. Although the Kolkata High Court had ordered on 18th
September, 2003 that M/s Rainbow Productions should pay the
arrears to DDK, Kolkata in three instalments and subsequent
payments on a regular basis, the producer has not complied with
the Court verdict. It is also distressing to note that M/s Aarambh
Advertising & Marketing Ltd. had also turned defaulter in payment
of dues to the DD Kendra. Despite the default in payments, their
programmes continued to be telecast by the DD Kendra till 1st
November, 2004 and 14th July 2004 respectively. The reply
furnished by Government in this regard merely states that the
process of recovery of all the dues from the agency has been
initiated
without spelling out the efforts made and the progress achieved

11
in this regard. The lack of efforts on the part of DD Kendra, Kolkata
for recovery of the dues despite the laxity and non-cooperative
attitude on the part of the producers, speaks volumes about the
working of Prasar Bharati and its officers responsible for the
recovery. The Committee disapprove the callous approach on the
part of the officials in pursuing the case despite the Court verdict
and the Committee’s strictures in the strongest possible terms. They
desire that the matter be dealt with more firmly and stringent
measures be initiated for speedy recovery of the dues from the
private producers and the Committee be apprised of the outcome
at the earliest.
9. The Committee also take a serious note that in spite of
the Inquiry Report having identified 14 officers involved in the
irregularities committed in sanctioning of programmes by DD
Kendra, Kolkata, the penalties imposed were not of major nature
and even in the two cases where major penalties were imposed,
those are reported to be in different stages of progress. Similar is
the case with one of the two officers who were responsible for
withdrawing the petition pending before the High Court against
M/s Rainbow Productions Pvt.Ltd. and for taking the decision to
increase the duration and periodicity of the programme, ‘Khas
Khabar’. Undue delay in meeting out punishment to the guilty is
bound to abet employees of Prasar Bharati to resort to similar
attempts of favoritism and unfair practices. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that
stern and speedy action be taken against the officer found guilty
and they be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
B. Marketing Structure in Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 69)
10. Commenting on the marketing structure in Prasar Bharati,
the Committee had in their earlier report recommended as follows:—
“The Committee is perturbed to find that marketing network
of Prasar Bharati is so weak (as admitted by CEO also) that
during last one year it could earn the revenue of Rs.11 crore
only from prime time slot-1900 hours to 2100 hours for which

12
a foreign company has offered Rs. 59 crore i.e. Rs. 48 crore
above the revenue earned by Prasar Bharati. It has been
explained that producers are indulging in undercutting of
each other. The Committee is not fully convinced by this
explanation and would like Prasar Bharati to look into it in
detail to ensure that there was no malpractice indulged in
marketing of time slot. The Committee further recommends
that Prasar Bharati should tone up its marketing efforts to
garner at least the proportionate revenue potential of the
market if not the dominant share. Prasar Bharati which
has modern equipment installed in its studios should be
capable of producing programmes of superior quality. The
Corporation needs to modify and strengthen its own
marketing strategy.
11. The Ministry in their updated action taken reply dated
27.11.2006 stated as follows:—
“Prasar Bharati could not market its own programmes on
prime time because Prasar Bharati did not own its content/
programmes. They were and are shown on sponsorship basis
where the Producer is given the time slot on payment of
a telecast fee. The rights of the programme after the telecast
return to the Producer. Since different Producers were
sponsoring programmes, there is competition among them
in the market and in resultant undercutting to sell their own
programme only. However, Prasar Bharati has now started
its own marketing offices at Mumbai and Chennai and
would be expanded to other cities also. Prasar Bharati has
also initiated steps to own content by commissioning classic
literary works to be made into teleserials by eminent
Producer/Directors. In order to ensure that undercutting of
rates is avoided, in the middle of programme, Doordarshan
has kept to itself one minute of commercial time per half
an hour which is marketed directly. Strengthening of
marketing set up is taken up in a phased manner. The Metro
Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news channel
DD News from

13
3rd November, 2003.”
12. The Committee note with satisfaction that Prasar Bharati
has now started its own Marketing Offices at Mumbai and Chennai
and is in the process of expanding the network to other cities also.
In order to discourage undercutting of rates in the middle of
programmes, Doordarshan has also kept to itself one minute of
commercial time per half an hour which is marketed directly. The
need for strengthening the marketing set up in Prasar Bharati with
a view to improve the distribution of Doordarshan channels and
earning better revenue has been stressed repeatedly and needs to
be addressed on priority basis. Needless to say that what has been
done in this direction is not adequate in view of the growing
competitive environment in the electronic media. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the specific steps taken by Prasar Bharati
for strengthening its marketing infrastructure and stepping up of
the marketing initiatives.
C. Rules/Guidelines for selection of programmes
Recommendation (Para No. 70 & 72)
13. Stressing the need for Prasar Bharati to formulate its own
tendering process, the Committee had recommended in their earlier
Report as follows:—
“The Committee is not convinced by the reasoning advanced
by Prasar Bharati for accepting single bid tender for time
slot 2100 hrs. to 2200 hrs. The Committee is at a loss to
understand that a Corporation like Prasar Bharati, entrusted
with the responsibility of informing and enlightening the
people inside and outside the country, should be guided by
the rules adopted in the CPWD when it comes to such
sensitive issues like awarding of programmes. Prasar Bharati
should have made attempts to attract more competitors to
ensure a fair and transparent action. The Corporation also
needs to modify its tendering process and make copies of
the same available to this Committee for its perusal.”

14
14. The Committee had further recommended as follows:—
“The Committee notes that time slots will be made available
for telecasting the programmes produced by Channel Nine
network Australia PTY Ltd. for a total of six hours at the
consideration of Rs. 122 crore. The Committee feels that
allotting everyday six hours’ slot to a private company is a
serious matter involving far reaching consequences. The
Committee is not convinced that all such matters were
considered before taking the decision. Though the
Committee is not against private participation it recommends
that the Corporation should adopt a clear and firm policy
on this aspect by taking the views of expert bodies and
public representatives and should lay down suitable
guidelines to ensure transparency and telecast of suitable
programmes consistent with the objectives of Prasar
Bharati.”
15. The Ministry in their updated action taken reply dated
27.11.2006 have stated as follows:—
“Prasar Bharati does not have any rules of its own for
inviting tenders/bids. Prasar Bharati was guided by the
CPWD rules since CPWD is also a Department of the Central
Government which executes all its jobs through award of
contracts under bids. The procedural commonalities are
taken as base as per the requirements of Doordarshan. The
process of inviting bids and processing them were conducted
in a fair and most transparent manner to attract maximum
competitors. On the first occasion, there was no response for
the prime time slots when a minimum floor price was fixed.
The bids were again invited without floor price and also
widely publicized on TV, Radio, and newspapers. But only
three bidders participated in the bids for the prime time. The
bids amount quoted by the bidders was found to be lower
than even the telecast fee. Therefore, bids were rejected with
the approval of Prasar Bharati Board.”
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply further stated as

15
follows:—
“Though the duration of telecast is 6 hours a day, the actual
telecast is only for 3 hours daily which was repeated for
3 hours the following day, on non prime time. We will
ensure transparency. The Metro Channel has been replaced
by the 24 hours news channel DD News from 3rd November,
2003.”
17. The Committee regret to note that despite their
recommendation that Prasar Bharati should frame its own rules/
guidelines for inviting bids and processing and awarding contracts
in view of the fact that the nature of bids and award of contracts
by Prasar Bharati are entirely different from that of CPWD, whose
rules are currently being followed by the Corporation, Prasar
Bharati has not initiated any action in this regard. The Committee
are also not satisfied with the reply furnished by Government to
their earlier recommendation to formulate suitable guidelines for
ensuring transparent and quality selection and telecast of
programmes. While the procedural commonalities in the CPWD
rules could be retained, it is imperative on the part of Prasar Bharati
that more compatible guidelines are formulated for its own purpose
keeping in view the unique nature of the bids invited and the
contracts awarded. The existence of specific rules would enable
Prasar Bharati to invite and process the bids in a more fair and
transparent manner and strengthen its arms while dealing with the
question of deposit of security, of termination of contracts and
recovery of dues, penalties, etc. The Committee, therefore, are of
the considered opinion that Prasar Bharati should draw up its own
rules for inviting bids and processing and awarding contracts with
a view to ensuring that the entire process is smooth, transparent
and efficient. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommenda-
tions and desire that Prasar Bharati should frame its own rules for
the purpose and the Committee be kept apprised of the steps taken
in this regard.

16
16
CHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee finds that Government has failed to implement
Prasar Bharati Act enacted in 1990 in letter and spirit. Though the Act
was passed by the Parliament in 1990, it came into force as late as
in 1997. Many provisions of the Act like constitution of Prasar Bharati
Board consisting of 15 Members representing various interests has not
been done till date simply for the reasons that there has been inordinate
delay in formulating rules governing conditions of service of Chairman
and Members of the Board, and in settling the issues of salary and
perks of the Chairman and Chief Executive Member of the Board.
Further, formulation of rules for recruitment of Member Personnel,
Member Finance, Director Generals of AIR and Doordarshan who have
to be on the Prasar Bharati Board, was delayed unusually which is
to say the least totally surprising. There have been four attempts to
amend the Act by the successive Governments since its enforcement
through ordinances which lapsed. There was also confusion because
of the Constitution of the Review Committee also by the Government.
Although the Attorney General of India had clarified that Prasar
Bharati Act remains in full force and operative despite the lapses of
the ordinances, the Ministry failed to constitute the Board which is a
matter of grave concern. As a result of unexplained inaction on the
part of Government, there are now only two part-time Members on
the Prasar Bharati Board who alongwith two nominees of the Ministry
are “running” its affairs. The way two non-official members were
retired in 1999 inspite of many vacancies on the Board appears to be
intriguing and has not been explained to the satisfaction of the
Committee. The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that the
posts of Chairman, four part time Members, DG (AIR) and DG (DD)

17
are lying vacant since June 1998, May 1998, November 1999, August
1998 and June, 1999 respectively and that the Government has not
appointed even the posted Member (Finance), Member (Personnel) and
the two representatives of the employees. Moreover, the function of
the Chief Executive Officer is being looked after by an officer of the
rank of Additional Secretary/Special Secretary on ad hoc  basis and no
regular CEO has been posted. The casual approach of the Government
in the matter is evident from the fact that the Selection Committee was
not approached for the last one year (till 10 November, 2000) when
the
subject was taken up for examination by this Committee and the
finalisation of terms and conditions of appointment  has been delayed
on one pretext or another. The Committee strongly recommends that
the process of filling up of vacancies in the Prasar Bharati Board be
expedited as the truncated Board hardly can function effectively and
is incapable of taking urgent and vital decisions also in the interest
of Prasar Bharati and can hardly be considered as an authority as
contemplated by the Act.
Action Taken by the Government
The composition of Prasar Bharati Board, at present, is as follows:
S.No. Name Post
12 3
1. Shri M.V. Kamath Chairman
2. Shri Brijeshwar Singh Chief Executive
Officer Additional
charge on ad-hoc basis
3. Shri M.L. Mehta Part-Time Member
4. Shri R.N. Bisaria Part-Time Member
5. Ms. Chitra Mudgal Part-Time Member
6. Shri L.D. Mandloi, Current Ex-Officio Member
Duty Charge of Director

18
General, Doordarshan
12 3
7. Shri Brijeshwar Singh, Director Ex-Officio Member
General, All India Radio
8. Sh. Pradeep Singh Additional Representative of
Secretary, Ministry of I&B Ministry of I&B
Action taken to fill up the vacancies
Presently Six positions in the Prasar Bharati Board are vacant. Out
of these, recommendations of the Selection Committee headed by the
Vice-President of India in respect of three Part-time Members are
awaited. Proposals for filling up the vacant post of Member (Personnel)
and Member (Finance) has been forwarded to Vice-President
Secretariat. Recommendations of the Selection Committee are expected.
Additional charge of Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati has been
given to the Director General, All India Radio with the approval of
Appointment Committee of Cabinet. Selection for Director General of
Doordarshan is in process in Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Besides, there
are two vacancies pertaining to the representatives of the employees.
Since all the employees of erstwhile AIR & DD continue to be
Government servants, the election of the representatives cannot be held,
till their services are transferred to Prasar Bharati, in accordance with
the provisions of Prasar Bharati Act. In addition to above action is being
taken to filling up the post of Chief Executive Officer on regular basis.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee finds that the Review Committee on Prasar
Bharati Board has made certain recommendations on status, rights and
functions (duties) of the Prasar Bharati Board. It has been informed
that the Government has not yet taken any decision on the same. The
Committee is unable to see any reason for the proposed exclusion of

19
the representatives of employees, Member (Finance), Member (Person-
nel),
DG (AIR) and DG (DD), from the Prasar Bharati Board. The Committee
trusts that the Government will take a final view on the recommen-
dations of the Review Committee only after exhaustive consultation
with this Committee and the Consultative Committee attached to the
Ministry of I & B and Prasar Bharati in the overall interest of the
Organisation.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Review Committee have wide
ranging ramification including amending the Prasar Bharati Act. While
Review Committee’s Report on Prasar Bharati was under examination
of the Ministry, a Group of Ministers (GoM) has been constituted to
examine various issues pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati.
Currently there is no change in the composition of the Board, which
is as was in the original Act. Member (Finance), Member (Personnel),
DG (AIR) and DG (DD) and two representatives of the employees are
members of the Board. As far as non-reprsentation of two employees
in the Prasar Bharati Board is concerned, it is again submitted that since
all the employees of erstwhile AIR & DD continue to be Government
Servants, the election of the representatives cannot be held, till their
services are transferred to Prasar Bharati, in accordance with the
provisions of Prasar Bharati Act.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Objectives of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee notes with concern that Prasar Bharati has been
telecasting educational programmes for 18 per cent of its total telecast
time and spends 46 per cent time on programmes on entertainment
and 35 per cent on information. The programmes on entertainment earn
revenue for the Corporation. However, the Committee is of the opinion
that Prasar Bharati should give more weightage to education and
information programmes and thus fulfill its obligation as a public

20
service broadcaster. There is need to balance the role of Prasar Bharati
as a public broadcaster and revenue earner. Excessive emphasis on
revenue generation disregarding its role as a public broadcaster will
be contrary to its avowed objectives. The Committee desires that a
proper
balance should be maintained in telecast of programmes so that
Prasar Bharati plays its role as a public broadcaster consistent with the
necessity of raising adequate resources without affecting the quality
of programmes.
Action Taken by the Government
EDUCATIONAL TELECAST ON DOORDARSHAN
As a public service broadcaster, Doordarshan has been promoting
telecast of Educational programmes on its channel and create a learning
society by telecast formal and informal educational programmes along
with other relevant enrichment programmes useful for the common
viewers.
With an aim to increase the reach of educational telecast ‘Gyan
Darshan’—a Educational satellite channel — was launched by Ministry
of Information & Broadcasting on 26th January, 2000 in collaboration
with Ministry of Human Resource Development and Indira Gandhi
National Open University. Presently, Gyan Darshan has a 24 hours
telecast. Following programmes are simultaneously telecast on DD-I
(National Network) as follows:—
For Senior Secondary School Students
Programmes produced by Central Institute of Educational
Technology (CIET), and the National Open School, Ministry of
Human Resource Development.
Telecast timings :
5.00 a.m. to 5.30 a.m. (daily) (National Network)
10.00 a.m. to 10.30 a.m. (Monday to Friday) (NCERT) (National
Network)
Higher Educational Programmes (Country-wise classroom)

21
Programmes sourced by University Grants Commission/Consor-
tium for Educational Communication, Ministry of Human
Resource Development.
Telecast timings : 5.30 a.m. to 6.00 a.m. (daily)
Distance Education Programmes
Curriculum — based programme on various courses conducted
and sourced by the Indira Gandhi National Open University.
Telecast timings : 6.00 a.m. to 6.30 a.m. (daily)
Primary Education Programmes
Programmes produced by State Institute of Education Technol-
ogy/Central Institute for Educational Technology are telecast by
Doordarshan Kendra, Bhubaneshwar.
Telecast timings: 10.00 a.m. to 10.30 a.m. (Monday to Friday) on
Regional DD – 1 and RLSS.
Literacy Mission and Adult Educational Programme
The Development Communication Division Cell of the Directorate
has completed a campaign on National Literacy Mission by
telecasting spots on National Literacy Mission from Regional
Kendras of Doordarshan – Bhubaneshwar, Patna, Ranchi, Raipur,
Lucknow, Guwahati and Kendras of North East States. Currently,
also the sports are being telecast on National News.
Spots on Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan are being telecast from 17
Doordarshan Kendras viz. Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal,
Bhubaneswar, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Jallandhar,
Lucknow, Mumbai, Raipur, Ranchi, Jammu, Thiruvanantapuram,
Delhi and Hissar.
Doordarshan has undertaken a restructuring exercise of its
programming on DD – National Channel with a view to meeting
its mandate as a Public Service Broadcaster and also ensure that
it is in a position to generate revenue to gradually become self-

22
supporting in the present broadcasting scenario.
As of now, DD – 1 is telecasting various kinds of informative
programmes for different groups of viewers. These like social
value systems, dynamics of scientific temper, information
technology, environmental issues, sense of discipline, myths
relating to superstition etc. are included in programme content
to make them informative while providing entertainment.
Prasar Bharati offers a bouquet of channels which cater to the
needs of viewers across the country through National as well as
Regional services. These channels provide educational, informa-
tive and entertaining programmes.
— On National Network of DD-1, educative, informative and
entertaining programmes are designed in such a manner that
viewers get all kinds of wholesome programmes. Out of
18-1/2 hours’ terrestrial transmission, 13-1/2 hours are on
National and 5 hours on Regional platform.
— On Regional platform, 50 per cent of programmes are
educative and informative.
— The Metro channel which was earlier known as DD-2, was
meant for entertainment. It was converted into a 24 hours
news channel DD-News with effect from 3.11.2003.
— DD-Bharati is a cultural channel and it telecast nearly 25.1
per cent programmes on education.
Even for a public broadcaster, entertainment programmes rare
necessary to attract the viewers to the channel. If the content is
overburdened with information and education programmes, the
viewership may be adversely affected. If viewers do not come to
the channel, the entire effort of putting informative and educative
programmes on air may be lost. Keeping this in view, Prasar
Bharati has strived to strike a proper balance between
entertainment, education and information in its content.
Being a public broadcaster, Prasar Bharati plays significant role
very distinct from other channels bringing together diverse
cultural, religious and other social and political events which are

23
our country’s essential aspects. As far as Prasar Bharati is
concerned, the main objectives are followed in letter and spirit
as per its mandate.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 51
The examination of the time slot allotted by Prasar Bharati to
private producers at DD Kendra, Kolkata has brought out many
disquieting aspects as detailed in the following paragraphs which
require urgent corrective action on the part of Prasar Bharati Board
and the Ministry.
(i) A private producer has been able to monopolise
Doordarshan-I and Doordarshan-7 to the extent of 26% and
70% respectively of the total programmes telecast at Kolkata.
A private company-Rainbow Productions owned by Shri
Ramesh Gandhi secured 8 programmes on these channels
from Kolkata Doordarshan/Directorate at Delhi namely,
‘Khas Khabar’, ‘Janmabhoomi’, Suprabhat’, ‘Aaj Ke’,
‘Mukhomukhi’ ‘Kankanjali’ ‘Ferrighat’ and feature film
programmes of nine hours duration daily. Many of these
programmes have repeat telecast also;
(ii) As the inquiry into the allegations has revealed, it could
not have been without the connivance and active collusion
of the Doordarshan officials with ulterior motives. The
Committee is surprised that although enquiry has already
established involvement of 14 officers of the Prasar Bharati
no action, has yet been taken to punish the guilty or against
the private producer whose role is required to be probed
in-depth;
(iii) M/s Rainbow Productions Private Limited had filed a court
case against Kolkata Doordarshan Kendra against the
decision of Prasar Bharati to discontinue the programme
“Khas Khabar”. The Committee views that the justification
offered by the Government representative for withdrawal of

24
the appeal filed by Doordarshan on the plea that the
litigation was not reaching its logical end and that on
revenue consideration outside the court settlement was
reached with the producer of “Khas Khabar”  (Rainbow
Productions), is all by way of after thought and not at all
convincing. In view of the fact that programme is repeated
four times a day and also taking note of the view of the
CEO Prasar Bharati that it is an aberration and also
considering the other information gathered by it, the
Committee holds the view that the programme “Khas
Khabar” which is a news bulletin based on hard daily news
rather a current affairs programme was deliberately allowed
in clear violation of the policy decision of Prasar Bharati
Board taken on 11 March, 1999 that private producers will
not be permitted to produce and telecast news programmes
on National or Regional Channels of doordarshan. Instead
of compiling with the decision of the Prasar Bharati Board
and the views expressed by this Committee during the
evidence taken on 5 September, 2000, the Prasar Bharati by
way of an act of defiance increased the duration the
programme 'Khas Khabar' w.e.f. 18 September, 2000. The
inept handling of the issue since termination notice issued
for the programme "Khas Khabar" and "Mukho Mukhi"
w.e.f.
16 October, 2000 and sudden withdrawal of the case and the
basis for outside settlement, raised many eyebrows and
requires to be investigated. In the correspondence and in the
affidavits filed before the High Court/Supreme Court the
Prasar Bharati has significantly taken the wholly erroneous
plea that the programme was a 'news based current affairs
programme' and not a "News Bulletin" till March, 1999;
(iv) The officer dealing with the legal matters who was aware
of the facts of the case initially deliberately avoided
appearance before the Committee without any convincing
reason and when he subsequently attended, took up the
strange but significant attitude of passing on responsibility
to others.

25
(v) In allotment of time slots for various programmes the Prasar
Bharati has given more weightage to the commercial aspect
as admitted by the DDG (FV) in his note that it would be
prudent to accept the additional revenue offered by the
producer of "Khas Khabar" which was very high, and they
should unnecessarily not lose the same especially when
Prasar Bharati was not having a strong case in the High
Court because of inconsistencies in their (Prasar Bharati)
approach to deal with the programme;
(vi) Even though news programmes are not awarded to private
producers, 'Khas Khabar' which was a hard news based
programme by the Ministry's own reckoning, was allowed
in the garb of news based current affairs programme and
its frequency and time increased from 15 to 20 minutes
obviously with ulterior motives.
(vii) A serious mischief was played by the producer of the
programme 'Khas Khabar' in its telecast on 21 November,
2000 by describing the State of Jammu & Kashmir, which
is an integral part of India, as 'India occupied Kashmir'. The
Committee desires a proper inquiry to be conducted on this
issue as it cannot be described merely as an innocuous error.
The Committee apprehends that there is every possibility of
recurrence of such mischief if the Prasar Bharati does not
review its policy and enforce strictly the regulation relating
to private producers.
(viii) Ministry of I&B and Prasar Bharati have not conducted any
proper inquiry as promised to the Committee into the whole
episode of awarding of Doordarshan slots to private
producers particularly into the irregularities made in
awarding of various slots to Rainbow Productions Pvt. Ltd.
The Committee is constrained to observe that even though
the former CEO expressed concern and held the view that
no private
producer should be allowed to produce and telecast news
on national or regional Channels and that the 'Khas Khabar'
had ceased to be a 'news and current affairs programme' and

26
acquired the character of a 'News Bulletin', (thus fallen in
the prohibited category which was to be discontinued
forthwith) no effective step has been taken to discontinue
private
news telecast 'Khas Khabar' on Doordarshan. Nor any
action has been taken against the delinquent officials who
favoured a private producer at the cost of public exchequer.
Not only a meagre fee was collected from the said private
producer by misclassification of programme, he was also
favoured by not collecting bank guarantees of the appropri-
ate amount.
(ix) A single (private) producer was awarded 11 time slots of
programmes for telecast from DD-I and DD-II i.e.
Doordarshan and DD Bangla Channel and that no fair
procedure was adopted since other producers were not given
any opportunity to compete which resulted in a monopoly
of the Doordarshan Bangla Channel by a single private
producer. Some of the proposals for programmes were
directly entertained by the Doordarshan directorate in utter
violation of established procedure which resulted in award
of time slot on a single bid. The Committee also regrets to
note that the then CEO Prasar Bharati did not take any action
in the matter as promised to the Committee during evidence.
The Committee cannot but express its deep concern about
the conduct of various officials of Prasar Bharati acting more
for the benefit of one private producer thereby violating the
conduct rules and damaging the interests of the nation. The
Committee strongly recommends to Prasar Bharati Board/
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to look into all such
alleged irregularities and take stern action as per relevant
rules.
(x) Prasar Bharati management favoured the private producer
at the cost of exchequer in utter violation of rules by
accepting Bank Guarantees of inadequate amounts for the
programmes telecast by him. In the case of 'Janmabhoomi'

27
Bank Guarantee required as per guidelines was to be of Rs.54
lakh, but the guarantee given is of Rs. 60,000/- only. In the
case of 'Khas Khabar' no bank guarantee has been taken
though he was required to furnish the same for Rs.13 lakh.
Similarly for 'Kankanjali' Bank Guarantee of Rs.40,000 was
accepted against the requirement of Rs.2 lakh. It is thus a
case of blatant favoritism which cannot be without any
consideration.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
(i), (iii), (vii) and (ix) Prasar Bharati decided to reduce the
approved period of telecast of the programmes Janmabhoomi, Khas
Khabar and Suprabhat. It was further decided to terminate the
programme Mukho Mukhi and two out of four bulletin of Khas Khabar.
Accordingly,
notices were issued to the producer by DDK Calcutta on 29.9.2000.
M/s Rainbow Productions approached the Calcutta High Court through
a Writ Petition and got stay order against the notices issued by DDK
Calcutta. The Hon'ble High Court gave its final verdict in the main
case and, vide its order dated 14.2.2001, quashed all the notices dated
29th September 2000 issued by the Director, DDK Calcutta. However,
the Court gave liberty to Prasar Bharati to take further action in the
matter strictly in terms of the agreement. On the advice of the
Additional Solicitor General, appeal duly vetted by the ASG has been
filed in Calcutta High Court before the Division Bench on 19.3.2001
in respect of Khas Khabar and 21.3.2001 for Janmabhoomi and
Suprabhat and Mukho Mukhi and simultaneously notices were issued
under Clause 22 of the Agreements to the producers on 20.3.2001. The
producer filed a Writ Petition against these notices before the single
Bench of Calcutta High Court who ordered on 30.3.2001 to maintain
the status quo . Director Doordarshan Kendra, Calcutta filed an appeal
against this order before the Division Bench on 10.4.2001 in respect
of Khas Khabar, Janmabhoomi, Suprabhat, and Mukho Mukhi on
17.4.2001. The matter came up for hearing before the Court on 23.4.2001
and the appeal was admitted and the Division Bench directed the
appellant to file paper book within three weeks. On 9th May, 2001,

28
another appeal was filed by Prasar Bharati before the Division Bench
against the order dated 30th March, 2001. It was admitted, with
direction to file paper book. It was further directed that both the
appeals will be heard analogously. As the agreements for 'Khas Khabar'
were nearing their end by March, 2003, M/s Rainbow Productions filed
a writ petition, on which the High Court passed interim order for
maintaining status quo regarding telecast of 'Khas Khabar' for 8 weeks
and on
5.2.2003 the interim order was extended till further orders by the Court.
A vacation petition for this was filed by DDK, Kolkata on 02.09.2003.
On 18.9.2003. the Kolkata High Court ordered M/s Rainbow
Productions Ltd. to pay arrears as admitted by them in 3 installments.
Subsequently, they were asked to make payment of current dues on
regular basis. Since they failed to make the requisite payment as per
the Court's directive, the programme was stopped with effect from
1.112004. Meanwhile,
M/s Aarambh Advt. & Mktg. had filed a writ petition in Kolkata High
Court, in which the Court on 9.10.2002 ordered status quo  regarding
all the programmes being released by the agency. Serial 'Janmabhoomi'
came to its end after its extended period of 1300 days of telecast, on
29.8.2003 but other programmes released by the agency continued to
be telecast on the basis of this stay order, for which the agency had
stopped paying the dues. Eventually, a comprehensive vacating petition
was filed by DDK, Kolkata against this stay order on 21.5.2004, in which
the Court ordered payment of current dues on regular basis, for default
of which Prasar Bharati was free to take appropriate action. Since the
agency failed to clear the dues, all the programmes of the agency other
than 'Khas Khabar', namely, Aleya, Short, Jhankar and Mukho Mukhi
were taken off the air with effect from 14.7.2004. The Prasar Bharati
Board has decided not to allow telecast of any "News" programme
produced by the outside agency and which are similar to "Khas Khabar"
in any channel of Doordarshan's network. The process for recovery of
all the dues from the agency has been initiated. All the programmes
of M/s Rainbow Production as well as programmes released by M/
s Aarambh Advtg. & Mktg. Ltd. have been taken off from DD-1/DD-
7.

29
(ii) & (viii : The Preliminary Enquiry Report submitted by
Sh. S.C. Tewari, former Director (BP&L), M/o I&B regarding the
irregularities committed in sanctioning of programmes for DDK,
Kolkata was examined by DG:DD and they had forwarded proposals
against 14 officers involved in the matter regarding initiation of
disciplinary proceedings against them for the lapses committed by
them. These 14 proposals were examined in details in the Ministry in
consultation with DG:DD and Central Vigilance Commission. Out of
these 14 cases, 4 cases have been closed, in one case CVC have advised
for closure in 5 cases Government's Displeasure has been issued, in
one case CVC have
advised for conveying of Govt.'s Displeasure and in one case regular
Departmental Proceedings for major Penalty were initiated on
28.11.2003 that have been concluded with the imposition of penalty of
10% cut-in-pension for two years on 20.9.2006. In remaining 2 cases
major
penalty has been recommended and these cases are in different stages
of progress.
(iv) Necessary action was taken against the officer who had been
looking after the Legal Cell of DDK, Kolkata during the relevant period.
He was placed under suspension vide Directorate General, Doordarshan's
Order dated 30.9.2003. However, the High Court stayed Directorate's
Order dated 30.9.2003 and by virtue of this Order, the Officer joined
duty on 28.12.2003. Subsequently, he retired from service on
superannuation on 31.12.2003.
(v) & (vi) Necessary action has already been taken by Prasar
Bharati in this regard, and responsibility has been fixed on two officers
for withdrawing the petition pending before the High Court and for
taking a decision to increase the duration and periodicity of the
programme Khas Khabar . The explanation of both the officers in this
regard has not been found satisfactory by Prasar Bharati, which has
recommended to the Ministry of I&B for initiation of disciplinary
proceedings against them. Against one Officer, Regular Departmental
Proceedings for Major Penalty were initiated against him. The same
have been concluded with the imposition of penalty of 10% cut-in-
pension for two years on 20.9.2006 and in respect of the other officer,

30
the Cadre Controlling Authority i.e. DOP&T, have initiated RDA for
major Penalty against him.
(x) The Preliminary Enquiry Report submitted by Sh. S.C.
Tewari, former Director (BP&L), M/o I&B has brought out the fact that
required bank guarantee has not been collected in case of programmes
Khas Khabar, Janmabhumi and Kanakanjali and fixed responsibility
on one officer for alleged lapse. The explanation of the officer in this
regard has not been found satisfactory by Prasar Bharati, which has
recommended to the Ministry of I&B for initiation of disciplinary
proceedings against him. CVC's advice for closure of the case in respect
of the allegations mentioned in this para has since been received. The
said advice is under examination in this Ministry.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.8 and 9 of Chapter I)
Recommendation Para No. 52Recommendation Para No. 52Recommendation Para No. 52Recommendation Para No. 52Recommendation Para No. 52
The Committee recommends that Prasar Bharati should review
its policy pertaining to award of Doordarshan slots to private producers
and selection of various types of programmes for telecast on
Doordarshan Channels. It needs to take special care in awarding the
telecast of programmes based on news and current affairs and should
strictly comply with the decision of Prasar Bharati Board taken on 11
March, 1999 not to permit the private producers to produce and telecast
news bulletins on national and regional channels of Doordarshan.
Prasar Bharati should stop forthwith the telecasting of ‘Khas Khabar’
and
other programmes of similar kind through Doordarshan slots in
order to preserve its status of a national broadcaster and should take
effective steps to contest the proceedings initiated by Rainbow
Productions.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
‘Khas Khabar’ has been taken off air with effect from 1.11.2004.

31
Prasar Bharati Board has decided not to allow telecast of any
'News' programme produced by outside agency and which are similar
to 'Khas Khabar' in any channel of Doordarshan's Network. In
pursuance of this decision some sponsored news and current affairs
programmes produced by outside agency and telecast on some
Doordarshan Kendras, were denied extension and no such new
programme is being considered.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 53Recommendation Para No. 53Recommendation Para No. 53Recommendation Para No. 53Recommendation Para No. 53
The Committee notes that the officials of Prasar Bharati at the
level of the Directorate as well the Kolkata Doordarshan Kendra, in
various communications with the producer and before the courts
deliberately described the programme ‘Khas Khabar’ as a news based
current affairs programme. The Committee notes with concern that
even the senior level officials of Prasar Bharati ignored their duty to
the nation since they pleaded for accepting the additional (high)
revenue offered by the producer of 'Khas Khabar' in violation of the
norms. The Committee expresses serious concern on the ways of
functioning of Prasar Bharati as admitted by the then DDG (F & V)
in his note dated 15 November, 1999 that Prasar Bharati did not have
a very strong case on 'Khas Khabar' in the Kolkata High Court because
of the inconsistencies in the approach of the Prasar Bharati in dealing
with the programme. The Committee regrets to note that instead of
taking recourse to due process of law in dealing with the case, the
Prasar Bharati requested the producer of 'Khas Khabar' to withdraw
the petition pending before the High Court and compromised the
interests of the Doordarshan and allowed the private, producer-
Rainbow Productions to reap profits at the expense of Doordarshan.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Necessary action has already been taken by Prasar Bharati in this
regard and responsibility has been fixed on two officers for
withdrawing the petition pending before the High Court and for taking
a decision to increase the duration and periodicity of the programme
Khas Khabar. The explanation of both the officers in this regard has

32
not been found satisfactory by Prasar Bharati, which has recommended
to the Ministry of I&B for initiation of disciplinary proceedings against
them. The major penalty proceedings were initiated against one officer.
The disciplinary proceedings have been concluded on 20.9.2006 with
the imposition of penalty of 10% cut-in-pension for two years. The other
officer involved has also been chargesheeted by DOP&T, The Cadre
Controlling Authority in respect of the alleged officer, who have
initiated RDA for major penalty against him.
In order to ensure that procedural lapses do not recur in future
and to avoid a single producer getting assigned large chunks of air
time in future, the concept of Channel Guardians is put in practice.
Senior officers from the Directorate have been designated as Channel
Guardians for one or two regional channel/kendras to inspect and
supervise their functioning and to look after their requirements with
the objective of increasing their efficiency. They are required to visit
their designated channels/kendras at least once every month the visit
being at times, unannounced i.e. surprise visit.
The visit/inspection shall, inter-alia, cover the following aspects:—
(i) Suitability of the FPC with reference to the identified
requirements of the region and those of the competing
channels;
(ii) Revenue generation with reference to targets, previous years
performance and future potential;
(iii) In-house production activity and utilisation of Kendra's
capabilities with reference to the manpower and equipments;
(iv)  Arrangements and commercial opportunities that could be
exploited out of the Library, Archives and Programmed
Exchange;
(v) Ensure coordination and cooperation between various wings
of the Kendra;
(vi) Future plans/strategy of the Kendra;
(vii) Any other matte r of interest.

33
Channel/Kendra Guardians furnish their inspection report-cum-
recommendations to the DG within the first week of the succeeding
month. They will also monitor the follow up action taken on their
recommendations by the concerned wing at the Headquarters.
No news bulletin is being given on sponsorship basis. However,
current affairs based magazine programme will be taken up on
sponsorship on the National Channel. This has been decided in
consultation with CEO.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
The Committee views seriously the infrastructure and equipment
of SRFTI was allowed to be used by private producers for production
of programmes. The Committee desires an inquiry be conducted into
the matter and proper procedure evolved to prevent misuse of public
assets in future.
Action Taken by the Government
The matter regarding using facilities and equipment of SRFTI for
commercial programmem production was brought to the notice of the
Minister by students of SRFTI who made a complaint on 14.2.2000.
A report was sought from the SRFTI on the allegations contained in
the complaint. From the report and additional comments furnished by
other members of the Faculty and Administration of SRFTI as well as
Governing Council’s deliberations available in the Ministry, it was
observed that the idea of hiring out of the equipment was presented
before the Governing Council on 16.8.1998 and accepted, in principle.
The idea was supported from the point of view of generating revenue
from equipment in their idle time so that the Institute could be over
all benefited.
At the instance of the Chairman, SRFTI, the Dean had prepared
a detailed scheme on 28.1.2000 laying down rentals for using equipment
and this had been approved by the Director, but, however, not brought
before the Governing Council for a decision. SRFTI started allowing

34
these facilities of the Institute to be used from July, 1999 when only
an in principle approval of the Governing Council existed for the same.
Meanwhile, the hiring of the equipment took place on the following
three occasions:—
(i) Hiring out of equipment by Shri Gautam Ghose for his own
production from 26.7.1999 to 3.8.1999.
(ii) Hiring out of equipment by M/s. Rainbow Productions of
Shri Ramesh Gandhi, Member of the Governing Council from
28.1.2000 to 7.2.2000.
(iii) Use of equipment by M/s. Aparna Sen on 30.7.1999
(However, since SRFTI had reported that this activity is a part
of an experiment).
The finals bills for these were settled on 10.5.2000 and  1.6.2000,
respectively, by Shri Gautam Ghose and Shri Ramesh Chandra. The
Ministry had also in the meantime directed the Institute to recover the
money for use of the equipment.
Subsequently, vide Officer Order dated 14.2.000 issued SRFTI,
hiring out of equipment has been stopped in the Institute. The
Governing Council in its meeting held on 4.9.2000, directed the Institute
to maintain the present status-quo regarding hiring out of equipment
by the Institute to outsiders and to take it up only after a detailed
scheme of hiring out based on infrastructure and staff available,
academic interests of the students and fixing of standard tariff is
approved by the Governing Council.
Based on CBI’s report and CVC’s advice, Government’s
displeasure has been conveyed to the former Direction, SRFTI.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 55
Prasar Bharati granted indiscriminate extensions to some
programmes produced by private producers as in case of ‘Kanakanjali’
where previously granted 260 episodes were converted to 260 weekly

35
episodes of five parts each resulting into 1300 episodes. The Committee
views that the permission to grant such large number of episodes in
one go was neither warranted nor advisable nor it could be permitted
without active collusion of concerned officials. Besides, it has resulted
in denial of fair opportunities to other producers. Here, the Committee
also notes that the guidelines issued on 19 November, 1998 to restrict
the powers of Directors of Doordarshan Kendras’ to sanction a
maximum of 26 episodes were clearly violated. Similar irregularities
have taken place in case of granting of episodes for 260 weeks in case
of ‘Janmabhumi’. The Committee is also seriously concerned with the
fact that some news based programmes including ‘Aaj Ke’ and ‘Khas
Khabar’ which in fact are ‘News Bulletins’ (for which telecast fee rate
is Rs.18000 per ten seconds) are being treated as news based current
affairs programmes thereby resulting in huge revenue loss to
Doordarshan. The slot for telecast of daily Bengali Feature Film was
allotted allegedly to the lowest bidder resulting in further revenue loss
to Doordarshan. Besides, the Committee is also concerned to note that
the slot for telecasting of ‘Suprobhat’ was allotted to the Rainbow
Productions without giving opportunity to other producers to compete
resulting in revenue loss to Prasar Bharati and denial of opportunity
to others.
Action Taken by the Government
The Preliminary Enquiry Report submitted by Sh.S.C. Tewari,
former Director (BP&L), M/o I&B regarding the irregularities
committed in sanctioning of programmes for DDK, Kolkata was
examined by DG:DD and they had forwarded proposals against 14
officers involved in the matter regarding initiation of disciplinary
proceedings against them for the lapses committed by them. These 14
proposals were examined in details in the Ministry in consultation with
DG:DD and Central Vigilance Commission. Out of these 14 cases, 4
cases have been closed, in one case CVC have advised for closure in
5 cases Government’s Displeasure has been issued, in one case CVC
have advised for conveying of Govt.’s Displeasure and in one case
regular Departmental Proceedings for major Penalty were initiated on
28.11.2003 that have been concluded with the imposition of penalty of

36
10% cut-in-pension for two years on 20.9.2006. In remaining 2 cases
major penalty has been recommended and these cases are in different
stages of progress.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 56
The Committee views these irregularities seriously and desires an
indepth and thorough inquiry be conducted urgently by an
independent agency preferably by CBI to ensure that all those who
indulged in malpractices are dealt with severely.
Action Taken by the Government
The Director, DDK Kolkata has informed that Dr. Upen Biswas,
Director CBI, Eastern Region alongwith four officials visited DDK
Kolkata on 20.2.2001 for secret vertification of files relating to
programmes allocated to M/s Rainbow Productions, Kolkata and its
associates M/s Aarambh Advertising and Marketing Pvt. Ltd.
Subsequently, a seven member team headed by Sh. Prasar, SP, CBI,
Kolkata visited DDK Kolkata on 23.2.2001 and seized the files relating
to programmes of Janmabhoomi, Khas Khabar, Suprabhat, Mukho
Mukhi, Kanakanjali, Aaj Ke, Bengali Feature Film etc. CBI, Kolkata has
again contacted the Director, DDK Kolkata for some specific
information relating to these programmes on 13.3.2001. CBI has
registered a preliminary inquiry on 22.3.2001 against Sh. D. Mukherjee,
programme Executive and other officials of DDK Kolkata for showing
undue
favour to M/s Rainbow Productions while approving various
programmes. CBI officials have visited DG:DD recently to collect some
relevant documents. CBI have registered the following cases in
connection with irregularities committed in sanctioning of various
programmes at DDK, Kolkata:
(I) RC-19(A)/2001 - Kol dated 08.06.2001 —  This case has been
registered by CBI in respect of irregularities committed in
awarding of marketing rights i.e. right to sell Free

37
Commercial Time in respect of Sunday Bengali Feature Film
to a private company. On receipt of S.P.’s Report from CBI,
sanction for prosecution has been issued against two officers
by this Ministry. DOP&T have also issued sanction for
prosecution against two officers, being their Cadre Control-
ling Authority. As regards initiation of disciplinary action
against the other officials, “Govt.’s Displeasure” has been
communicated to two officers and major penalty proceedings
have been initiated against another official.
(II) RC-23(A)/2001-Kol dated 08.06.2001 —  This case has been
registered by CBI in respect of irregularities committed in
the matter of telecast of Daily Bengali Feature Film. On
receipt of S.P.’s Report from CBI, Sanction for Prosecution
against two officials have been issued by their respective
disciplinary authorities. As regards Regular Departmental
Action recommended against four officers, chargesheets for
major penalty have been issued against two officials by this
Ministry and against two officials of DG:DD Departmental
Inquiry is in progress against all the officers.
(III) PE-03(A)/2001-Cal —  CBI had registered a Preliminary
Enquiry against Sh.D. Mukherjee, PEX (Retd.) and other
officials of DDK, Kolkata. On completion of inquiry, CBI
have registered the following Regular Cases:
Case Number : Programme
RC-24(A)/2003-Kol
Dated 30.6.2003 : Janmabhumi
RC-25(A)/2003-Kol
Dated 30.6.2003 : Aaj Ke
RC-26(A)/2003-Kol
Dated 30.6.2003 : Khas Khabor
Investigation reports in these cases have since been received from
the CBI.
RC-25(A)/2003-Kol has been closed in pursuance of CBI’s
recommendations and in consultation with CVC with the approval

38
of competent authority.
In RC-24(A)/2003-Kol,  in pursuance of CBI’s recommendations
and CVC’s advice, sanctions for prosecution have been issued
against two officers by this Ministry. In respect of other two
officers, DOP&T is the competent authority to accord Sanction for
prosecution.
RC-26(A)/2003-Kol, In pursuance of CBI’s recommendations and
CVC’s advice, sanction for prosecution have been issued against
two officers by this Ministry.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 57
The Committee finds from the materials produced an evidence
tendered that in various cases financial irregularities have taken place
resulting in heavy losses to Prasar Bharati, as in some cases private
agencies like Rainbow Productions were allowed to avoid payment of
an outstanding sum of Rs.3 crore for 2 years. The same concern was
permitted to change their agents to avoid being debarred and moreover
they did not submit Bank Guarantee of the appropriate amount in time.
It requires to be investigated how the DDK Kolkata conveniently
overlooked the instructions contained in Circular No.66 relating to prior
permission of DD commercial service. The former CEO had taken a
serious note of these irregularities when pointed out by the Committee
in evidence and had promised to personally investigate the same and
take necessary action. The Committee regrets to note that so far no
action appears to have been taken in this regard. The Committee trusts
that Ministry of I&B would take deterrent action against persons found
guilty for the alleged irregularities.
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding the policy pertaining to award of DD slot to private
producers and selection of various types of programmes telecast on DD
Channels, Prasar Bharati has taken necessary action and policy
governing acquisition of programmes from outside producers both in
sponsorship and commissioned categories are in place now. Revised

39
guidelines for sponsorship of programmes and for acquisition of
programmes have been issued by Prasar Bharati to ensure transparency,
fairness and objectivity.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 58
The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that Prasar Bharati
did not invite bids to award time slots to private producers. The Board
entertained programmes received directly from the producers in case
of ‘Suprobhat’ and ‘Mukho Mukhi’. It smacks of favouring a particular
producer and denail of competitive opportunities to others at the cost
of exchequer without any valid justification. In most of the cases
awarding of slots (selection of programems) was done by a local
committee. The important work of selection of programmes was left
to the whims of a handful of Doordarshan officials constituting the
so called local committee which violated the well established procedure
of inviting bids. The Committee strongly recommends the Prasar
Bharati to look into this and issue detailed guidelines to adopt a
comprehensive and fair bidding system for award of programme/slot
to ensure justice and maximise revenue realisation to Prasar Bharati.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati reviewed the award of time slots to Producers of
‘Superabhat’ and ‘Mukho Mukhi’ as per commercial terms and
conditions. Accordingly, notices were issued to M/s Rainbow
Productions Pvt. Ltd. to discontinue the telecast of daily serials ‘Mukho
Mukhi’ w.e.f. 16.10.2000. The producer of daily serial ‘Superabhat’ was
also given notice to restrict the serial to 260 days with the last episode
to be telecasts on 15.10.2001. Copies of the communications dated
29.9.2000 issued by DDK, Kolkata in this regard are enclosed as
Annexure - I.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]

40
BID/TENDER
Recommendation Para No. 69
Committee is perturbed to find that marketing network of Prasar
Bharati is so weak (as admitted by CEO also) that during last one
year it could earn the revenue of Rs.11 crore only from prime time
slot 1900 hrs. to 2100 hrs. for which a foreign company has offered
Rs.59 crore i.e. Rs.48 crore above the revenue earned by Prasar Bharati.
It has been explained that producers are indulging in undercutting of
each other. The Committee is not fully convinced by this explanation
and would like Prasar Bharati to look into it in detail to ensure that
there was no malpractice indulged in marketing of time slot. The
Committee further recommends that Prasar Bharati should tone up its
marketing efforts to garner at least the proportionate revenue potential
of the market if not the dominant share. Prasar Bharati which has
modern equipment installed in its studios should be capable of
producing programmes of superior quality. The Corporation needs to
modify and strengthen its own marketing strategy.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati could not market its own programmes on prime
time because Prasar Bharati did not own its content/programmes. They
were and are shown on sponsorship basis where the Producer is given
the time slot on payment of a telecast fee. The rights of the programmes
after the telecast return to the Producer. Since different Producers were
sponsoring programmes, there is competition among them in the
market and in resultant undercutting to sell their own programme only.
However, Prasar Bharati has now started its own marketing offices
at Mumbai and Chennai and would be expanded to other cities also.
Prasar Bharati has also initiated steps to own content by commissioning
classic literary works to be made into teleserials by eminent
Producers/Directors. In order to ensure that undercutting of rates is
avoided, in the middle of programme, Doordarshan has kept to itself
one minute of commercial time per half an hour which is marketed
directly. Strengthening of marketing set up is taken up in a phased

41
manner.
The Metro Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news
channel DD News from 3rd November, 2003.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.12 of Chapter I)
Recommendation Para No. 79
The Committee strongly deprecates the absence of the senior
officials of the Ministry from the meetings of the Committee. Instead
of asking the officers responsible for the mistake in drafting minutes
of PRP meeting to be present before the Committee and taking them
to task, for grave blunder, as was the commitment made by the CEO
before the Committee, a purported corrigendum was issued to the
minutes of the meeting of PRP without any authority and without
calling even the meeting of that Committee, and giving a totally
different version after six months of that meeting the purported
corrigendum was issued by way of interpolation and as after thought.
The Committee feels unconvinced with the alleged version and is
unable to accept the same. The Committee desires the Ministry to take
suitable action against the officers responsible for such unauthorised
interpolation. Evidently, it was a mischief and not misunderstanding.
Action Taken by the Government
Concerned officers have been warned to be careful in future.
Doordarshan regrets the lapse.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Informative/News based programmes:
Recommendation Para No. 82
The Committee appreciates the step taken by Prasar Bharati in

42
starting a separate channel for telecasting news and current affairs
programmes. However, the Committee observes that precious news
time is wasted in showing Doordarshan Logo, Background music and
other unnecessary scenes with every news headlines which have no
relevance with news. The Committee also finds that there is ample
scope to improve live expert interview/views programme and make
the news bulletins vibrant with showing live action and visuals. As
such, the Committee recommends that Prasar Bharati should improve
its news bulletins further by avoiding wastage of precious time on
screening avoidable scenes.
Action Taken by the Government
Universally showing of Logo, playing of music etc. are considered
necessary for identification of a TV Channel. Suggestion of the
Committee for improving news bulletins is noted for necessary action.
It may be mentioned that Doordarshan News is continuously
endeavouring to improve news bulletins with better live expert
interviews/views, live action and visuals etc.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 83
The Committee expresses its concern that viewership of such a
vital channel is very insignificant. All necessary measures to increase
the viewership besides providing necessary facilities to cable operators
for down linking and screening the channel and bringing the same
under the mass carrier obligation clause of Cable Television Network
(Regulation) Act be taken expeditiously with a view to popularise the
news channel.
Action Taken by the Government
Improving the viewership of DD-News Channel is an ongoing
process. As per the Cable Television Regulation Act, it is mandatory
for all cable operators to carry DD-News Channel in the prime band
and non-compliance of the same can invite prosecution. This directive
is scrolled on the screen of DD-News Channel for information of cable
operators and viewers. Whenever violation of the directive is brought

43
to our notice, the same is promptly sent to the concerned district
administration for taking necessary corrective measures. The DD-News
Channel is available terrestrially to half of the country’s population.
Its reach has considerably expand with the introduction of Doordarshan’s
direct to home service DD Direct + as a viewer without cable connection
and out of terrestrial reach of channel, are now able to have access
to this channel along with 32 other Doordarshan and private channels
and 12 channels of All India Radio, with the help of a set top box.
DD-News Channel remains the most watched New Channel in the
country in all homes.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
International Challen (DD World) :
Recommendation Para No. 92
The Committee notes that International Channels of Doordarshan
is disseminating pertinent information on Indian cultural values and
traditions and projecting image of the country abroad. However, the
Committee regrets that these Channels are not being managed
imaginatively and so far no formal survey has been conducted to assess
the expectations of the NRIs and foreign viewers from the
DD International Channel. The Committee recommends that a survey
be conducted and necessary steps taken to meet the genuine
expectations of the viewers and also improve quality, contents and
reach of the transmissions.
Action Taken by the Government
DD-India has an agreement with M/s 1021497 Ontario Inc. for
its distribution in the territory of Canada. Two more Agencies viz.
M/s South Asian Family Entertainment and Dr. Hemanth Patel have
also been shorlisted for the distribution of DD-India, DD-News,
DD-Punjabi and DD-Bangla in USA.
Doordarshan India has recently called for tenders from reputed
Agencies to conduct a study on the impact and reach to DD-India
channels in USA, UK and Middle East countries.

44
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Uplinking :
Recommendation Para No. 95
The Committee notes with concern that certain foreign companies
are telecasting uncensored programmes by uplinking from outside the
country without subjecting themselves to regulation of Indian
broadcasting laws which is also resulting in revenue loss to the country.
The Committee trusts that such companies would be brought within
the purview of Broadcasting laws by permitting them to uplink from
India. The Committee desires that adoption of legislative measure to
establish a Broadcasting Regulatory Authority which can effectively
control uncensored programmes be expedited.
Action Taken by the Government
I. The Government had called for the comments and opinion
of the stakeholders and general public by posting a consultation Note
as well as the Draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill, which
inter-alia provides for establishment of a Broadcasting Regulatory
Authority of India. The comments received from the various
organizations/quarters are under examination in so far as Broadcasting
Services Regulation Bill is concerned.
II. Government has further amended the uplinking guidelines
and consolidated into one set of guidelines. These guidelines titled as
Guidelines for Uplinking from India have been notified on 2.12.2005,
in supersession of all previous guidelines. Some of the salient changes
made in the uplinking guidelines are given as below:—
(i) Apart from FDI, FII/NRI investment within the overall limit
of 26% has been permitted.
(ii) In addition to “C” Band, u plinking in Ku Band has also been
allowed.
(iii) For live coverage of National and International events, all
companies having TV broadcasting rights of these events,

45
are required to share their feed with Prasar Bharati under
a revenue sharing formula.
(iv) Foreign News Channels/A gencies can be permitted tempo-
rary uplinking permission up to one year through a pre-
designated teleport under certain conditions.
(v) A processing/permission fee for all applicants has been
introduced.
Incidentally, it also deserves to be mentioned that Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting has for the first time formulated policy
guidelines for downlinking all satellite television channels downlinked/
received/transmitted and re-transmitted in India for public viewing.
Consequently, no person/entity shall downlink a channel, which has
not been registered by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
under these guidelines. Henceforth, all persons/entities providing
Television Satellite Broadcasting Services (TV Channels) uplinked from
other countries to viewers in India as well as any entity desirous of
providing such a Television Satellite Broadcasting Service (TV
Channel), receivable in India for public viewership, shall be required
to obtain permission from Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
in accordance with the terms & conditions prescribed under these
guidelines. These guidelines were issued on 11.11.2005. The guidelines
require, inter-alia, that the entity applying for permission for
downlinking a channel, uplinked from abroad, ( i.e. Applicant
Company), must be a company registered in India under the Indian
Companies Act, 1956, irrespective of its equity structure, foreign
ownership or management control; the applicant company must have
a commercial presence in India with its principal place of business in
India; the applicant company must either own the channel it wants
to downlinked for public viewing, or must enjoy, for the territory of
India, exclusive marketing/distribution rights for the same, inclusive
of the rights to the advertising and subscription revenues for the
channel and must submit adequate proof at the time of application;
In case the applicant company has exclusive marketing/distribution
rights, it should also have the authority to conclude contracts on behalf
of the channel for advertisements, subscription and programme

46
content; The applicant company must provide names and details of
all the Directors of the Company and key executives such as CEO, CFO,
and Head of Marketing etc. to get their national security clearance. Both
Uplinking & Downlinking Guidelines have been placed on the
Ministry’s website (http://www.mib.nic.in).
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Advertisement code and Programme code:
Recommendation Para No. 98
The Committee is of the view that suitable arrangements should
be made by Prasar Bharati to scrutinise the quality and content of
programmes, including advertisements, so that they maintain basic
standard. The Committee recommends that guidelines in this regard
be laid down clearly and followed strictly.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
All programmes are previewed by an in-house committee to
ensure high standards of quality and content. Prasar Bharati has
recently issued revised guidelines which ensure quality even at the
selection stage and they are followed strictly. All commercial
advertisements are governed by the Code for Commercial Advertising
which is strictly adhered to. Advertisements are also previewed to
ensure conformity to the code, prior to the telecast.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27-11-2006]
Financial self sufficiencyFinancial self sufficiencyFinancial self sufficiencyFinancial self sufficiencyFinancial self sufficiency
(Revenue Earning)(Revenue Earning)(Revenue Earning)(Revenue Earning)(Revenue Earning)
Recommendation (Para No. 103)Recommendation (Para No. 103)Recommendation (Para No. 103)Recommendation (Para No. 103)Recommendation (Para No. 103)
The Committee agrees to the necessity of in-house generation
of revenue as suggested by Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance besides attaching importance to the view that the Corporation
should not excessively depend upon market mechanism for its financial

47
needs. It should be independent and distinct from the Government to
play the role of a public broadcaster in the true sense. In view of the
above, the Committee appreciates that Prasar Bharati should strive to
attain financial self-sufficiency in due course and its functioning should
not be influenced by the Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 104)Recommendation (Para No. 104)Recommendation (Para No. 104)Recommendation (Para No. 104)Recommendation (Para No. 104)
The Committee also endorses the idea of Prasar Bharati to raise
revenue by adopting measures that do not affect the quality of its
programmes, and also to earn revenue by leasing out its infrastructure
on rental basis to private organizations since its vast infrastructure built
at enormous cost is not utilised optimally. However, it should be
allowed only after framing the detailed guidelines taking into account
the fair compensation for use of costly infrastructure and equipments
by outsiders. It should also be ensured that in house production does
not suffer on this account and there should not be any scope for
malpractice detrimental to the interest of Prasar Bharati. The Committee
further recommends the setting up of a Marketing Division and a
Strategic Planning Division to streamline and strengthen its functioning
and for increasing revenue collection.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has set up AIR Resources in Akashwani Bhawan,
Parliament Street, New Delhi with an objective to generate revenue
by undertaking profitable ventures in the field of broadcasting and
communications. AIR Resources aims towards becoming the national
and global provider of broadcast transmission, infrastructure and
related services.
For working out the license fee for the infrastructure to be
allowed for use by Private/Government Broadcasters, guidelines have
been obtained from the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance. The guidelines are used to work out the license fee for the
infrastructure.
While allowing the other broadcasters to use Prasar
Bharati’s infrastructure utmost care is taken to ensure that in house
production does not suffer and it also does not affect the quality of
programmes.

48
While on the one hand Prasar Bharati is fulfilling its prime
mandate of a Public Service Broadcaster yet on the other hand, is
making all out efforts to augment revenue generation. This is being
done by way of planned, strategic and aggressive marketing and
also by producing customized programmes. Setting up of Marketing
Division in different parts of the country is a step in this direction.
At present, Prasar Bharati has Marketing Division at Mumbai, Chennai,
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhi, Kolkata Thiruvananthapuram, Guwahati
and Kochi.
A single window facility for all the channels of All India Radio
and Doordarshan, Marketing Divisions cater to all the needs of
advertising. With the continuous and concrete efforts of these
divisions, All India Radio has been able to break its previous records
by earning overall revenue of Rs. 268.83 crores in the financial year
2005-06.
Doordarshan infrastructure facilities like studios, satellite
uplinks, DSND units and OB vans are already available on rental basis
to outside agencies. The rate card has recently been rationalized to
make it more attractive.
Recently, a scheme for revenue generation through scroll of
local commercials has been started at 10 LPTs, on an experimental basis.
Marketing Division has been established at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore and Trivandrum.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27-11-2006]
Utilisation of Prasar Bharati InfrastructureUtilisation of Prasar Bharati InfrastructureUtilisation of Prasar Bharati InfrastructureUtilisation of Prasar Bharati InfrastructureUtilisation of Prasar Bharati Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 107)Recommendation (Para No. 107)Recommendation (Para No. 107)Recommendation (Para No. 107)Recommendation (Para No. 107)
The Committee regrets to note that infrastructure built with
investment of crores of rupees from the public exchequer for production
of programmes at various DD Kendras like Shimla, Shantiniketan and
Patna are lying unused. The Committee is perturbed to note that Patna
studio recorded only 8.15 hours programme in a month, while only
field work is being done at Shimla, Jalpaiguri and Shantiniketan.

49
Similarly, at various other important places infrastructure has been
utilized merely for a few hours in a month which is grossly inadequate
vis-a-vis, the facilities installed there, resulting in wastage of huge
public funds. The Committee is not convinced at all with the
explanation that major centres are overstaffed and the smaller ones
under staffed which can only be termed as mismanagement, neglect
of planning and lack of foresight on the part of Prasar Bharati. The
Committee strongly recommends that required steps like redeployment
and tapping the local talent etc. be initiated promptly.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
In response to the Committee’s recommendations, instructions
have been issued to facilitate Kendras like Patna to increase recording
hours in the studio and also for expediting the process of construction/
installation for recording purpose in respect of Kendras such as Shimla,
Jalpaiguri & Shantiniketan. As gathered from these Kendras, the ENG
coverage outside studio premises is now being done and editing, etc.
being managed at the temporary set-up at the Kendras. Adequate staff
has been deployed at all studios by re-deployment. Efforts are also
being made to achieve an optimum utilization of studios.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27-11-2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 108)Recommendation (Para No. 108)Recommendation (Para No. 108)Recommendation (Para No. 108)Recommendation (Para No. 108)
The Committee is aware of the misutilisation of Government
infrastructure by private producers at various places in connivance with
Doordarshan staff. It has been receiving complaints to that effect quite
often. In one of the complaints names of officials working for
production of programmes of a private producer who is connected with
Calcutta DDK have been given. The Committee had passed on those
complaints to CEO Prasar Bharati and Secretary I & B. In view of these
facts the reasoning that employees are not permitted to undertake
private job does not carry on conviction and is clearly by way of after
thoughts. The Ministry does not seem to be concerned. The Committee
recommends that Prasar Bharati should strengthen and streamline its
supervisory/inspecting machinery, conduct surprise checks and submit

50
a detailed note to the Committee about its findings and necessary steps
taken to remedy the malady.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Vigilance Section of DG : Doordarshan has conducted several
surprise checks in inspections of commercial wing, Doordarshan News
and several programme sections of Doordarshan Channels. In these
raids/surprise checks several irregularities have come to the notice in
processing of proposals alongwith processing fee. Action has been
initiated including suspension of officials and the finance wing of
Doordarshan is conducting the further inquiry. The Chief Vigilance
Officer, Prasar Bharati in order to strengthen and streamline the
vigilance units of both Doordarshan and AIR has conducted a study
of vigilance unit of various public organizations such as VSNL, NTPC
and BHEL etc. In his concept paper, he has suggested a special Anti-
corruption unit for inspecting machinery/surprise checks. This unit will
have flying squads. The use of information technology is also mooted
so that several checklists can be made available on web site of vigilance
in order to make information readily available.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27-11-2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 114)Recommendation (Para No. 114)Recommendation (Para No. 114)Recommendation (Para No. 114)Recommendation (Para No. 114)
This requires to be investigated and stern action taken against
the producer of the programme. Again, Prasar Bharati has installed
VLPTs in the area which are unmanned and incapable of transmitting
the programmes with clarity to the remote and hilly areas. The
Committee views that the explanation given to those problems/
deficiencies that the transmitter was not working due to non-supply
of electricity, the capacity of production infrastructure was not being
tapped fully due to unwillingness of staff to go there and work and
that the VLPTs were installed to overcome the shortage of staff, are
not convincing at all. The Committee is seriously concerned with the
problems of North-East and have already made several strong
recommendations on various deficiencies observed in North-Eastern
States. The Committee is constrained to observe that no concrete action

51
is taken on the recommendations. Therefore, the Committee reiterates
that Prasar Bharati should take urgent measures to overcome the
difficulties/deficiencies in the broadcasting/telecasting services in that
area and bring the people of the area in the mainstream who feel
alienated and neglected, because of lack of responsive attitude on the
part of the Government.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Phase.-I of special NE package was approved in Jan., 02 at
a cost of Rs. 46.52 crores. Following schemes of Doordarshan
approved as part of Ph.-I of Special package have already been
implemented:—
(i) Cable headends in uncovered villages of 8 NE States
(160 No.)—all 160 cable headends installed.
(ii) Upgradation of 1KW HPTs (DD1) at Shillong, Imphal,
Aizawl, Itanagar & Kohima to 10KW HPTs—all the HPTs
(5 No.) commissioned.
(iii) Earth stations at Shillong & Aizawl—both the Earth stations
commissioned.
(iv) Satellite video phones—procured & in use.
Special package (Ph.-II) for improvement and expansion of
Doordarshan services in NE region and Island territories has been
approved by the Government in May, 2006. The schemes approved
under Ph.-II of Special package are as under:—
(a)(a)(a)(a)(a) NE statesNE statesNE statesNE statesNE states
2 NE channels
25000 DTH receive units with TV sets (to be provided in
uncovered areas of NE States)
HPT, Kokrajhar
Maintenance centres—2 No.
DSNG units—6 No.

52
Aug. of OB & post production facilities at 3 capital stations.
(b)(b)(b)(b)(b) A&N IslandsA&N IslandsA&N IslandsA&N IslandsA&N Islands
HPTs, Port Blair (DD1 & DD News)
New VLPTs (DD1)—10 No.
New VLPTs (DD2)—6 No.
Upgradation of existing VPLTs (DD1)—6 No.
Upgradation of LPT, Car Nicobar (DD1)
New LPT (DD2) Car Nicobar
Maintenance centre—1 No.
Aug. of Port Blair Studio
10 channel C band uplink
1000 C band receive units with TV sets
DSNG for Port Blair
(c)(c)(c)(c)(c) Lakshadweep IslandsLakshadweep IslandsLakshadweep IslandsLakshadweep IslandsLakshadweep Islands
New VPLTs (DD2)—6 No.
Upgradation of existing VLPTs—9 No.
Action for implementation of the above package is in progress
& the package is expected to be fully implemented by 2008-09. Financial
sanctions for all the schemes included in the package have been issued.
Tenders for DTH receive units have been received & are under process.
Tenders for TV sets, DSNG units, VLPTs & 10 channel C band uplink
have been invited.
Phase-I & Phase-II of the special package approved by the
Government for improvement and expansion of AIR services in the
North-East including Sikkim and Island Territories is given below.
(3)(3)(3)(3)(3) Phase-IPhase-IPhase-IPhase-IPhase-I
Phase-I was approved in Jan., 2003 at a cost of Rs. 24.8 crore.

53
This proposal includes 6 projects i.e. 10 KW FM Transmitters at Port
Blair, Itanagar and Kohima and upgradation of existing uplinking
facilities to digital system at Itanagar, Kohima and Guwahati. These
projects have been completed except 10 KW FM Transmitter project
at Kohima where an interim set up has been provided. Installation of
permanent set up is also in progress and will be completed during
this year.
(4)(4)(4)(4)(4) Phase-IIPhase-IIPhase-IIPhase-IIPhase-II
Approval of Phase-II of NE Package in respect of All India Radio
at a cost of 143.32 crore has since been received in the last week of
May, 2006. AIR Proposals approved under Ph-II include:—
1. 19 new FM stations
2. Addl. Channels with FM Tr. at Silchar (5 KW) & Gangtok
(10 KW)
3. DSNG/MSS terminals
4. Chinsura-1000 KW MW Tr. (Replacement)
5. Kavaratti-10 KW MW Tr. (Replacement of 1 KW)
6. 100 low power unmanned FM transmitters (100 W)
New sites are to be acquired for the 19 new FM stations & 10
KW MW Transmitter proposed at Kavaratti with the help of the State
governments. Site surveys are being conducted and sites for some of
the locations like Bomdila, Changlang, Khonsa, Goalpara, Tuipang,
Chemphai, Udaipur & Nutan Bazar have been tentatively finalized &
demand notes for cost of sites are being got expedited from the State
governments.
Procurement of equipment has already been initiated &
specifications are under finalization for most of the equipments.
For the proposed 100 Watt FM transmitters, more than 100 places
have been identified in consultation with the respective State
governments. Finalisation of suitable sites for locating these transmit-
ters is in progress.

54
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 115Recommendation Para No. 115Recommendation Para No. 115Recommendation Para No. 115Recommendation Para No. 115
The Committee strongly recommends recruitment of the local
people who are familiar with the geography and culture of the area
and hopefully and present authentic information in programmes. The
Committee also hopes that the Government will take suitable measures
to overcome reluctance of staff to be posted in North East.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Government of India has provided for grant of special incentives
to the employees posted in the North-Eastern Region. Provisions for
these benefits are already contained in the Fundamental Rules/
Supplementary Rules, LTC Rules etc. Prasar Bharati continues to follow
these rules.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV dated 27.11.2006]
Recommendation Para No. 116Recommendation Para No. 116Recommendation Para No. 116Recommendation Para No. 116Recommendation Para No. 116
The 50 K.W. Transmitter should be upgraded at the earliest and
step taken to overcome the erratic power supply so that transmission
may reach the remote border areas. Urgent action should be taken to
attend to the problems of VLPTs and wherever possible faulty VLPTs
should be replaced with LPTs which have higher range and are less
fault prone. The senior officers should make surprise visits to the area
to tone up the administrative machinery.
Para 116 of Twenty Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Information
Technology (13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
At present, there are 369 VLPTs in Doordarshan network. Most
of these transmitters are located in remote and hilly areas for providing
coverage to small pockets of population. These are unmanned
transmitters and run on solar supply. Power supply at some
transmitters has also been provided. Maintenance requirements of these
transmitters are catered to by the Maintenance centres, which are
located away from the VLPTs. In case of any breakdown it takes some
time for the fault to be attended to, as the staff is rushed from the
nearby maintenance centre.
VLPTs are unmanned installations whereas LPTs are manned
installations. In case, VLPTs are replaced by LPTs, there would be
requirement of additional staff. Already there is acute shortage of staff
in Doordarshan Network. Doordarshan does not propose to replace the

55
Annexure “J” to the writ petition
being : copy of the notice dated
29th September, 2000.
PRASAR BHARTI
(BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA)
Doordarshan Kendra : Calcutta
Ref. No. DDK/CAL/ SPONS./5-41/2000 Dated
29.09.2000
To
M/s. Rainbow Production Pvt. Ltd.,
Navina Cinema Building (4th Floor),
85A, Prince Anwarshah Road,
Calcutta-700 033
Sub : Daily Serial ‘Mukha Mukhi’ (sponsored)  being telecast
at 09.50 p.m. on DD-7.
Dear Sir,
In view of Doordarshan’s transmission priority a decision has
been taken to discontinue to telecast of your above programme ‘Mukha
Mukhi’ being telecast from 9.30 p.m.  to 10.20 p.m. w.e.f. 16th Oct.’
2000.
Please treat this as notice of termination in terms of the Agreement
dated 30.1.2000.
It will be highly appreciated if you please arrange to the
outstanding dues already intimated to you, most urgently.
The receipt of this communication may please be acknowledged.
Yours faithfully.
sd/-
for Director
55

56
Annexure “J” to the writ petition
being : copy of the notice dated
29th September, 2000.
PRASAR BHARTI
(BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA)
Doordarshan Kendra : Calcutta
Ref. No. DDR/CAL/ SPONS./ Dated 29.09.2000
To
M/s. Rainbow Production Pvt. Ltd.
Navina Cinema Building (4th Floor),
85A, Prince Anwarshah Road,
Calcutta-700 033
Sub : Sponsored programme ‘Suprabhat’ being telecast at
06.55 a.m. on DD-7.
Dear Sir,
The undersigned is desired to inform you that in view of the
Doordarshan’s transmisson priority, it has been decided to telecast your
daily serial Suprabhat for 260 day (Two hundread sixty) of telecast,
ending on 15th October, 2001.
You are accordingly requested to collect the revised memorandum
of agreement  effective from 16th October, 2000 from this kendra.
Please confirm your acceptance and furnish the signed agreement
required for the above telecast, most urgently.
Kindly acknowledge the receipt of this communication.
Yours faithfully.
sd/-
for Director
56

57
57
CHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMIT-
TEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
Sale of Air Time slots on Doordarshan MetroSale of Air Time slots on Doordarshan MetroSale of Air Time slots on Doordarshan MetroSale of Air Time slots on Doordarshan MetroSale of Air Time slots on Doordarshan Metro
Recommendation Para No. 68Recommendation Para No. 68Recommendation Para No. 68Recommendation Para No. 68Recommendation Para No. 68
Committee finds that Commercial earnings of Doordarshan Metro
Channel was continuously declining in the later part of 1990s. Revenue
realisation had come down from Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 50 crore in 1999.
On the other hand, earnings of private Hindi Channels had increased
from Rs. 200 crore to Rs. 400 crore during this period. On commercial
considerations Prasar Bharati sold its prime time slots from 1900 hrs.
to 2100 hrs. and from 2100 hrs. to 2200 hrs. for Rs. 59 crore and
Rs. 62.5 crore respectively for one year to a company, in which Channel
Nine Network Australia PTY Ltd. has substantial stake. It is ironical
that a company with substantial foreign stake will produce
entertainment programmes in Hindi for Indian viewers.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
It is submitted that though M/s Channel Nine Network Australia
PTY Ltd., were awarded the contract for telecast of programme on
DD-Metro, they were not producing any programmes on their own but
were outsourcing the programmes from reputed Indian production
houses, as per the requirements of DD-Metro. These production houses
had earlier worked for various channels of Doordarshan. Some of the
producers who worked for M/s Channel Nine were M/s Balaji
Telefilms, M/s Numero Uno, M/s Cinevista Communications, M/s
Firework Productions, M/s Softline, M/s Nimbut, M/s UTV, M/s B.A.G.
Films,
M/s B.R. Films, M/s Siddhant Cinevision etc. M/s Channel Nine

58
Network Australia PTY. Ltd. had a full dedicated team for marketing
which could procure good marketing support for the programmes since
they understood nuances of production modalities.
Other leading Satellite Channels like Star and Sony are also
basically foreign channels catering to the entertainment needs of Indian
audience, they are also sourcing the programme from those producers
who provided the software to M/s Channel 9. Doordarshan had the
final editorial authority and it is a fact that revenues of DD Metro were
steadily declining prior to the financial year 2000-2001. In 1996-97, DD
Metro revenues stood that Rs.102.74 crore which declined to Rs.93.79
crore in 1997-98 and Rs.7351 crore in 1998-99 in 1999-2000 it further
came down Rs.46.18 crore. A major reason for this decline was the
rising growth of cable and satellite homes. As per available market
data, there were
9.30 million C&S homes in June 1995 which rose to 11 million in
December 1996. In June 1998 this figure went to 14.4 million. In
December, 1999 it crossed 20 million and as per the market estimates
it is now around 40 million. Because of steady growth of cable and
satellite homes, the market which had earlier been virtually
monopolized by DD, gradually started getting more and more
fragmented. Because of this, the revenue share of DD started falling.
So far as selling of prime time slots from 7.00 PM to 10.00 PM
for an amount of Rs.121.5 crore in one year to M/s Channel Nine
Network is concerned, the decision cannot be faulted from commercial
point of view. After terminating the contract DD’s revenue has come
down.
The Metro Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news
channel DD News from 3rd November, 2003.
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006)
Recommendation Para No. 71Recommendation Para No. 71Recommendation Para No. 71Recommendation Para No. 71Recommendation Para No. 71
The Committee is unable to appreciate the justification to sell out
important time slots to foreign/private companies on the plea that the

59
agreement would be restricted to a period of only one year on a
performance test. Moreover, the policy of Prasar Bharati to do Prime
Time programming primarily on commercial and market consideration
does not conform to the mandate given to it. Since prime time is most
important slot, the Committee desires that prime time programming
should conform to the mandate of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service
Broadcaster instead of being solely guided by commercial and market
considerations.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
The profile of Metro Channel is purely entertainment and it stands
in direct competition with other Satellite Channels like Star, Zee and
Sony. The revenue generated through entertainment programmes on
DD-2 is used for Subsidizing Public Service Broadcast in National
Channel where the focus is on Education & Information which are in
the nature of Public Utility Services. Prime time revenue is used for
Public Service Broadcasting.
The Metro Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news
channel DD News from 3rd November, 2003.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]
Programmes Review and Planning (PRP) CommitteeProgrammes Review and Planning (PRP) CommitteeProgrammes Review and Planning (PRP) CommitteeProgrammes Review and Planning (PRP) CommitteeProgrammes Review and Planning (PRP) Committee
Recommendation Para No. 78Recommendation Para No. 78Recommendation Para No. 78Recommendation Para No. 78Recommendation Para No. 78
The Committee takes a serious note of the casual approach of
Prasar Bharati in posting key officials like DG (AIR) and DG (DD)
and the manner in which such important matters are discussed and
recorded. The minutes of Programmes Review and Planning (PRP)
meeting held on 8 March, 2000 has allegedly wrongly recorded that
there would be no posts of DG (AIR) and DG (DD). It is strange that
the alleged mistake was not detected by anyone and the same came
to light six months later on 5 September, 2000 when this Committee
pointed it out. The Committee views it as a strange phenomenon that
the Secretary, I&B and CEO, Prasar Bharati were not even aware of

60
the existence of the PRP Committee in Prasar Bharati until the issue
was raised in the meeting of the Committee. The minutes referred to
above give rise to the reasonable doubt about the real/intention of
Prasar Bharati with regard to the filling of the posts of DG (AIR) and
DG (DD) which are lying vacant for 3 years. The Committee is unable
to accept simplistic if not naive, explanation about the so-called mistake
and is of the view that the Ministry minutes should not only
categorically disclose its decision but should also take early steps to
fill up the important posts.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Director General of AIR is in position. Selection for Director
General, Doordarshan is in process in Prasar Bharati Secretariat.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]
Gyandarshan Channel:Gyandarshan Channel:Gyandarshan Channel:Gyandarshan Channel:Gyandarshan Channel:
Recommendation Para No. Recommendation Para No. Recommendation Para No. Recommendation Para No. Recommendation Para No. 89
The Committee notes with satisfaction that Prasar Bharati
recognising the significance of increased educational and informative
programmes has started an exclusive channel by the name of
“Gyandarshan” which is broadcasting UGC programmes and other
educative/informative programmes in the morning. However, the
Committee finds that people at large are not even aware of the existence
of such a channel, since it is a satellite channel and cable operators
are unwilling to screen the same. Besides, the Committee also observes
that duration of programmes (two and half hours) is grossly
inadequate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
“Gyandarshan” channel be converted into a terrestrial channel to make
it available to the people directly without involvement of Cable
Operators. The Government should also take all necessary steps
expeditiously to popularise it, increase the duration and improve the
quality of its contents. Prasar Bharati requires to render more active
contribution in coordination with Ministry of Human Resource
Development, since spread of education is one of the important

61
component of its statutory mandate. The Committee also notes that
production, broadcast and telecast of programmes on the themes
involving health care, family welfare, social welfare and population
control should receive greater thrust in the interest of the society and
the country at large.
Action Taken by the Government
Gyan Darshan is a 24 hour satellite channel. Doordarshan has only
provided a transponder on the satellite to the HRD Ministry. EMPC
of INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY is the
coordinator for contents on this channel received from diverse sources.
Therefore a decision to make this a terrestrial channel will need to
be taken by that Ministry. Doordarshan continues to provide a 2 hour
window to this channel in the terrestrial mode.
Apart from Gyandarshan programmes, Doordarshan is telecasting
other educational programmes on various subjects Doordarshan is
telecasting other educational programmes on various subjects,
including the following:—
(a) Environmental issues
(b) Health and Family Welfare Programmes
(c) Adult Literacy
(d) Non-formal Education
(e) History, Culture and Heritage
(f) Women Issues
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]
Broadcasting Services in the North-East
Recommendation Para No. 113
The Committee notes with serious concern that sensitive North-

62
Eastern States, which are facing serious insurgency problem, are not
being paid due attention by Prasar Bharati, since even in Kohima, the
capital of Nagaland, only four Doordarshan officials were in position
producing 58 minutes programme in a week, as 72 posts have been
abolished in 1996 and 31 posts are lying vacant. The Committee is
perturbed at the casual and negligent attitude of Doordarshan, as in
a TV programme telecast at 1.30 p.m. to 2.00 p.m. on the North East,
the demographic scenes were shown from some other place while
commentary was made for another place from the same footage which
amounts to disinformation and playing with the sentiments of the local
people.
Action Taken by the Government
It is true that a good number of posts have been lying vacant
in all Kendras and position at DDK Kohima is much better. However
the available officers and staff are producing programmes to meet daily
software requirement for two hours transmission, 6.00 PM to 8.00 PM
from Monday to Friday. To supplement the in-house production, the
Kendra also commissioned local producers for producing programmes
on health, agriculture, social welfare, music, art & culture, folk music
& dance, education, water supply minor irrigation etc. and also cover
important events taking place within the State of Nagaland.
It is also a fact that the available staff in the Kendra with the
help of outside producers are meeting the daily programmes
requirements for the two hours transmission.
Regarding the programme telecast between 1.30 PM to 2.00 PM
all the cassettes of all the programmes telecast over Doordarshan on
Sundays between 1.30 p.m. to 2.00 p.m. during the months of May,
June, July 2000 have been checked. Nowhere has Tripura been either
written in the script or mentioned in the commentary. It was also not
found that visuals of a particular state were shown while mention of
another state was being made.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]

63
63
CHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation Para No. 70
The Committee is not convinced by the reasoning advanced by
Prasar Bharati for accepting single bid tender for time slot 2100 hrs.
to 2200 hrs. The Committee is at a loss to understand that a Corporation
like Prasar Bharati, entrusted with the responsibility of informing and
enlightening the people inside and outside the country, should be
guided by the rules adopted in the CPWD when it comes to such
sensitive issues like awarding of programmes. Prasar Bharati should
have made attempts to attract more competitors to ensure a fair and
transparent action. The Corporation also needs to modify its tendering
process and make copies of the same available to this Committee for
its perusal.
Action Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the GovernmentAction Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati does not have any rules of its own for inviting
tenders/bids. Prasar Bharati was guided by the CPWD rules since
CPWD is also a Department of the Central Government which executes
all its jobs through award of contracts under bids. The procedural
commonalities are taken as base as per the requirements of
Doordarshan. The process of inviting bids and processing them were
conducted in a fair and most transparent manner to attract maximum
competitors. On the first occasion, there was no response for the prime
time slots when a minimum floor price was fixed. The bids were again
invited without
floor price and also widely publicized on TV, Radio and newspapers.
But only three bidders participated in the bids for the prime time. The
bids amount quoted by the bidders was found to be lower than even

64
the telecast fee. Therefore, bids were rejected with the approval of
Prasar Bharati Board.
The Metro Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news
channel DD News from 3rd November, 2003.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I)
Recommendation Para No. 72
The Committee notes that time slots will be made available for
telecasting the programmes produced by Channel Nine Network
Australia PTY Ltd. for a total of six hours at the consideration of
Rs. 122 crore. The Committee feels that allotting everyday six hours’
slot to a private company is a serious matter involving far reaching
consequences. The Committee is not convinced that all such matters
were considered before taking the decision. Though the Committee is
not against private participation it recommends that the Corporation
should adopt a clear and firm policy on this aspect by taking the views
of expert bodies and public representatives and should lay down
suitable guidelines to ensure transparency and telecast of suitable
programmes consistent with the objectives of Prasar Bharati.
Action Taken by the Government
Though the duration of telecast is 6 hours a day, the actual telecast
is only for 3 hours daily which was repeated for 3 hours the following
day, on non prime time. We will ensure transparency.
The Metro Channel has been replaced by the 24 hours news
channel DD News from 3rd November, 2003.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 18/10/2001-
BC-IV, dated 27.11.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter I)

65
65
CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
-NIL-
 N EW D ELHI;
13 December , 2006
22 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka)
NIKHIL KUMAR,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Information
Technology.

66
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13th December, 2006 from
1500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Sohan Potai
5. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Vijay J. Darda
7. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
8. Shri A. Vijayaragahavan
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekher Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
66

67
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with some
modification:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Twenty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Working of Prasar Bharati’ pertaining to Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting.
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise
and present the above mentioned Reports to the House on a date and
time convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government::
Paragraph Nos. : 10, 16, 19, 51-58, 69, 79, 82, 83, 92, 95, 98, 103,
104, 107, 108 and 114-116
Total : 25
Percentage : 78.12%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. : 68, 71, 78, 89 and 113
Total : 05
Percentage : 15.62%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. : 70 and 72
Total : 02
Percentage : 6.25%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. : Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
68