STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on “Implementation of e-Governance Projects”]
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
37

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on “Implementation of e-Governance Projects”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

CIT No. 159
Price : Rs. 72.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................................. 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government ...... 49
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration .............................................................. 52
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are interim in nature ..................................................................... 57
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on
Information Technology (2006-2007) held on 13.12.2006 ....... 63
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee ..................................................................................... 64

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
16. Shri P.C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri Narahari Mahato
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri M.Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2006-07)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirty-Seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Implementation of e-Governance projects” relating to the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 08.12.2005. The Department furnished Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report on 25.09.2006.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 13.12.2006.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee is given at Annexure-II.
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
13 December, 2006 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation
of e-Governance Projects’ pertaining to the Department of Information Technology
(DoIT).
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 08.12.2005 and
was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha the same day. It contained 61 recommendations/
observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/observations
contained in the Report have been received and categorised as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos : 1-5,7,8,10-15,17,19-25,28-53,55-57 and 59-61.
(Total: 53)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para Nos : 6, 16 and 18.
(Total: 03)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos : 9, 26, 27 & 58.
(Total: 04)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of
interim nature:
Para No : 54.
(Total: 01)
(Chapter-V)

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the Government.
In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement the
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported
to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further
desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations contained
in Chapter-I and final action taken reply to the recommendation contained in
Chapter V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date.
A. Time Targets for projects under NeGP
Recommendation (Para No.7)
5. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that no time targets were
fixed to implement the various Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)/Key components under
the NeGP. The concerned Line Ministries/Departments had been advised to work out
their respective project proposal for obtaining financial approval duly indicating project
service goals, outlays and time frames. In view of the slow pace of progress of the
National e-Governance Programme(NeGP), the Committee had desired that DIT being
facilitator to Line Ministries/ Departments in formulating their project proposals, should
not leave things to them and play a pro-active role to impress upon them to formulate
their project proposals immediately for getting the financial approval so that the projects
could be completed in a prescribed time frame.
6. The Department of Information Technology (DIT) in their action taken reply
have stated that the National e-Governance Plan was conceptualized during 2003-04
and the various Mission Mode Projects under the NeGP were finalised thereafter. DIT
has been coordinating and facilitating the various Line Ministries in formulating their
schemes including the broad guidelines, budgetary requirements and financial approvals,
etc. so that the projects could be initiated as early as possible. However, as per the terms
of the Cabinet approval of NeGP on 18 May, 2006, responsibilities for various activities
have now been allocated to the appropriate agencies concerned. Thus, the responsibility
of conceptualising, developing and implementing the MMPs is stated to be the task of
the concerned Line Ministry and it is for them to prepare the intermediate milestones
and timelines for implementation of the concerned MMP. As per the Cabinet approval
the details of the various MMPs would be worked out by the Line Ministries concerned
and financial approvals taken within 6 months of the approval.
7. The Committee note that as per the terms of Cabinet approval of NeGP,
conceptualizing, developing and implementing the Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
is the responsibility of the concerned Line Ministry. However, DIT, being the
facilitator and catalyst for implementation of NeGP, is certainly expected to play a
pro-active role for the speedy and successful implementation of the MMPs. It is a
matter of serious concern that the Line Ministries/Departments have taken unduly
long time for preparing their project proposals and obtaining financial approval.
The Committee, are of the considered view that DIT cannot be absolved of the

3
responsibility of monitoring the implementation of MMPs under the NeGP. As per
the terms of Cabinet approval given on 18 May, 2006, the details of various MMPs
are to be worked out by the Line Ministries concerned and financial approval
taken within 6 months of the date of approval, i.e. by 17 November, 2006. The
Committee trust that by now the whole exercise must have been completed by the
Line Ministries. They desire that DIT should monitor the implementation of MMPs
by the Line Ministries and apprise the Committee of the progress made by each of
the Line Ministries in this regard.
B. Monitoring of Mission Mode Projects ( MMPs)
Recommendation (Para No.8)
8. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted with concern that Department
of Information Technology (DIT) had no information regarding the progress made so
far by the Line Ministries/Departments/States in respect of each of the Mission Mode
Projects being implemented by them ostensibly on the ground that it was not possible
for the DIT to effectively carry out monitoring of all the MMPs in the absence of the
required manpower and requisite tools. The Committee had been apprised that a
Programme Management Unit (PMU) was set up to design and put in place a Programme
Management Information System (PMIS) which would monitor the progress of the
MMPs. While deploring the apathetic attitude of the DIT in such an ambitious Plan
encompassing the whole nation, the Committee had strongly desired that the DIT should
adequately strengthen the PMU to enable it to effectively design the PMIS to monitor
the progress of the MMPs. They had further desired to know the precise progress made
so far by the Line Ministries/Departments/States in respect of each of the MMPs.
9. In their action taken reply, the DIT have regretted the delay in the formation
of Programme Management Unit (PMU). They have informed that the PMU has now
been set up and augmented by resources from the public/private sector but it is currently
seized of the task of developing the Programme Management Information System
(PMIS), based on which the information from the various Line Ministries will be
collected. The PMIS would be in place, within 3 months of Cabinet approval.
10. It has further been added that DIT has designated Nodal Officers for each
Mission Mode Projects/ Components under the NeGP. These nodal officers are also
interacting with the Line Ministries for getting the required monitoring inputs. The DIT’s
e-Governance Project Management Unit (EGPMU) would be consolidating the inputs
for presenting a dashboard view.
11. The Committee note with satisfaction that although there has been a
delay, the Programme Management Unit (PMU) has now been set up and
augmented by resources from the public and private sector. The PMU was engaged
in the task of developing Programme Management Information System (PMIS).
It has been stated that the PMIS was to be in place within three months of Cabinet
approval for monitoring the progress of MMPs. Although the Cabinet approval

4
was accorded on 18 May, 2006, the reply is silent as to whether PMIS has been
fully developed and the Programme Management Unit fully equipped to consolidate
inputs regarding the progress of MMPs. The task should have been made much
easier with Nodal Officers having been designated for interacting with the Line
Ministries for getting the required monitoring inputs. The Committee desire that
the Department should expedite the matter and they be apprised of the progress
made in consolidating the inputs for presenting a dashboard view.
C. Key Components of NeGP
(Recommendation Para No.9)
12. In their earlier Report the Committee had expressed their unhappiness over
non-submission of a precise reply with regard to specific initiatives taken by DIT in
respect of each of the 8 key components of NeGP, viz. Core Policies, Core Infrastructure,
Support Infrastructure, Technical Assistance, R&D, Human Resource Development &
Training, Awareness & Assessment and Organizational Structure, which had been
identified for implementation. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the specific
initiatives taken in respect of each component.
13. The DIT in their Action Taken Notes have furnished the following
information:
“Core Infrastructure: State Wide Area Networks (SWANs):  The SWAN
projects of 22 States/UTs, out of total 35 States and UTs, have so far been approved
by the Empowered Committee with an estimated DIT share of Rs. 1507.8 crores,
out of the total estimated DIT share of Rs. 2005 Crores. Five States are
implementing the project through NIC while remaining 17 are using PPP model.
Two States i.e. Mizoram and Meghalaya, have initiated pre-project activities.
Project proposals received from three States i.e. Bihar, Pondicherry and
Lakshadweep are under scrutiny and revision. DIT is discussing with the remaining
States/UTs to expedite the initiatives on the SWAN project.
Support Infrastructure: The Common Service Centre (CSC) Scheme has been
formulated and appraised by the EFC. The draft Cabinet Note has been prepared
by the DIT and circulated to the required agencies. The CSC Scheme would be
placed before the Cabinet by July 2006. A National Level Service Agency has
been appointed to assist the DIT in carrying out the work of Project Development
for the CSC Scheme.
Core Policies: The Core Policies on the roles and responsibilities, approach and
implementation Strategy for the NeGP have been detailed in the Cabinet Note on
the NeGP. Further, core policies on SWAN and CSCs have been framed.
Guidelines and Policies on State Data Centres (SDC) and Standards are currently
being worked out. A lot of work has been done in defining the Service Levels and
implementation framework of the NeGP. Further, an Apex Committee on

5
Standards has also been formed under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DIT to
approve, notify and enforce standards.
Recognizing the critical role that well-designed Standards play in the rapid growth
of e-Governance in the country, DIT has also setup an Institutional mechanism
and put in place processes to evolve, approve and notify Standards. The Standards
will be evolved in consultations with all the stakeholders (Industry, academia,
associations, Central and State governments, etc).”
14. The Committee express their serious displeasure at the manner in which
incomplete and casual reply has been furnished by the DIT on the recommendation
of the Committee. After having expressed their unhappiness over non-submission
of precise reply with regard to initiatives taken by DIT in respect of each of the
eight key components of Mission Mode Projects during the time of examination of
the subject, the Committee had recommended that specific initiatives taken in
respect of each component should be furnished to the Committee in the action
taken reply. They are not satisfied with the reply as the Department has furnished
information relating to only three of the key components of NeGP, viz. Core Policies,
Core Infrastructure and Support Infrastructure. However, information in respect
of the remaining five key components, viz. Technical Assistance, R&D, Human
Resource Development & Training, Awareness & Assessment and Organizational
Structure has not been furnished to the Committee. The Committee deplore the
lackadaisical approach of the DIT in furnishing the incomplete reply. They,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that detailed
information in respect of each of the eight key components under NeGP be furnished
to the Committee at the earliest.
D. State Data Centres (SDCs)
Recommendation (Para No.22)
15. The Committee had noted with concern that the policy guidelines for creation
of State Data Centres were only in a formulation stage. As the technical and financial
support to States for this initiative could be extended only after finalisation of the scheme
in this regard, the Committee had recommended for early finalisation of a comprehensive
Policy Guidelines for creation of State Data Centres (SDCs) by the States. They had
desired that all requisite technical and financial support should be extended to the States
for establishing State Data Centres (SDCs).
16. The DIT in their Action Taken Notes have stated that the creation of Data
Centres becomes necessary as more and more e-Governance applications are introduced
by the States. Policy decisions on Data Centres involve issues of Sovereign control
and are of strategic importance in view of criticality/confidentiality of data and the
applications hosted and therefore need to be appropriately addressed. DIT is in the
process of formulating suitable Policy Guidelines for technical and financial assistance
to the States for creation of State Data Centres which are expected to be ready by

6
July 2006. As Data Centres can be planned, established and operationalised in relatively
short time frames, it is expected that these will be ready by the time State Wide Area
Networks (SWANs) and Common Service Centres (CSCs) are established in the States.
17. The Committee note that DIT was still in the process of formulating
Policy Guidelines for technical and financial assistance to the States for creation
of State Data Centres (SDCs) which were expected to be ready by July, 2006. It
goes without saying that Policy Guidelines for creation of SDCs should have been
finalised much before the Centres are set up. The Committee express their
displeasure at the delay on the part of the Government in formulating Policy
Guidelines regarding creation of SDCs. The Committee hope that, as assured by
the DIT, SDCs would be ready by the time SWANs and CSCs are established in the
States so that work under NeGP does not come to a standstill due to non-creation
of SDCs. They would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard.
E. State Wide Area Networks (SWANs)
Recommendation (Para Nos.26 and 27)
18. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that the Department of
Information Technology was primarily responsible for establishing the shared core
backbone infrastructure identified in NeGP and it was proposed to establish State Wide
Area Network (SWAN) and NICNET to provide seamless connectivity to Line Ministries/
Departments which would be progressively leveraged to provide services electronically
to citizens at the village levels by extending its reach through wireless and other
technologies relevant for the last mile. However, the Committee were disappointed to
learn that only 17 proposals from the States were received, considered and approved by
the Empowered Committee and the remaining States/UTs had not submitted their
proposals. In view of the fact that setting up of SWAN network is the basic requisite for
running the e-Governance projects and any delay in the implementation of the SWAN
project would have direct bearing on the implementation of the e-Governance projects,
the Committee had recommended the DIT to take up the matter with all seriousness
with the remaining States/UTs to expedite submission of their SWAN proposals. With a
view that the eligibility criteria could be one of the reasons for delay in submission of
SWAN proposals by the States, the Committee had also recommended for review of the
eligibility criteria by DIT keeping the spirit of the policy intact to help the States in
early submission of their SWAN proposals.
19. The DIT in their Action Taken Notes have stated that Since March 2005 till
date, SWAN projects from 22 States/UTs with estimated DIT share of funding for
Rs. 1507.8 crore have been approved in accordance with the provisions of SWAN Policy
Framework and guidelines issued by DIT in October 2004. 5 States are implementing
the SWAN project through NIC while remaining 17 are using Build-Own-Operate-
Transfer (BOOT) or Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) model. 2 States i.e. Mizoram and
Meghalaya have initiated pre-project activities. Project proposals received from three
States/Union Territories i.e. Bihar, Pondicherry and Lakshadweep are under scrutiny

7
and revision. DIT is discussing with the remaining States/UTs for expediting initiatives
on the SWAN project.
20. DIT have further stated that no State/UT has so far approached them for
relaxation of the eligibility condition in order to avoid any delay in submission of its
SWAN proposal. However DIT have been making efforts for formulation of the proposals
from the remaining States / UTs by providing them necessary technical guidance required
for formulation of the proposals.
21. The Committee are constrained to note that the SWAN Project has so
far been approved in respect of only 22 out of 35 States/Union Territories. The
Committee recall that during the examination of the subject, DIT had pointed out
that since e-Governance Projects are expected to use the common core
infrastructure including SWAN, any delay in the implementation of SWAN would
have direct bearing on the implementation of e-Governance Projects. The delay in
submission /approval of SWAN proposals by the remaining States/Union Territories
is, therefore, a matter of grave concern with serious repercussions. The Committee
desire that DIT should vigorously pursue the matter with the remaining States/
Union Territories and finalise SWAN proposals to facilitate speedy implementation
of e-Governance Projects.
22. The Committee further note that no State/Union Territory has so far
approached DIT with the request to relax the eligibility criteria to avoid delay in
submission of SWAN proposal. The Committee, however, desire that besides
providing all out support to States/Union Territories in formulating SWAN project
proposal, DIT should review the eligibility criteria for submission of the SWAN
proposal, as they apprehend that it might be one of the deterrents leading to delay
in submission of SWAN proposal by the States/Union Territories.
F. Common Service Centres (CSCs)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 29)
23. Emphasizing the need for early selection of National Level Service Agency
(NLSA) for timely implementation of Common Service Centres (CSCs) and since the
core activities relating to e-projects had to be carried out by NLSA, the Committee had
recommended in their earlier report that the selection process of the agency should be
completed early so that NLSA could carry out their assigned tasks and the proposed
target of setting up of 1,00,000 CSCs could be achieved by the year 2007.
24. The DIT in their action taken reply have stated the selection process of
the NLSA has been completed and a recommendation has been made by the Expenditure
Finance Committee on the agency to be selected as the NLSA for the CSC scheme.
The approval of the NLSA however, forms part of the proposal of the CSC scheme
itself and requires approval of the competent authority. The CSC will be put up to the
Cabinet/CCEA for approval shortly. Further, the draft Cabinet Note on the CSC has
already been circulated. Subsequently, in a separate note furnished to the Committee in

8
November 2006, the Department stated that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
has since approved the CSC Scheme.
25. The Committee note that the Department of Information Technology
have completed the selection process of National Level Service Agency (NLSA),
but the approval of the competent authority is still awaited. The Committee express
their displeasure at the painfully slow progress being made in the implementation
of the total scheme. They were informed that the target for setting up 1,00,000
CSCs across the country was by the year 2007. The Committee are well aware that
project management and implementation of CSCs would not be possible without
selection of NLSA since the core activities relating to the scheme are to be carried
out by the selected agency. As any further delay in the finalization of NLSA would
adversely affect the timely setting up of CSCs across the country, the Committee
stress that prompt steps be taken to get the approval for the NLSA by the competent
authority so that it could carry out the assigned tasks and ensure timely
implementation of the CSCs across the country.
G . E-Security Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No.34)
26. In their earlier Report the Committee had recommended that DIT should
evolve a comprehensive e-security mechanism to ensure full protection of data/
information generated under various e-Governance projects by the Line Ministries/States.
27. In the Action Taken Notes, the DIT have stated that under the institutional
mechanism set up for standards for e-Governance, 5 working groups have been
constituted with representation from industry, academia, government associations etc.
One of the Working Groups constituted is the “Network & Information Security Working
Group”. This group has the mandate to come out with guidelines, policies & standards
related to network and e-Security.
28. It has further been added that NIC, which is playing a pro-active role in
the standardization process, has setup a Portal on E-Governance Standards
http://egovstandards.gov.in. A Brain storming session on the Network and Information
Security Working Group was held in Chennai recently.
29. The Committee note that a Network & Information Security Working
Group has been constituted as an institutional mechanism with a mandate to come
out with guidelines, policies and standards relating to network and e-security to
ensure full protection of data generated under various e-Governance projects by
the Line Ministries/Departments. In view of the increasing number of cyber crimes,
it has become imperative that the Government take immediate steps to develop an
effective e-security mechanism for data protection. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the matter be accorded top priority and they be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.

9
H. Association of local representatives and NGOs in publicity campaign of
e-Services
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
30. In their earlier Report, the Committee had found that the ability to derive
benefit of e-Governance has been limited in our country because of various reasons
including unwillingness among public to adopt the new technology, resistance due to
ignorance, resistance to change the procedure etc. They felt that a project would be
successfully implemented if the common man starts fully availing of all the services
being delivered through such projects. The Committee had recommended that the
Department should design a well defined plan to make these projects acceptable to the
common man through organizing awareness camps particularly in villages and far-flung
areas. They also suggested the DIT to consider associating the local representatives of
the people and also the NGOs in such campaign to ensure whole-hearted participation
by the public.
31. The Department of IT have stated to have taken note of the recommendation
of the Committee. It has further been stated that the NeGP has a component of awareness
and assessment. The EGPMU has also been augmented with private sector resources to
develop an awareness campaign for the NeGP and this would be rolled out shortly.
Even the CSC Scheme has a significant component of awareness building amongst
citizens about the possible benefit of the CSC Scheme. An awareness campaign targeting
Citizens would also be launched under the CSC Scheme.
32. Although the Committee are happy to note that an anxious campaign
targeting citizens is being launched by DIT under the CSC scheme but no indication
has been given by DIT about associating local representatives of the people as well
as NGOs in such campaign. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the DIT that to
ensure whole-hearted participation by the public, they should associate local
representatives of the people as also the NGOs in such campaigns.
I. Need for suitable changes in laws and regulations
Recommendation (Para No.54)
33. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the age old statutes
and regulations governing the manual process would not be suitable for governing the
electronic processes which require altogether a different set of legal framework and
guidelines to make the e-Governance successful. They had, therefore, recommended
that a comprehensive review of all relevant statutes and regulations should urgently be
done to bring about suitable changes therein to make them compatible with the cyber
age technology enabling the citizens to obtain maximum advantage of e-Governance
projects. They had also recommended to look into the possibility to bring a new legislative
mechanism, if need be, to ensure that the implementation of e-Governance projects
delivers the citizen centric services in an effective and successful manner.

10
34. The DIT in their Action Taken Notes have stated that they along with
DARP&G will jointly examine and review relevant statutes and regulations and the
possibility of a new legislation in order that the citizens obtain maximum advantage
from NeGP. The same will be taken up in the coordination meetings of DIT with the
DARP&G.
35. The Committee are concerned to note that the Department of
Information Technology have not taken any concrete steps so far on the
recommendation made by them to undertake a comprehensive review of all relevant
statutes and regulations governing manual processes since a different set of legal
framework and guidelines might be required for the purpose of e-Governance. In
the changing scenario, it calls for immediate attention of the Government. Keeping
in view the urgency involved in reviewing the relevant statutes and regulations,
the Committee desire that the matter be accorded top priority and pursued to its
logical conclusion. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by
Government in this regard at the earliest.
J. Suggestions by various IT Service/Solution Providers
Recommendation (Para No.58)
36. The Committee had observed in their earlier Report that the representatives
of various IT Services/Solution Providers had given various suggestions for speedy and
effective implementation of e-Governance projects viz. the need for a praradigm shift
in the thought process, capital investment by private sector, utilization of available
expertise and technical skills in the private sector, public private partnership (PPP),
need for sharing of infrastructure, concerted efforts for capacity building, change in
process and process re-engineering, standardization of technology for better operability,
high penetration and usage of IT in the country, identification of successful e-Governance
projects and replication thereof, designing self-sustainable model, strengthening of
intellectual property rights, publicity of e-Governance success stories, guidelines for
outsourcing, etc. They, had therefore, recommended that the DIT should thoroughly
examine those suggestions with a view to exploring the possibility of translating them
into practical reality on different issues relating to implementation of NeGP. The
Committee had also desired to be apprised of the precise action taken by DIT in the
matter. They had viewed that DIT should have frequent interactions with the IT service/
solution providers to solicit their suggestions to increase the pace of implementation of
e-Governance Projects.
37. The Department of Information Technology in their Action Taken Notes
have stated that they have held frequent interactions with the IT services/solution
providers to help accelerate the pace of implementation of e-Governance projects. For
instance, in the Municipalities MMPs, several solution providers who have implemented
projects in the Municipalities have been contacted and their applications are being
assessed and evaluated for speedier implementation. Solution providers have been

11
advised to have their solution certified by STQC to facilitate wide spread implementation
and rollout using these solutions.
38. The Committee regret to note that although they had recommended
that the number of suggestions given by various IT service/solution providers for
speedy and effective implementation of e-Governance Projects should be examined
thoroughly by DIT with a view to exploring the possibility of translating them into
reality and they be apprised of the precise action taken thereon, the reply furnished
by the Department is totally silent on the action taken thereon. The Committee
find that some of the suggestions are very useful for the speedy implementation of
the e-Governance projects. They feel that there is a need for more responsiveness
and openness on the part of the Department to welcome suggestions emerging out
of experience gained by various service/solution providers in their respective
spheres. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
urge upon DIT to examine the suggestions received with due seriousness and apprise
them of the concrete action taken thereon.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
I. CONCEPT OF e-GOVERNANCE
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 1)
The Committee observes that the trend all over the world has been to
provide good governance which is broadly based on the principles of participation,
accountability, transparency, responsiveness, efficiency, effectiveness etc. They
take cognisance of the increasing use of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) in the delivery of good governance. This is sought to be achieved by adoption
of the concept of what is popularly known as Electronic Governance (e-Governance).
E-Governance involves delivery of various government services to the public at
large through electronic means. It has immense potential in realizing these objectives
and in improving efficiency, responsiveness and convenience for end users of
Government services. The Committee’s analysis of the materials on the subject and
also their discussions with the representatives of different Ministries, Departments,
various Governmental agencies and private IT Service/Solution Providers have
revealed that the major aspects involved in the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
are Mission Mode Projects (MMPs), key components of NeGP, Institutional
framework, implementation strategy, financial allocations and capital investment, study
of e-Governance models, requirement of common-core infrastructure, establishment
of State Data Centers and State Wide Area Networks, Common Service Centers,
e-Governance service delivery gateway and integrated delivery mechanism, Human
resources management, capacity building mechanism, requirement of technical
manpower, need for continuous upgradation of skills, high rate of attrition of
IT workforce, outsourcing of skilled manpower, process re-engineering and change
management, uniformity of standards, e-assessment, India portal, replication of
successful e-Governance models, Public Private Partnership, Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG
and C-DAC etc. The Committee’s observations and recommendations arising out of
these aspects are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report.
Action Taken by Government
Department takes the note of the observations of the Committee.

13
II. National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 2)
(a) Concept of NeGP
The Committee observe that in order to bring about total transparency in
administration and make government functioning more citizen centric, the importance
of e-Governance has been recognized in India and the Government has proposed to
promote e-Governance on a massive scale by harnessing all possible resources that are
available both in public and private sectors and by providing required policy initiatives
and budgetary support needed to stimulate its growth. Keeping these objectives in view,
the Department of Information Technology (DIT) jointly with the Department of
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (DAR&PG) conceived a National
e-Governance Plan (NeGP) in the year 2003. The Committee views that e-Governance
through usage of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), facilitates the
efficient, speedy and transparent process of dissemination of information to the public
and other agencies and also substantially reduces the scope of arbitrariness, discretion
and corruption. It increases the citizen’s participation in the decision making process of
the Government and simultaneously strengthens the trust between the Government and
the citizen. The Committee therefore, feel that it is imperative on the part of the
Government to apply all available Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
to provide efficient and effective citizen centric services in a transparent manner at a
faster pace.
Action Taken by Government
Department takes the note of the recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 3)
The increasing usage of ICT world-wide acknowledges the fact that there shall
be extensive application of electronic means in future for interaction not only between
Government to Government (G2G), Government to Business (G2B) and Government
to Citizen (G2C) but also among peoples/cross sections of the societies all over the
world involving minimal manual interface and intervention. The Committee, therefore,
suggest that all aspects of e-Governance need to be examined in-depth by the Government
duly considering the existing as well as emerging ICT not only for its present applications
in e-Governance projects to provide citizen centric services but also to evolve a futuristic
plan to meet the specific needs of the multilingual, multiracial and multicultural society
like ours in the years to come.
Action Taken by Government
Department takes the note of the recommendations of the Committee. As per the
recommendation of the Committee, all aspects of e-governance would be examined
from the viewpoint of providing Government Services to Citizens. In the revised Cabinet

14
Note, which has been approved by the Cabinet, the emphasis has been on making
the Government Process Reengineering (GPR) an integral part of all Mission Mode
Projects (MMPs) with a focus on the needs of the Citizens in multilingual, multiracial
society.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 4)
The Committee appreciated the proposed vision of NeGP to make available
all Government services to the common man in his locality throughout his life
through one-stop-shop ensuring efficiency, transparency and reliability at affordable
cost. They are, however, disappointed to learn that the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) has not even been able to develop a formally approved document
on NeGP till date although NeGP was conceived in mid 2003. The Committee
consider the delay in placing the NeGP document, a matter of great concern, as it
was necessary for a clear articulation of Government Policy on e-Governance.
They, therefore, recommend that NeGP document should be placed before the Cabinet
without any further delay so that the various projects under NeGP find a defined
track to move ahead towards the destination of implementation at a faster speed.
Action Taken by Government
Department of Information Technology (DIT) prepared a Draft Note for
the Cabinet seeking Cabinet Approval for the “Approach and the Key Components
of the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)” and circulated the same to the Planning
Commission and all concerned Line Ministries/Departments on 15.09.05 for
their comments. As advised by the Prime Minister’s Office, Summary Note was
also circulated for comments to the all Chief Secretaries and Secretaries (IT) of the
States/UTs Administrations. Based on the comments/ suggestions received, a Note for
the Cabinet was prepared and submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on 06.02.06 for
seeking Cabinet approval.
The above Note was considered by the Cabinet In its meeting held on
23rd February 2006 wherein it was decided that the matter be considered, in the
first instance, by the Committee of Secretaries, which will make its recommendations
keeping in view: (i) the needs of the common man and the requirements for
efficient delivery of services; and (ii) the report of the National Knowledge Commission
and the e-Governance applications already put in place by various Departments.
The Committee of Secretaries discussed the above subject matter in its meeting
held on 14th March 2006.
The revised Note incorporating the recommendations of the Committee of
Secretaries was placed before the Cabinet for its consideration. At its meeting held on
18th May 2006, the Cabinet approved the NeGP proposal.

15
(b) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 5)
The Committee observe that 26 Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) have been
identified for implementation under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) by the
concerned Line Ministries/Departments and State Governments for delivery of various
government services on priority basis. These MMPs cover the areas of Income Tax,
Passport Visa & Immigration Project, DCA21, Insurance, National Citizen Database,
Central Excise, Pensions, Banking and e-Office under Central Government category;
Land Records, Road Transport, Property Registration, Agriculture, Treasuries,
Municipalities, Gram Panchayats, Commercial Taxes, Police (UTs initially) and
Employment Exchanges under State Governments category; and EDI (E-Commerce),
E-Biz, Common Service Centres, India Portal, EG Gateway, E-Procurement and
E-Courts under the Integrated Services category. Since these 26 Projects apparently do
not cover the whole gamut of Governmental activities, the Committee desire that the
remaining areas should either be added in MMPs list or efforts be made to cover them
under some other projects to ensure that e-Governance projects are taken up as a
composite and comprehensive programme to deliver all citizen centric services through
integrated delivery mechanism. This would also be in tune with the proposed vision of
NeGP which promises to make all government services to the common man through a
one-stop-shop.
Action Taken by Government
Currently, 26 Mission Mode Projects have been included in the list of proposed
Mission Mode Project under the NeGP. A number of Departments / Ministries that are
not under the formal ambit of the NeGP are doing good work in the area of e-governance,
e.g. the Railways. Constant efforts are being made to ensure that other departments also
undertake e-governance initiatives. NeGP identifies certain priority areas/MMPs for
rapid implementation without constraining other areas/departments from being connected
through e-governance projects. NeGP as approved by the Cabinet gives the freedom to
each State to select any 5 MMPs specific to the State other than those included in the list
of 26 MMPs, which could be implemented in that State as part of the NeGP. The Planning
Commission has issued an advisory to all line Ministries to allocate 2-3% of their Plan
allocations for computerization/ e-governance efforts. Though, the NeGP, as formulated
would cover only 26 MMPs (and 5 State specific MMPs), the Planning Commission
Advisory and the components of the NeGP like Standards, Core Policies, Capacity
Building, Core and Support Infrastructure etc. would cover all government Departments.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 7)
The Committee are constrained to note that no time targets have been fixed for
implementation of various Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)/Key components under the
NeGP. The issue becomes all the more serious as two years have passed since NeGP
was conceived and almost half of the period prescribed for implementation of the NeGP

16
i.e. 2003-2007 is already over. According to the DIT, the concerned Line Ministries/
Departments have been advised to work out their respective project proposal for obtaining
financial approval duly indicating project service goals, outlays and time frames. Taking
serious note of this, the Committee would like to know from the DIT whether the period
of two years was not sufficient enough to prepare project proposals. In view of the slow
pace of progress made, the Committee earnestly desire that instead of leaving things to
Line Ministries/Departments, DIT being facilitator to Line Ministries/ Departments in
formulating their project proposals, should play a pro-active role to impress upon them
to formulate their project proposals immediately for getting the financial approval so
that the projects are completed in a prescribed time frame.
Action Taken by Government
The National e-Governance Plan was conceptualised during 2003-2004 and the
various Mission Mode Projects under the NeGP were finalized thereafter. DIT has been
coordinating and facilitating the various Line Ministries in formulating their schemes
including the broad guidelines, budgetary requirements and financial approvals etc., so
that the projects can be initiated as early as possible.
As per the terms of the Cabinet approval of NeGP, responsibilities for various
activities have been allocated to the appropriate agencies concerned. Thus, the
responsibility of conceptualizing, developing and implementing the MMPs is the task
of the concerned line Ministry. It is the line Ministry concerned that would prepare the
intermediate milestones and timelines for implementation of the concerned MMP. As
per the Cabinet approval the details of the various MMPs would be worked out by the
line Ministries concerned and financial approvals taken within 6 months of the approval.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 8)
The Committee are unhappy to note that the information regarding the progress
made so far by the Line Ministries/Departments/States in respect of each of the MMPs
is not readily available with the Department of Information Technology. What has
surprised the Committee is that till now no mechanism is in place in the DIT to monitor
the progress of various Mission Mode Projects being implemented by the different Line
Ministries/Departments ostensibly on the ground that it was not possible for the
Department to effectively carry out monitoring of all the MMPs in the absence of the
required manpower and requisite tools. In this connection, the Committee are informed
that the Programme Management Unit (PMU) set up now in the DIT would be tasked to
provide Secretarial support to the Apex Committee. PMU will design and put in place a
Programme Management Information System (PMIS) to monitor the progress of the
MMPs. The Committee feel that DIT being the nodal Department and the facilitator is
responsible for proper take off of various projects under NeGP and therefore, should

17
have strengthened itself at least to monitor the progress of the projects in various
Ministries/Departments. Unfortunately the DIT could not timely develop any such
mechanism which apparently resulted in slow progress in almost each area of
e-Governance. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to why the Programme
Management Unit (PMU) which should have been constituted much earlier has been
formed almost after two years since the formulation of NeGP in November, 2003. While
deploring the apathetic attitude of the DIT in such an ambitious Plan encompassing the
whole nation, the Committee would like the DIT to ensure that at least now Programme
Management Unit is adequately strengthened so that it could effectively design the
Programme Management Information System (PMIS) to monitor the progress of the
MMPs and also provide secretarial support to the Apex Committee efficiently. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the precise progress made so far by the
Line Ministries/Departments/States in respect of each of the MMPs.
Action Taken by Government
The DIT regrets the delay in the formation of the Programme Management Unit
(PMU). However, the PMU has already been set up in the DIT and has also been
augmented by resources from the public/private sector. The PMU currently is seized of
the task of developing the Programme Management Information System (PMIS), based
on which the information from the various line Ministries will be collected. The PMIS
would be in place, within 3 months of Cabinet approval.
Prime responsibility for executing various Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) vests
with the concerned Line Ministries/Departments and they would be steering their
respective projects including monitoring of the same. DIT’s role is that of a facilitator.
DIT has designated Nodal Officers for each Mission Mode Projects/Components
under the NeGP. These nodal officers are also interacting with the Line Ministries for
getting the required monitoring inputs. The DIT’s e-Governance Project Management
Unit (EGPMU) would be consolidating the inputs for presenting a dashboard view.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter 1
II. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PLANT (NeGP)
(d) Implementation Strategy
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee observe that various Central Ministries/ Departments and State
Governments are involved in the implementation of the NeGP and therefore, the DIT
have proposed separate role and responsibilities for them. As proposed by the DIT, the
Apex Committee would be overseeing the programme and providing policy and strategic
directions for its implementation and resolving inter-ministerial issues. The Line

18
Ministries/Departments would be responsible for implementation of the assigned Mission
Mode Projects (MMPs)/Components. The State Governments would be responsible for
implementing State Sector MMPs under the overall guidance of respective Line
Ministries. The DIT would be the facilitator and catalyst for the implementation of
NeGP by various Ministries and State Governments. The DAR&PG would be responsible
for the generic process re-engineering, change management, Human Resource
Development and Training, and the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
would allocate funds for NeGP through Plan and non-Plan budgetary provisions. The
Committee feel that the role and responsibilities proposed under the Plan appear to be
too general in nature and, therefore, there is a need to evolve an integrated coordinating
mechanism which could precisely define the functional responsibilities of each
Department in regard to step-wise completion of NeGP within a definite timeframe and
also could review their assigned role and responsibilities regularly to suitably redesign
them to meet the requirement of changing scenario.
Action Taken by Government
The roles and responsibilities of the various agencies have been proposed based
on the allocation of business rules and after extensive consultations with Departments.
The allocations of roles and responsibilities have also been endorsed by the Committee
of Secretaries in its meeting held in March 2006. Further, a detailed implementation
Schedule leading up to the formal launch of the NeGP has also been approved by the
Cabinet. In order to meet the requirements of the changing scenario, the DIT and the
DAR&PG have agreed to hold a monthly coordination and review meeting to deal with
changes required.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee observe that the DIT have taken initiatives in the areas of State
Wide Area Networks (SWANs), Common Services Centres (CSCs), State Data Centres
(SDCs), India Portal, e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway, Standards in
e-Governance, Capacity Building, e-readiness, e-assessment, Horizontal Transfer of
successful e-Governance applications and setting up of a Programme Management Unit
in DIT for NeGP. The Committee appreciates the initiatives being taken by the DIT in
different areas of NeGP.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendation of the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 12)
The Committee, however, observe that information regarding initiatives taken so
far by DAR&PG under the NeGP is being collected from them. They are perturbed to
find that no precise reply was given about the specific requests received from the Line
Ministries and assistance rendered to them by DIT with regard to different aspects to
NeGP. The Committee are of the strong view that the Department of Information

19
Technology should develop an effective internal mechanism which could ensure timely
submission of the point-wise and precise reply to the Committee after collecting the
same from various sources. They would like to be fully apprised of the various initiatives
taken by the DAR&PG under its assigned role and responsibilities under NeGP.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are  not convinced by the statement given by the DIT that as both
DIT and DAR&PG are represented on all the major committees constituted for the
NeGP (like Apex Committee, Advisory Group); the coordination among them is ensured
through these committees. In their opinion, this arrangement would certainly lead to
delay in execution of the projects. They, therefore, recommend that a formal coordination
mechanism should be developed for direct interaction between DIT and DAR&PG for
sorting out various issues pertaining to NeGP in general and for accelerating the
implementation of e-Governance projects in particular.
Action Taken by Government
The DIT has noted the observation of the committee and is strengthening the
e-Governance project management unit (EGPMU) within DIT, to collect and provide
precise information and replies. In particular, DAR&PG has reported that the following
initiatives have been taken under its assigned role:
 Organisation of annual National Conferences with states and IT companies
and academia, to analyse problem’s and discuss solutions
 Organisation of annual conference of IT managers of Joint Secretary level
designated in all GoI departments for propagating e-Governance
Since the DAR&PG is responsible for formulation and updation of all office
procedures and new government-business transaction processes they regularly undertake
activities in relevant areas like Records Management including e-mails, revision of
Business Processes, Performance Appraisal System, the Public Service Law,
dissemination of Best Practices etc.
To achieve reduction of paper work in the Government and for switching over to
e-Governance, a software solution for less paper office (LPO) has been developed and
validated for its deployment. This encompasses electronic file movement, tracking and
management, decision making in meetings and Project Monitoring and status tracking.
To encourage excellence in e- governance, five presentations on Best Practices (BP) by
State Governments/ UTs, have been organized for senior officers in Government of
India. A National Conference of district collectors was held on 19-20 May, 2005 focussed
on improvement of delivery of services in the district. This was addressed by the Prime
Minister, and follow up actions are being taken on various decisions recorded. As was
desired by the Parliamentary Committee, a formal coordination mechanism between
the DIT and DAR&PG for accelerating NeGP implementation has been initiated in the
form of a monthly meeting.

20
(e) Institutional Framework for NeGP
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that for effective management of NeGP, an Organizational
Structure has been worked out which will accord credibility to the e-Governance
programme, provide a forum to solicit views of stakeholders, oversee the programme
and resolve interministerial/inter-departmental issues and ensure speedy sanctioning of
projects. The proposed structure would have the needed secretarial/monitoring/technical
support and appropriate decentralization of power and responsibility to ensure effective
execution of the various projects/components by the implementing departments/teams.
At present, the Programme Management Structure consists of Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA), National e-Governance Advisory Group, Apex Committee,
Empowered Financial Committee, Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)/Committee
on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE), and State Level Apex Committees. The Committee is
pained to note that the requisite institutional framework is yet to be made fully operational
pending approval of the competent authority. They are of the firm opinion that existence
of the organizational structure is an essential pre-requisite for successful implementation
of any project. Since various components of the proposed organizational structure are
still in a conceptual stage, the Committee believe that successful implementation of
e-Governance project will remain a distant dream. They, therefore, recommend that the
DIT should speed up the process, complete the formation of Programme Management
Structure including all proposed Committees/Bodies, obtain necessary approvals and
make them operational at the earliest so that the implementation of e-Governance projects
could gain momentum.
Action Taken by Government
The detailed Programme Management Structure has since approved by the Cabinet
including a body to be constituted under the chairpersonship of the Prime Minister to
monitor and provide a thrust to implementation of e-Governance. The Apex Committee
had been formed earlier and a suitable implementation Structure has been proposed at
the State level under the Capacity Building Guidelines. Further, an e-Governance
Programme Management Unit has been set up and augmented with private sector
resources in the DIT.
(f) Study of e-Governance Models
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 15)
The Committee learn that the approach to NeGP is based on lessons learnt from
the past and also experiences from successful e-Governance applications implemented
nationally and internationally. Admittedly, there could be a need to acquire know-how
for programme management practices being followed in other countries and similarly
on-site field studies in other developed countries would help in expanding the knowledge
base and experience for executing similar projects in India. It is quite surprising that

21
despite being aware of the necessity, no formal study of e-Governance applications of
other countries has been undertaken so far. The Committee observe that “Knowledge
Management” is an equally important element to build the strong foundation for
successful implementation of e-Governance projects and they, therefore, feel that
formal studies of some successful e-Governance models of other countries would have
helped the DIT to suitably design the strategy for all domestic e-Governance projects.
Although such studies, being pre-requisite for drafting a policy, should have been
conducted in the beginning itself, the Committee nevertheless enjoin upon the DIT to
undertake a formal study of e-Governance models of some of the developed/developing
countries so as to use the feedback in formulating appropriate strategy for implementation
of NeGP successfully.
Action Taken by Government
The e-Governance Programme Management and funding options study has already
elaborated on management practices for e-governance programmes internationally. The
DIT would undertake a study of strategies adopted by developing countries to further
refine the model adopted for NeGP.
III. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 17)
The Committee observe that the DIT had awarded a consultancy assignment to
M/s Price Water House Coopers Pvt. Ltd (PWC) for programme management structure
and funding arrangement for NeGP. On the basis of a set of feasible options suggested
by the Firm, the DIT held follow up discussions with the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance. The PWC report has also provided inputs to the DIT for discussion
with the World Bank on funding and programme management support for the NeGP.
The Committee note with concern that not much progress has been made in finalizing
the funding structure beyond the stage of discussions and consultations. They do not
agree with the plea of DIT that the programme and funding structure is an ongoing
process. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the findings of PWC Report should
be constructively utilised to finalize the programme and funding structure of NeGP
quickly so as to accelerate the process of implementation of various e-Governance
projects.
Action Taken by Government
The final ‘view’ which has emerged for the NeGP is that the programme
management would be integrated under the Apex Committee, the funding for various
MMPs would be through the existing line Ministries, with the projects being Technically
appraised’ by the DIT before being approved by the ‘Competent Authority’. Thus the
funding structure and programme management structure has already been proposed and
is being adopted in practice and has been approved by the Cabinet. Further, discussions
have been held with the Planning Commission, Department of Economic Affairs and

22
the Department of Expenditure on the possible Programme Management and Funding
arrangement for the World Bank funded sub programme in support of the NeGP.
The view that has emerged is that a Society would be formed in the DIT and the
World Bank funds would be routed through the DIT to this Society primarily for
funding the State MMPs as well as the other components like Training/Capacity
Building etc.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that the overall capital investment in IT sector in our country
at present is far below the desired level. They learn that the IT capital share of the
total capital is only three-and-a-half percent in India while the average IT capital share
is approximately 5.7 percent in the eight countries that have also underinvested in
IT Sector. Despite the phenomenal success of India’s IT industry, India’s economy
has significantly under-invested in the IT Capital. The Committee observe that sufficient
capital investment in IT sector is inevitable in view of the requirement of huge and
extensive infrastructure needed for delivery of e-Governance services and also to
have a marketing edge over the big multinational competitors. They feel that the country
is not leveraging its IT strength. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that a
long term policy of capital investment in IT sector for usage of IT in the country is
essential.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may be
mentioned that DIT is facilitating the setting up of the State Wide Area Networks
(SWANs) and Common Services Centres (CSCs) across the country. These major
infrastructures would extend the ICT and e-Governance reach to the common man even
in far-flung areas.
IV . CREATION AND SHARING OF INFRASTRUCTURE
(a) Requirement of Common-core Infrastructure
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 20)
The Committee observe that, implementation of different e-Governance projects
require various types of infrastructure like computer hardware & software, secured
data repositories, data connectivity, service delivery outlets/access points etc. The
Common core infrastructure being considered under NeGP are National/State Data
Centres (SDCs), State wide Area Networks (SWANs), augmented NICNET to carry
both Central and State data e-Govemance services, Common Service Centres (CSCs) to
connect the areas below the block level with the rest of the country through SWAN/
NICNET.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendation of the Committee.

23
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are of the firm view that it would be a wasteful expenditure to
create separate infrastructure for e-Governance projects by all concerned Line Ministries/
States particularly when the same has already been created by some other Ministries/
Departments. The Committee are informed that the Power grid, Railnet and GAIL
together have fair amount capacity and an attempt has been made to work out
an aggregation of all these bandwidth for carrying some of their traffic. They
are further apprised that the DIT is also contemplating to create common
infrastructure in respect of SWANs, Data Centres and CSCs, which can be used by
the different Ministries/Departments and State Governments for G2G (Intranet)
and G2C applications. The Committee recommend that the infrastructure available
with Railways, Department of Telecom, and other organizations be gainfully utilized
and shared among the user Ministries/States as this would bring down the cost and
also speed up the rolling out of NeGP. They feel that organization such as NIC should
be given the primary responsibility of co-coordinating the use of infrastructure of all
these organizations essentially for optimum utilization of capital expenditure as a
nation
Action Taken by Government
DIT has been holding consultations with Department of Telecom and
USO Fund Administration to create an institutional mechanism of optimally sharing
the infrastructure being created by those entities as well as the private sector. The
Alternate Telecom Network (ATN) created by Power Grid, RailNet and Gail are being
studied so that States/UTs having significant presence of the ATN in their
jurisdiction can consider them as bandwidth service providers. There is no provision
to create any telecom-networking infrastructure in either SWAN or CSC Scheme.
However, access Nodes would be created that would take converged services from
the existing telecom infrastructure service providers.
NIC as a part of continuing NICNET expansion plan has carried out following
activities:
a. Upgradation of District to State connectivity at 116 locations to 2 MBPS.
b. Upgradation of State to Centre leased lines to higher speeds upward of
4 MBPS to 45 MBPS.
c. Infrastructure has been created in all the state Centres and the above Districts
to extend horizontal connectivity to various e-Governance projects such as
Passport, immigration, RGI etc.
Other districts will also be upgraded to 2 MBPS depending upon the need of
applications being run on NICNET.
NIC is in a position to undertake the primary responsibility in executing/
coordinating ICT infrastructure projects for e-governance purpose and has been assisting
DIT, DoT & USOF in this regard.

24
(b) State Data Centres (SDCs)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that it is proposed to create data centres/ data repositories in
various States so that common secured data storage could be maintained to serve a host
of e-Governance applications. However, they are distressed to find that broad policy
guidelines for creation of State Data Centres are still in a formulation stage. Since the
technical and financial support to States in this initiative are to be extended only after
finalisation of the scheme in this regard, the Committee apprehend that any delay in
finalization of the scheme would hamper the process of setting up of State Data Centres
which in turn will result in slow execution of NeGP. The Committee are unable to
understand that when NeGP was approved two years back in the year 2003 and also
when State Data Centre has been identified as one of the important elements of Core
Infrastructure for supporting e-Governance initiatives under NeGP, why the DIT has
not been able to formulate and finalise the policy guidelines in this regard during these
two years. The Committee would recommend for early finalisation of a comprehensive
Policy Guidelines for creation of State Data Centres (SDCs) by the States. They would
also recommend that the DIT should ensure that all requisite technical and financial
support is extended to the States in establishing State Data Centres (SDCs).
Action Taken by Government
The requirement of creating Data Centres becomes necessary as more and more
e-governance applications are introduced by the States. Policy decisions on Data Centres
involve issues of Sovereign control and are of strategic importance in view of criticality/
confidentiality of data and the applications hosted and need to be appropriately addressed.
DIT is now in the process of formulating suitable policy guidelines for Technical and
Financial Assistance to the States for creation of State Data Centres. The guidelines are
expected to be ready by July 2006. As Data Centres can be planned, established and
operationalised in relatively short time frames, it is expected that these will be ready by
the time State Wide Area Networks and Common Service Centers are established in the
States.
NIC is developing/involved in implementation of a number of projects for which
data compilation at higher levels (State and Central) is required. These applications
include both Central Government and State Government projects. To facilitate this,
NIC has set up a large National Data Centre at Delhi with Disaster Recovery Centre at
Hyderabad as Business Continuity Process (BCP), In addition, NIC has set up 30 State
Data Centres to provide data compilation and hosting of e-governance applications at
state level. These data centres are fully connected among themselves and have high
bandwidth access to provide effective citizen interface. This facility is used for keeping
passport information, Driving Licence/Vehicle Registration, Land records etc.
information and also for co-hosting a number of applications from various Government
Departments. NIC has geared itself to support all the requirements of e-governance
Projects through the Data Centres already set up. These Data Centres are scalable

25
vertically/Horizontally i.e. storage capacity can be extended vertically and servers can
be added horizontally.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 23)
The Committee observe that DIT had sanctioned the project for establishing
the State Data Centre to the Government of Karnataka though the guidelines in
this regard are still under consideration. This initiative was taken with a view to
providing a learning experience to the DIT towards common Technology Infrastructure
for centralized management, monitoring and troubleshooting etc. which other States
could also, consider eventually for adoption in the land records computerization
programme and various other e-Governance initiatives. The Committee trust that
the Department would invariably incorporate the experiences gained through
this initiative while finalising the policy guidelines for establishment of SDCs at the
earliest.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 24)
The Committee are perturbed to note that no time frame has been fixed
for establishing the State Data Centres (SDCs), the reason though seem obvious from
the fact that the policy guidelines to set up State Data Centres have not been
finalized yet. However, the Committee feels that absence of fixed time-frame in
this regard has actually worked as a de-motivator as the States had not been put under
any obligation to fulfill the commitment of establishing the SDCs by a prescribed
date. The Committee feels that there, should not be any laxity and ambiguity in
an ambitious and important plan like NeGP. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that a definite time frame should be drawn and all the States/UTs
should be motivated and persuaded to establish their State Data Centres within
the prescribed time schedule. The Committee would also like the DIT to explore the
possibility of interconnectivity of all SDCs through a common network.
Action Taken by Government
The guidelines on State Data Centre being formulated will also incorporate the
time frames for implementation. It shall be ensured that the State Data Centres are
established by the time the SWAN and CSCs are ready in the States. Further, all the
SDCs will be interconnected through NICNET of NIC which provides connectivity to
all the States and the District Hqs. in the country.

26
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 25)
The Committee feel that greater efforts should be made for planning reliable and
adequate data storage redundancy arrangements in the event of any technical
malfunctioning or natural calamities.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
(C) State-wise Area Networks (SWANs)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 28)
The Committee are satisfied to note that for this purpose, a scheme to establish
State Wide Area Networks for providing data connectivity of 2 MBPS at block level has
been approved at a total outlay of Rs. 3334 crores with Central Assistance component
of Rs. 2005 crores over a period of 5 years. They trust that the approved outlay will be
gainfully utilized by the Department to establish SWAN in a time bound manner.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
(d) Common Services Centres (CSCs)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 29)
The Committee learn that the draft framework for establishment of 1,00,000
Common Services Centres (CSCs) across the country has been finalized but it will only
take a final shape after its consideration and approval by the Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) by November, 2005. The Committee further note that a
National Level Service Agency (NLSA) is still to be selected which would carry out
activities like effective project management and implementation, mobilizing requisite,
financial resources to supplement Government support to the project, acquiring benefits
from significant economies of scale in the identification, customization and
implementation of the physical and digital infrastructure, enabling aggregation of
potential citizen-centric services at the national level, agglomerating best practices and
content providers and incorporating standardized design, content and processes. Since
the crore activities relating to the e-projects are to be carried out by NLSA, which is yet
to be selected, the Committee would recommend that the selection process of the agency
be completed early so that the selected NLSA could carry out their assigned tasks to
ensure successful and timely implementation of the CSCs project with a view to achieving
the proposed target of setting up of 1,00,000 CSCs by the year 2007.
Action Taken by Government
The selection process of the NLSA has been completed and a recommendation
has been made by the Expenditure Finance Committee on the agency to be selected as

27
the NLSA for the CSC scheme. The approval of the NLSA however, forms part of the
proposal of the CSC scheme itself and requires approval of the competent authority.
The CSC Scheme will be put up to the Cabinet/CCEA for approval shortly. It may be
pointed out that the draft Cabinet Note on the CSC has already been circulated.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 30)
The Committee are of the opinion that 1,00,000 Common Services Centres (CSCs)
proposed to be set up by the year 2007 should be on a revenue sharing model because
such a model would not only be economically viable but also be an avenue to provide
employment opportunities to a large workforce. They, therefore, recommend that the
DIT should consider this aspect seriously while giving final shape to the methodology
for establishment of Common Services Centres (CSCs) and its operations.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. The CSC
scheme has been formulated proposed on a PPP based entrepreneurial model, on a
revenue sharing basis.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 31)
While emphasizing the urgent need for timely setting up of Common Services
Centres (CSCs), the Committee is of the opinion that it is equally important to build
efficiency in the system and even more important is the manner in which these services
are provided to the citizens. Delivery of services should not only be efficient, effective
and citizen friendly but also need to be provided in a good ambience so that the citizens
should have a pleasurable experience in the process. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that utmost care should be taken to select suitable locations for CSCs and
also to provide user friendly and attractive ambience so that the citizen should have a
feel of good governance in the process itself. The Committee trust that these initiatives
would raise the confidence level of the citizens and encourage them to avail services
through CSCs and at the same time it will also enhance credibility of the Government in
the minds of the people.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 32)
The Committee had observed in their 15th Report (14th Lok Sabha), the
Department of Information Technology had successfully set up 487 Community
Information Centres (CICs) in eight North-Eastern States and 60 CICs in J&K on

28
replications basis to bring the benefits of ICT for socio-economic development of these
areas by providing broadband connectivity. The 75 CICs were proposed to be set up by
October, 2005 and the proposal for setting up CICs in Uttaranchal had been formulated.
In view of the fact that CIC project is an effective interface between the Government
and the citizen, the Committee would recommend the Department to utilize the
Community Information Centres as an integrated e-delivery gateway in the areas having
CICs, to provide citizen centric services of e-Governance projects under NeGP which
would not only make optimal, use of infrastructure but also avoid duplication of efforts.
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
(e) Integrated Service Delivery Mechanism (e-Governance Service Delivery
Gateway)
Recommendation/Observation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that DIT has initiated a pilot implementation of the Mission
Mode Project on e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway through National Institute
for Smart Government (NISG). This Gateway would enable connectivity between
multiple back-end applications with multiple front-end service providers in a secure
and reliable manner. An Advisory Group and a Technical Sub-Committee comprising
of members from NIC, NISG , C-DAC, DAR&PG and Industry has been constituted to
oversee and guide the implementation of the Gateway pilot. Gateway Specifications
and Request for proposal is currently being carried out. The Committee would like to
know the timeframe fixed in this regard. As informed to the Committee, some initiatives
like India Portal, EG Service Delivery Gateway, E-Biz, Common Service Centres (CSCc)
have been taken to achieve the objective of single window facility for delivery of public
services. The Committee observe that the entire motive behind all the e-Governance
projects is to provide all necessary services to the common man through a single window
facility and in the absence of such a mechanism, a citizen has to move from place to
place for getting the requisite services/information even in the fully automated system.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the DIT should coordinate with all the Line
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs to establish an effective integrated delivery
mechanism for single window delivery of various public services under different
e-Governance projects.
Action Taken by Government
The National e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway, which is a middleware
infrastructure, would act as a standards based routing and messaging switch de-linking
the back-end in departments from the Front-end service access providers. This would
facilitate standards based inter-operability and integration of existing and new
e-governance applications. A pilot implementation has been successful developed and
tested. Governance structure, business model and stakeholder buy-in for the Gateway is
being worked and would be completed by August/September 2006. The National
Gateway is expected to go live by mid 2007.

29
As regards providing all the necessary services to the common man through a
single window facility, a mission mode project under NeGP titled “India Portal” has
been initiated with NIC as the implementing agency. The First version of Portal is
operational now and was launched by Hon’ble MCIT on 10
th Nov’05 and the
portal address is http://india.gov.in. This Portal provides comprehensive, accurate,
and reliable one stop source of information about India and its various facets. The
content on this Portal is the result of a collaborative effort by various Indian Government
Ministries and Departments, at the Central/State/District level. National Portal
Coordinators (NPC) have been identified from States/UTs and Central Ministries/
Departments that would provide authentic content pertaining to their respective
departments.
The DIT has also formulated a scheme for establishment of 100,000 Common
Service Centres across the country in order to deliver government services at the doorstep
of the citizen. During the development phase of the said project, the identified NLSA is
assisting the DIT in conducting a dialogue with Central Line Ministries, State
Governments etc., to ensure that a large number of Government Services could be
aggregated and delivered in an integrated manner using the CSCs.
(f) e-Security
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee note that logical security of infrastructure is being maintained in
the system to safeguard from hackers, unauthorized access, viruses, denial of access
service etc. by Firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Disaster Recovery Sites,
Data Back-up etc., through well laid down policies and security measures. They strongly
believe that the infrastructure being developed should be safe and secure to avoid loss
and misuse of valuable information and data. They would, therefore, recommend that
DIT should evolve a comprehensive e-security mechanism, which could ensure full
protection of data/information generated under various e-Governance projects by the
Line Ministries/States.
Action Taken by the Government
Under the Institutional mechanism set up for Standards for e-Governance,
5 working groups have been constituted with representation from industry, academia,
govt., associations etc. One of the Working Group Constituted is the “Network &
Information Security working group”. This group has the mandate to come out with
Guidelines, Policies & Standards related to network and e-Security.
NIC, which is playing a pro-active role in the Standardization process, has setup
a Portal on E-Governance Standards http://egovstandards.gov.in. A Brain storming
session on the Network and Information Security Working Group was held in Chennai
recently.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I

30
V . FACILITATION AND EXPANSION
(a) Uniformity of Standards
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee note that the DIT has constituted a Core Group on Standards in
e-Governance with the Director General, NIC as the Chairman. Four sub-groups namely
Major priority areas, Documentation, Quality and Localisation constituted under the
Core Group to look into specific areas have submitted their Reports. The Committee
are apprised that some of the key priority areas of immediate concern identified by the
core group for standardization are technical standards, localization standards, quality
and documentation, security standards, data standards. Based on these recommendations,
an institutional mechanism has been set up for evolving e-Governance Standards at the
National level. The Committee apprehend that the involvement of multiple agencies in
implementation of variety of e-Governance projects would, inescapably, result in
variation in the processes of application of cyber technology in delivery of citizen centric
services and thus the inter-operability of the system would become impossible. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that DIT should make strategic planning through
institutional mechanism to bring uniformity in standards of various e-Governance projects
being implemented by different Line Ministries/Departments and States.
Action Taken by the Government
Standards in e-Governance are a high priority activity, which will ensure sharing
of information and seamless interoperability of data and e-Governance applications
under NeGP.
Department of Information Technology (DIT) had constituted a Core group on
Standards to arrive at an Institutional Mechanism and Processes to be put in place and
recommend key areas for standardization. The Core group had examined various aspects
of the Standards-setting exercise and made suitable recommendations.
Based on the recommendations of the Core Group, an Institutional mechanism
has been setup to carry the Standardization forward. An Apex body has been constituted
under the chairmanship of Secretary, DIT with senior representatives from Government,
NASSCOM, Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), etc. with a mandate to approve, notify
and enforce the Standards formulated by various Working Groups and to oversee that
they are in accordance with international practices in this regard.
National Informatics Centre (NIC) has been entrusted with the task of originating
white papers on all the desired standards. NIC has created a separate “e-Governance
Standards Division” to steer the process of evolving the Standards. These white papers
would serve as discussion papers for working groups to develop the Standards. The
Working Groups have members from DIT, Associations, Industry, Academia,
representatives from Central & State Government etc.

31
Once the Standards are approved by the Apex Body, STQC Directorate will be
responsible for release of these approved standards on the web and make them available
to all the stakeholders for free download. STQC Directorate will further ensure
conformance & certification (where required) of these standards and have created a
separate “e-Governance Division” for this purpose. Subsequent to the issuing of these
initial standards, STQC will be responsible for enhancement of these standards and
would liaise with the national & international standardization bodies for harmonization
and acceptance of these standards.
The e-Governance Standard Division in each of NIC and STQC will function in
close coordination with e-Governance PMU of DIT, which would be responsible for
overseeing and coordinating their working.
Portal on e-Governance Standards has been developed and hosted by NIC at
http://egovstandards.gov.in. Brainstorming sessions and Working Group meetings have
been initiated.
DIT has constituted “Project Review and Steering Committee (PRSG)” for the
Project “Standards in e-Governance” under the chairmanship of Secretary, DIT to monitor
and review the standardization process. DIT is closely working with Central Ministries
and State Departments to ensure uniformity in Standards of various e-Governance
projects.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee are further informed that NIC would create a separate
“e-Governance Standards Division” to steer the process of evolving the Standards. They
would also originate white papers on all desired Standards which would serve as
discussion papers for Working Groups to develop the Standards. The Working Groups
with members from DIT, Associations, Industry, Academia and representatives from
Central and State Governments etc will be constituted with the approval of DIT. Further,
Apex Body has been constituted with a mandate to approve, notify and enforce the
Standards formulated by various Working Groups and to oversee that, they are in
accordance with international practices in this regard. After approval by the Apex Body,
Standardisation Testing & Quality Certification Directorate (STQC) will be releasing
these approved Standards on the web and make them available to all the stakeholders
for free download. STQC will further ensure conformance and certification of these
standards and would create a separate “e-Governance Division” for this purpose. STQC
will also be responsible for enhancement of these Standards and liaise with the national
and international standardization bodies for harmonization and acceptance of these
Standards. The e-Governance Division of NIC and STQC will function in tandem with
e- Governance Programme Management Unit of DIT. The Committee note that up till
now “e-Governance Standards Division” which will steer the process of evolving the
Standards and “Working Groups” which will also develop the Standards have not been
constituted and are only at proposal stage. The Committee urge upon the Department to
take up the matter on priority basis to complete all the necessary formalities for early

32
operationalization of the proposed units, since bringing uniformity of Standards in various
e-Governance projects is an undeniable feature for inter-connectivity and interoperability
of the successful implementation of the projects.
Action Taken by the Government
An Apex body has been constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary,
DIT with senior representatives from Government, NASSCOM, Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS), etc. with a mandate to approve, notify and enforce the Standards
formulated by various Working Groups and to oversee that they are in accordance with
international practices in this regard. Also “e-Governance Standards Division” has been
constituted in NIC and in STQC Directorate to steer the process of evolving the standards.
Portal on e-Governance Standards has been developed and hosted at http://
egovstandards.gov.in. DIT has constituted following 4 Working Groups out of the 5
identified priority areas.
Technical Standards & e-Governance Architecture WG
Quality & Documentation WG
Network and Information Security WG
Meta Data and Data WG
White papers in these areas are being developed by NIC. Brainstorming sessions
on the identified priority areas have been conducted to discuss the key issues of the area
concerned.
(b) e-Assessment
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee note that it has been planned to list out all the e-Governance
projects running across various States and at the National level and undertake Summary/
Detailed assessment of these projects for their effectiveness and sustainability.
e-Governance Assessment Framework has been prepared and put in public domain on
DIT Website. A Working Group has also been constituted to provide overall guidance
and steer the e-Assessment programme. The Committee would like to be informed of
the constitution of the Working Group and how it would provide overall guidance etc.
Action Taken by the Government
An expert Working group constituted in 2004 to steer and provide overall guidance
to the e-Assessment Programme, comprised members from government departments/
organisations (DIT,NIC,DAR&PG,C-DAC), private sector ( Wipro Infotech, Skoch
Consultants), academia (IIM, Ahmedabad) and other relevant institutions such as NISG.
As per their Terms of Reference(TOR), the group advised on identification of competent
agencies for e-assessment programme, its various phases of assessment, identification
of projects for Summary and Detailed assessment; evaluation of reports; finalisation of
report structure and analysis etc.

33
As of now, 39 e-governance projects were taken up for Summary Assessment (in
terms of e-Governance assessment framework EAF 2.0 posted on http://www.mit.gov.in/
NISG EAF 18-05-04.pdf) and the assessment reports on these 39 projects are being
collated and analysed.
Further, DIT, in consultation with state IT Secretaries and other institutions
engaged in the field of e-governance, shall be identifying additional e-governance projects
in India and the working group may also be appropriately reconstituted, in order to
better implement the e-Assessment component of NeGP, under the Apex Committee
directions.
(c) India Portal
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee note that India Portal, a project being implemented by NIC is
envisaged to be a unified portal for accessing information in the State Sector viz.
Executive, Judiciary, Legislature and Constitutional Authorities, for electronic delivery
of citizen services and a major facilitator for implementing e-Governance initiatives.
This project would be an extension to the “India Image” postal catering to the Government
to citizen (G2C) services. While appreciating the concept of “India Portal” to enable
the citizens to have access to all information pertaining to Executive, Judiciary and
Legislature etc. through single window shop, the Committee would like to be apprised
of the progress made in this regard so far.
Action Taken by the Government
MCIT released the first version of India Portal on 10th Nov’05. The Portal is
operational. The portal address is http://india.gov.in. A Project Review and Steering
Committee (PRSG) under the chairmanship of Secretary DIT have been constituted to
monitor and review various activities under the project and ensure timely completion.
NIC has carried out a detailed trend analysis to find out the statistics pertaining
to hits, page-views, Visitors, usages patterns and other such details about the Portal.
The Maximum numbers of hits on a single day i.e. over 3.4 million were received on the
day following the launch i.e. 11
th Nov’05. Average Hits per day: 3.4 lakhs Other most
Active Date was 28th February 2006, which had around 4.5 Lakhs hits.
(d) Replication of Successful e-Governance Models
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee note that one key component of the multi-pronged initiative to
replicate successful e-Governance model is to identify successfully implemented citizen
centric e-Governance models in some States for replication to other willing States. The
successful implementation models of Land Records, Property Registration and Road
Transport sectors were first studied in the States viz. ‘Bhoomi’ in Karnataka, ‘Sarita’

34
in Maharashtra, ‘Card’ in Andhra Pradesh, ‘Vahan’, ‘Sarathi’ in Himachal Pradesh
and a strategy was formulated to replicate them in other States on a pilot scale with
necessary modifications to suit the State’s requirement. According to DIT, the success
of such projects depends on capturing entire solutions including technology components,
process reengineering, change management and transfer of the knowledge and
experience through other States as a package of assistance. While appreciating
successful implementation of these projects in one of more States, the Committee regrets
to note that the other States, for various reasons have not been able to cross the
hurdles of implementation and derive the benefits of these projects. They, therefore,
recommend that DIT being the facilitator and catalyst for implementation of
NeGP should play an active role to overcome the obstacles being faced by some of
the States in replication of projects and render all the strategic and technical assistance
to enable these States to replicate the successful models in their respective States.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. One of
the primary objectives of the replication programme was to develop a model
implementation within each state taking a recognised, successful implementation in
some states in the country as a reference model such that a State Government can go
for a State wide Rollout plan. A good number of States followed the strategy. States
like West Bengal, Kerala, Sikkim, and Pondicherry have started implementation
while requests have come from others like Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, and Tripura for
extending strategic and technical assistance in undertaking state wide rollout post
completion of the pilot project. As part of this process DIT has provided technical
support especially in establishing sustainable model. In this connection, a policy decision,
similar to what has been suggested by the Standing Committee has already been
taken by DIT with respect to supporting States for replication of projects and renders all
the strategic and technical assistance required therein.
Under the Horizontal Transfer Programme, DIT has recently approved a separate
project for supporting pilot projects “e-District” in Uttar Pradesh. This project proposes
to significantly improve the service effectiveness of the district administration through
process reengineering, back-end computerization and integrated service delivery of
various departments through service centres (including CSCs).
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee note that Replication Project is being carried out in 17 States,
with a total of 14 pilot projects on Land Records, 11 projects on Property Registration
and 6 projects on Road Transport. The Committee are informed that the DIT has initiated
a pilot scheme aimed at spreading the benefits of e-Governance to citizens in all parts of
the country and the strategy is to build capability to horizontally transfer the recipe
from the successful to the not so successful States. The Committee are sure that the
scheme would save a lot of capital expenditure and would certainly avoid the duplication

35
of efforts in conceptualising and programming of the same project time and again. They
trust that the replication strategy being followed by the DIT would suitably take care of
all aspects viz. standardization, localization, customisation etc, so that replication of the
successful e-Governance models of one State is done in other States keeping in view the
State specific requirements.
Action Taken by the Government
The DIT programme for replication is based upon the philosophy of Identify,
standardize, localize and replicate. The program, takes into account the best practices
and lays emphasis on localization. Accordingly, the project design included technical
assistance to States for preparing State specific Software Requirement Specification
and Training. Based upon the success of the replication programme across three areas
i.e. Land Records, Property Registration and Transport. It may be mentioned that recently
a pilot project on Land Record and Property Registration has been initiated in the State
of Mizoram on receiving their request, DIT is considering the inclusion of additional
areas of Thrust.
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
During examination, the Committee looked into the implementation of certain
e-Governance projects both at the Centre and the State levels. They are happy to
note that the Centre for Railway Information Service (CRIS) has successfully
implemented the CONCERT (countrywide network of computerized enhanced
reservation and ticketing) for the various kinds of services to be availed by the
general public through the computerized network. The CRIS is stated to be fully
equipped to provide technical support and services to develop, setup, operate and
maintain any computerized system and underlying infrastructure. Similarly, the Central
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) has initiated a number of measures in the area of
dissemination of tax related information including PAN and tax returns. The Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways have developed softwares in the name of V AHAN
for the RC (Registration Certificate) and SARTHI for DL (Driving License). They
have also developed Smart Card Operating System for Transport (SCOSTA).
The Ministry of Rural Development has started computerization of Land Records as
a pilot project in some States to be extended in other parts of the country. The
main objective of the programme is to provide computerized copies of ownership
and crop details to the land owners on demand, updating the land records
through mutations, ensuring accuracy and transparency in land records and affected
public delivery of services from the Tehsil to the Taluka centres. Karnataka, Goa,
Tamil Nadu and Gujarat have fully operationalised their Talukas under this scheme.
The Committee applaud the sincere efforts made by certain Departments of the
Government of India and various States in the successful delivery of citizen centric
services and hope that the other Departments of the Government of India and States
would also mobilize their resources to successfully replicate these models in their
Departments/States.

36
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
VI. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (CAPACITY BUILDING)
(a) Capacity Building Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The Committee note that capacity building, for implementation of NeGP, is
required at two levels i.e. programme level and project level. Each level consists of
two major components namely (i) positioning of especially recruited/identified
personnel having requisite skills; and (ii) training of existing personnel. The State
Governments are required to build capacity in terms of resources of people, process
and tools for conceptualising, developing and managing the e-Governance projects under
NeGP. The Committee further note that DIT along with Planning Commission
has formulated detailed Capacity Building Guidelines and circulated them to all the
State Govts. DIT organised a workshop in Delhi and NISG in Hyderabad and
Kolkata, for better understanding of Capacity Building requirements. The Planning
Commission had also allocated additional funds amounting to Rs. 17 crore to States
for capacity building during the year 2004-05, which was distributed to various
States primarily for preparing Capacity Building proposals covering the components
like State e-Governance Road Map including prioritising of MMPs, State Capacity
Building Road Map and Financial proposal for Capacity Building projecting requirements
for coming three years. The Committee observe that except circulation of guidelines
and organizing workshops, nothing concrete has been done on the ground level in
regard to capacity building. As capacity building would need a lot of efforts and time,
they recommend that the process for actual capacity building in terms of resource of
people, process and tools be started at the earliest to ensure complete roll out of
e-Governance projects.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. DIT
recognizes the need for quick implementation of the capacity building guidelines issued
by the department. As a follow up to the guidelines most State Governments have initiated
preparation of the following:
 e-Governance Roadmap (EGRM);
 Capacity Building Road Map (CBRM); and
 Detailed Project Report (DPR) including financial Implication for
implementing CBRM
The DIT has already received DPR from over 15 State Governments for
implementing capacity building initiatives. These are being examined for giving necessary

37
approval. DIT is also working on a centralized empanelment (for willing states) of
experienced technical and managerial personnel for employment with State Governments
to enhance their own capacities. This approach will help ensure speedy deployment
of resources, ensure screening of resources for quality and finally, avoid duplication
of activities among States. Additionally, as part of institutional training initiative
the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG) is providing various training
programs for States. It is also proposing to strengthen the capacities of State
owned Administrative Training Institute (ATIs) for long term sustainability of capacity
building initiatives. DIT, along with the Department of Personnel and Training and
NISG, has also initiated a programme for trianing e-Champions. Further, a detailed
guildeline for training is under preparation to help ensure that there is consistency of
approach and content, in training across the country.
Recommendation (Para No. 43 & 44)
The Committee further note that NISG has offered its consulting services to
all the State Governments for preparing State Road Map and Capacity Building
proposal. As of now, 15 States have engaged NISG for preparing the above
proposal, while 5 other States are in the process of considering engaging them.
States like Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh have gone through the process
of tendering for selection of the consultant for preparing Road Map and capacity
building. A scheme has been drawn by DIT to provide support to UTs for the
preparation of project proposal for Capacity Building Programme as they are not
eligible for Additional Central Assistance (ACA) fund. The Committee are of the
view that although these steps are in the right direction but these cannot be termed as
adequate. They would, therefore, like to impress upon the DIT to take the capacity
building component in a comprehensive manner, and persuade the line Ministries/
Departments/States/UTs to complete the exercise in a time bound manner. The
Committee feel that initially the elementary training programmes are needed or the
officials of all the Line Ministry/Departments/States etc. so that they are well
acquainted with the e-Governance projects. The objective of such training should
be to prepare them to redesign their working pattern in the cyber atmosphere so that
the desired result of good governance is achieved through e-Governance projects.
The Committee would in fact like to emphasize the need for undertaking a parallel
planning for capacity building along with the on-going implementation of e-Governance
projects.
The Committee further note that NIC is providing regular technical support
for implementation of e-Governance projects to all the central Ministries/Departments,
State Governments and District Administration. Further, NISG is providing
regular support in terms of conducting workshop and training programmes to policy
makers of various States. The Committee desire that instead of piecemeal measures
centralized and institutionalised mechanism should be developed to provide regular
support to Line Ministries and States etc. for capacity building at different levels of the
implementation of e-Governance projects.

38
Action Taken by the Government
One of the key tasks of the PMU is to provide the needed support to the concerned
line ministries in conceptualizing, developing, implementing and monitoring MMPs. In
the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held to consider the Cabinet Note on the
NeGP, this point was also reiterated. It may be pointed out that the DIT has been providing
support to the line ministries for their MMPs, as and when such requests are received
from the Ministry concerned. For example in the MCA 21 Project, DIT has been playing
the role of an Adviser right from the start of the project till date providing all the necessary
technical and some financial support. NIC is providing implementation support to several
ministries. DIT has played an active role in the project conceptualisation, implementation
issue resolution, Programme Management Unit setup, Government Secure Repository,
Exit Management, Conformance Audit of the entire solution through STQC, Internal
Capacity building of MCA through the Empowered Committee, Programme Management
Committee and one to one interactions with the Minsitry consultants and other stake
holders. Technical assistance is being provided to other Ministries as per requirements
indicated by them.
(b) Upgradation of Skills
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
The Committee observe that another problem being faced by the Government
Departments is the requirement of continuous upgradation of skills of IT professionals
engaged by them. They further note that the Department of Personnel and Training,
NIC and NISG have been conducting training programmes for the benefit of the
Government employees and support is also being provided for creating in-house training
facilities to meet the growing requirements of ICT literate people. Recognizing the
paramount need of continuous upgradation of skills of the technical manpower, the
Committee, recommend that a suitable training programme be chalked out specifically
for IT skilled workforce for upgradation of their skills on regular basis which could
help successful running of all IT related projects of the Government.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. As a
consequence of the Capacity Building Guidelines, most State Governments have initiated
preparation of a detailed Capacity Building Road Map (CBRM), which has two primarily
components — setting up State e-Govemance Mission Team (SeMT) and identifying
training needs. As part of CBRM, skill assessment of staff across key departments and
States are being undertaken together with Training Need Assessment and strategy for
overcoming the current gaps. Implementation of the CBRM would result in creating
sustainable capacities at the State Level.
DIT is also taking initiative (at the request of the States) to recruit technical and
managerial experts for various states for reducing the overall time required for hiring
additional resources. Recruitment to Project e-Governance Mission Team (PeMT) would

39
be taken up as and when an individual project is taken up for implementation by the
State Government.
DIT is currently in the process of preparing detailed guidelines for training to
help ensure there is consistency of approach and content in training across the country.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
Committee further observe that no definite programme has been drawn so far
either for recruitment of personnel of specialized skills or for training of existing personnel
in different Line Ministries/States. In the Committee’s opinion, efforts should have been
made, in the first instance, to organize familiarisation/awareness programme for
employees of all levels in the line Ministries/Departments/States and subsequently
extensive training should be organized for those employees who are actually to be
deployed for execution of e-Governance projects. The Committee recommend that an
annual training programme for different levels of officials in various Institutes in the
country be drawn immediately by the Department in such a manner that all involved in
the process acquire the requisite skills to enable the successful implementation of
e-Governance projects.
Action Taken by the Government
Training requirements have been classified across the following four broad
areas i.e.
 General IT awareness,
 Operational
 CIOs and
 Policy makers,
Most State Governments have programmes for General IT awareness in
association with DoPT, State owned institutions, NIC etc. Under Capacity building
State initiatives for improving the State owned Training infrastructure for long term
sustainability of capacity building efforts would be supported. Operational training is
largely provided by respective application developers including NIC. Additionally, as a
special focus under NeGP, DIT along with NISG and DoPT is supporting training for
CIOs and policy makers. It may be noted that as part of this initiatives, an e-Champion
training programme has been launched.
DIT has also been supporting requests of State Governments for technical and
financial assistance for specific training initiatives/upgradation of training infrastructure.
(c) Requirement of Technical Manpower
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee observe that there is a growing need for technical and skilled
manpower in different Departments and at different outlets for handling information

40
and communication related activities as well as for implementation of various
e-Governance projects. They are, however, perturbed to note that no long term planning
has been made by the DIT in this regard despite clear evidence of enhanced requirements
of technically qualified people in this area. They are afraid that increasing workload
without corresponding increase in the skilled workforce would adversely affect the
functioning of the e-Governance projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Department should assess the actual requirements of skilled manpower in different
areas of e-Governance projects by taking inputs from various departments so as to
make a long term comprehensive planning for recruitments of new people as well as
imparting suitable and timely training to the existing manpower.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. It is
envisaged that for taking up NeGP at the national level, capacities / qualified manpower
would be required at two levels - State Level (State e-Governance Mission Team -
SeMT for coordination, standard setting, monitoring & evaluation and programme
management) and for managing individual project implementation (Project e-Governance
Mission Team - PeMT for project conceptualization and implementation). DIT is also
taking initiative (at the request of the States) to empanel technical and managerial experts
for various states. This would reduce the overall time required for hiring additional
resources at SeMT and PeMT level. Recruitment to PeMT would be taken up as and
when the State Government takes up individual projects for implementation. DIT would
also have an updated panel of experts that can be used by States for meeting short term
and long-term capacity gaps.
(d) High Rate of Attrition
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
The Committee are constrained to note the rising trend in the attrition rate of the
IT skilled workforce in the Government sector. The reason for high staff turnover is
stated to be relatively lower compensation package than those offered by the private
sector companies. As brought to the notice of the Committee, the IT professionals join
the Government organization and after gaining experience leave these organizations
and join the private sector for better salary. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the DIT should work out a strategy to retain the technically qualified manpower in the
Government sector and for this purpose the possibility of providing advanced training,
better promotional avenues, adequate housing/medical facilities, and suitable financial
incentives may also be explored to encourage them to continue with the Government
organization for longer tenure.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT recognizes the above constraint and this has been attempted to be addressed
through the Capacity Building Guidelines. The Capacity guidelines allow setting up of

41
institutional structure that allow for payment of market linked salary to attract and retain
the best and the brightest skilled manpower as members of SeMT and PeMT.
(e) Outsourcing of Skilled Manpower
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Committee observe that the concept of outsourcing of the services has become
a common phenomenon now-a-days and it has proved to be successful in the projects
like Municipalities, e-Seva and MCA 21 project. They, however, observe that outsourcing
of services is to be resorted to on selective basis as per the requirement of the individual
project. The Committee feel that there are broadly two major areas of activities namely
core and the peripheral. The core area which governs the key components, safety and
security of data, policy initiatives, fixation and achievement of targets should, in the
opinion of the Committee, be invariably manned by the in-house people of the
organization for strategic reasons; and the activities in the peripheral areas of the project
could be got done by outsourcing of services. They, therefore, strongly recommend that
the concept of outsourcing may be considered and applied by the user Departments
primarily on these parameters as the basic idea should always be to retain the core
technology with the Government itself.
Action Taken by the Government
The NeGP strategy is to outsource and adopt PPP models wherever feasible. The
decision as to which components should be outsourced is taken by the Department
concerned keeping in mind a number of issues including issues relating to sensitivity of
data, security of data, the nature of job which the department is doing, the need to retain
control over the more sensitive and critical functions, so that they do not become overly
dependent on the service provider, the financial justification for outsourcing etc.
While implementing various projects/components under the NeGP, all necessary
efforts would be made to retain Core technology with the Government. All concerned
agencies would be advised suitably in this context. Outsourcing of activities in the
Peripheral areas are generally encouraged and resorted to. For example, in the Data
Centre set up by the Government of Karnataka, all non-core area services are either
outsourced or planned to be outsourced.
VII. AWARENESS CREATION AND RE-ENGINEERING
(a) e-Readiness
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee observe that e-readiness is the degree to which a country is
prepared to participate in the networked world and it is based on the level of adoption of
important applications of ICTs in offering interconnectedness among Government,
business and citizens. The value of the e-readiness at the State level reflects the capacity

42
of a State to participate in the networked economy vis-a-vis other States. The Committee
observe from the categorization in the ladder of preparedness that while Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chandigarh are placed in the position of
leader, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,
Bihar, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Nagaland are the least achievers. The
other remaining States/UTs are in the different states in the middle level. The Committee
are of the view that e-readiness index reflects the actual preparedness of the State for
adoption of IT and delivery of IT Enabled Services (ITES) and seen in this background,
the most of the States are yet to bring them to the required level of e-readiness to be
capable to deliver the citizen centric services of e-Governance projects. In such a
situation, the Committee are apprehensive about the desired success of e-Governance
projects in near future. They, therefore, recommend the DIT to persuade all the States/
UTs and also the Ministries/Departments for vigorous process re-engineering and
deployment of additional resources for achieving at least the requisite level of e-readiness
for successful roll out of citizen centric services through e-Governance projects. The
DIT may also extend their full support and guidance to them in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 102 countries, India ranks at
45th position in the e-readiness index as per 2003-04 Report of World Economic Forum.
Aiming at improving the e-readiness of the States, the core infrastructure projects being
implemented under NEGP are the Common Service Centre (CSC) which aims to have
100,000 CSC’s across all States in the country by year 2007, State Wide Area Network
(SWAN) which will enable the States to have the data connectivity of 2 MBPs up to the
block level; and State Data Centre (SDC) which aims to have a centralized storage and
access of core data, with sharing facility by many e-Governance applications and the
capacity building program at the State level to improve the Human Resource skills and
to have the necessary structures in place for faster implementation of e-Governance
projects. The Committee desire that all these infrastructures which are the backbone of
the e-Governance projects be established in a time bound manner so as to bring the
country as well as States at higher level in e-readiness index which would ultimately
facilitate the early start of delivery of Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES)
to the general public.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. The CSC
scheme has been appraised by the EFC and will be put up to the Cabinet for consideration
shortly. The Scheme envisages the CSCs coming up within a period of 18-24 months
from approval of the Scheme.

43
The core infrastructure projects like SWAN, CSC are going on as per the time
schedule contemplated. SWAN Projects are being approved in phases as and when
submitted and considered with 18 months of implementation time after approval of the
proposal. So far, SWAN projects from 22 States/UTs have been approved. CSC Scheme
envisages setting up of 100,000 Common Service Centers across the country by the
year 2007. These projects are being monitored closely at DIT for timely completion.
For SWAN projects, a Program Tracker has been designed for monitoring and has been
put up on the DIT Website. As availability of Network / Connectivity and IT enabled
service delivery platform at the front end have significant bearing on the e-Readiness
index of any country, it is expected that overall ranking of India in the global e-Readiness
index would go up significantly after these two Schemes i.e. SWAN and CSC are
implemented by end of 2007.
(b) IT Education/Publicity of e-Services.
Recommendation (Para No. 52)
The Committee note that the NeGP includes a component on awareness for
educating the masses about the benefits of e-Governance and the method of utilizing
these services. However, IT education of masses has not been included in the present
scope of NeGP. Since most of the people across the country are not very much aware of
various services being/to be provided through e-Governance projects, the Committee
feel that there is a need to initiate measures for demystifying the e-Governance Projects.
They desire that the DAR & PG which is primarily engaged in awareness programme
should give wider publicity of various e-services through implementation of e-
Governance projects to be provided well in advance so that people can make up their
mind and start availing of the services as soon as they are commenced to derive maximum
benefits out of them.
Action Taken by the Government
This recommendation has again been communicated to the DARPG and will
also be taken up in the monthly coordination and review meeting of DIT and DARPG,
for follow up of actions taken and planned. Department of Administrative Reforms &
Public Grievances (DAR&PG) in collaboration with DIT, State Govts., industry and
various organizations has been conducting Workshops/Conferences on e-Governance,
from time to time, at various places in the country, as part of the regional and national e-
Governance strategy which serves as a forum for discussion amongst all stake holders
in the e-Governance domain. DAR&PG has been giving Awards for exemplary
implementation of e-Governance initiative and contributions during National
Conferences. DAR&PG also proposes to produce a series of documentary films on e-
Governance titled, “Information Technology in the service of people”.
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Committee are informed that the ability to derive benefit of e-Governance is
limited in our country because of various reasons including unwillingness among public

44
to adopt the new technology, resistance due to ignorance, resistance to change the
procedure etc. Admittedly, the slow progress is attributable to some extent to non-
fulfilment of the requirements of educating the people and changing their mindset. The
Committee feel that a project could be considered to be successfully implemented if the
common man starts fully availing of all the services being delivered through such projects.
Taking into account the demographic composition, geographical terrain, literacy rate
and the apprehensions expressed, the Committee recommend the Department to design
a well defined plan to make these projects acceptable to the common man through
organizing awareness camps particularly in villages and far-flung areas. They would
further like to suggest that the DIT may consider associating the local representatives of
the people and also the NGOs in such campaign to ensure whole-hearted participation
by the public.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. The NeGP
has a component of awareness and assessment under the NeGP. The EGPMU has also
been augmented with private sector resources to develop an awareness campaign for
the NeGP and this would be rolled out shortly. It may also be pointed out that even the
CSC Scheme has a significant component of awareness building amongst citizens about
the possible benefit of the CSC Scheme. An awareness campaign targeting Citizens
would also be launched under the CSC Scheme.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter I
VIII. INSTITUTIONAL PARTICIPATION
(a) Public Private Partnership (PPP)
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
According to the Committee, there is no doubt that the implementation of
e-Governance projects is a gigantic task which would require huge resources viz.
financial, technical of personnel. In traditional economy, these resources for any
government project were used to be provided by the Government alone. However, taking
into account the increase in population, economic development and people’s aspirations,
the Committee anticipate massive demands to avail e-services. They feel that there is an
urgent need to look for a combination of the Government and private sector resources
for timely and effective implementation of e-Governance projects. The Committee are
apprised of the benefits of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) model such as the
Government would not have to make the initial investment and would be paying only
when they get the services. Requirements of different types of personnel would be met
easily by the private sector and monitoring of the projects will be done through service
level agreements and only then they will be paid. In the opinion of the Committee, while

45
engaging the private sector, a better system can be evolved and many of the constraints
faced by the DIT can be easily addressed. They are, therefore, of the considered view
that there are numerous advantages of implementing the e-Governance Projects through
suitably devised PPP model primarily from the point of optimising and rationalizing of
the resources and the advantage of having the flexibility to hire that IT skilled workforce
on need basis thus avoiding the overhead cost to the Government organizations.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. The NeGP
recognizes the possibility and potential of implementing Projects in PPP mode and the
same has been suitably incorporated in the implementation strategy of the NeGP. In fact
projects like CSC, MCA etc. have been designed with a specific PPP emphasis.
Recommendation (Para No. 56)
The Committee observe that the projects dealing with security of the country of
similar other sensitive areas, requiring control of technology are required to be handled
fully by the Government without any private participation. Even in the projects on PPP
model, the Government has to maintain their control in critical areas of the particular
project. The Committee hope that a balanced view needs to be taken into consideration
while finalizing the PPP model for different projects. They desire that the DIT should
take care of these aspects while adopting PPP model and the mandate should be made
clear on what terms they have to work and the goals related to the needs of the citizens
should also be very specifically spelt out.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee. While the
NeGP proposes the use of PPP models for implementation of NeGP MMPs, the actual
implementation modality has to be worked out by the implementing department taking
into account issues relating to security, sensitivity of data being handled as well as
ownership of core processes.
Recommendation (Para No. 57)
The Committee are satisfied to learn that Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models
have either been successfully implemented or being explored in the projects viz.
Municipalities, Property Registration, e-Procurement, Citizen Service Centres (CSCs)
etc. The Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA-21) project is also being implemented on
PPP model. Further, the guidelines for SWANs have specifically mentioned PPP model
as one of the options for establishment of the network by the States and the implementation
of SCS is also being envisaged in a PPP entrepreneurial model. While no major
operational difficulties are anticipated as long as PPP model would be meeting the
financial and sustainability requirements, the Committee desire that the National Institute
for Smart Government (NISG) having expertise in the area of PPP Models should
continue to give their guidance in this regard in all the e-Governance projects.

46
Action Taken by the Government
The NISG has been specifically created to work in the area of developing PPP
models for implementation of e governance projects and the DIT is enabling the NISG
to continue to play this role.
(c) Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG and C-DAC
Recommendation (Para No. 59)
The Committee note that the National Informatics Centre (NIC) is providing
network backbone and e-Governance support to Central Government, State Governments,
UT Administrations, Districts and other government bodies. It offers network services
over high-speed long distance and local leased line Ku-band (RDMA, FTDMA, IPA
and DVB and SCPC VSATs), Wireless, Metropolitan Area Networks (MANs) and Local
Area Networks (LANs) with NICNET gateway for Internet resources, facilitating
informatics services for decentralized planning, improvement in Government services
and wider transparency of national and local Governments. NIC assists in implementing
Information Technology. The Committee further note that National Informatics Centres
Services Incorporated (NICSI) was basically conceived for providing logistic support
to NIC and various e-Governance projects. NIC has initiated several MMPs such as
road transport, land records, commercial taxes, gram panchayats, police, treasuries etc.
and the NICSI’s role is to facilitate smooth execution of these projects at grass-root
levels in various States of the country. The basic concept in most of the projects is to
focus on citizen service delivery, centralized initiatives and decentralized implementation.
The Committee further note that the NISG has been created as a public-private partnership
in collaboration between the Government and the private sector as a facilitator to lead
private sector competencies into the e-Governance efforts. It was further mentioned
that NISG’s vision is to establish itself as a Centre of Excellence in an e-Governance as
several other countries are also looking to India and also to leverage private sector
resources through PPP made for spread of e-Governance. The strategy is in the major
areas viz. planning a project, Project Development and Capacity Building through holding
Training Programmes for Policy Makers viz. Political Leaders, Senior Civil Servants
and Members of e-Governance Business Units in IT Companies. The Committee observe
that the projects undertaken by NISG are e-Seva (Government to Citizen Interface)
started in Andhra Pradesh and e-Biz (Government to Business area). Similarly, the
Committee find that C-DAC has successfully developed and deployed its solutions for
various government offices in States like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Punjab, Tripura,
Orissa, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Goa and Uttar Pradesh, successful
statewide computerization of the Department of Registration and Stamps, Integrating
its Language Technology expertise with its e-Governance proficiency, C-DAC also
develops important solutions in Indian languages, which impact the users in the
Government and the citizens. C-DAC has undertaken several projects, which have been
systematically implemented and effectively executed. C-DAC has deployed its software
in over 600 offices spread across thousands of miles, thus establishing an unmatched
ability in this domain. The Committee appreciate the large variety of informatics services

47
being provided by the premier institutions like NIC, NICSI, NISG and C-DAC to the
Government Ministries/Departments, States, and UTs etc. in successfully carrying out
their IT projects. The Committee recommend the DIT to undertake a scientific assessment
of the potentials of these Institutions so as to assign them a definite role and
responsibilities for effective and efficient implementation of various e-Governance
projects under NeGP. The Committee also recommend that these institutes of excellence
should be further assisted to enhance their capacities and capabilities for delivering the
increasing expectations from them.
Action Taken by the Government
All the institutions viz (NIC, NICSI, NISG & CDAC) have been promoted by
the DIT and have largely distinct roles. NIC is an attached office of the DIT to provide
technical and infrastructure support to all government departments for implementation
of e-Government projects; NICSI is a section 25 company meant to serve as a front end
to the NIC for contracting projects of commercial nature; and CDAC is an autonomous
society engaged primarily in R&D activities including development of Super Computers,
Grid Computing, Local Language computing, software solutions etc. NISG is a section
25 company promoted by the Government jointly with the Private sector, with a view to
channelise private sector resources and competencies into the national e-Governance
efforts. DIT, as promoter of these institutions, has been reviewing their performance
and carrying out periodical assessment of their potential & capabilities. They are being
assigned roles, which they can optimally discharge and which are within their charter.
The advice of the committee regarding the need to undertake scientific assessment of
the potential of these initiatives, assign definite roles and responsibilities to them and
enhance their capacities/capabilities is noted and necessary action is being taken in this
regard.
IX. CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
Recommendation (Para No. 60)
The Committee are informed that the major constraints which are anticipated are
the poor and inadequate definition of project outcomes in terms of services, poor project
development in terms of capturing the expectations of all stakeholders and incorporating
them into project deliverables, inadequate project implementation strategy including
appropriate PPP/procurement models, inadequate internal capacity to conceptualise and
manage the change, lack of continuity of project team, lack of relevant skills of project
leaders, lack of empowerment of project team to make necessary process changes and
financial constraints. The other constraints are stated to be the poor data connectivity,
poor literacy rate, poor affordability by masses, need for multiple languages interface,
successes in islands, no institutional mechanism for mass deployment, capacity
constraints within government staff to fully comprehend the potential of e-Governance
and to manage its deployments including change management, stability of tenure of key
persons/implementation teams, Lack of standards (for inter-operability and integration

48
of different applications) need to secure data and maintain its privacy, lack of necessary
high-level political and bureaucratic support for the programme.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department takes note of the recommendations of the Committee and
necessary corrective measures have been introduced in the NeGP strategy.
Recommendation (Para No. 61)
As informed to the Committee, a draft Note to seek approval of the competent
authority for the Approach and Key components of the NeGP, in order to address the
above issues has been prepared and circulated for comments to Central Line Ministries
concerned and State Governments. The Committee observe that the constraints identified
above though prima facie appear to be serious hurdles before the Department but most
of them, in the Committee’s opinion, are basically integral part of the core issues required
to be addressed under NeGP. The Committee have examined most of these issues
separately in this Report and has given their opinions and recommendations. They would,
therefore, like the DIT to gear up its machinery to address these issues in the light of the
various observations of the Committee in a time bound manner in consultation with all
concerned implementing Ministries, Departments, State Governments and other agencies.
Action Taken by the Government
The DIT has noted the valuable suggestions of the Committee as indicated in the
above Recommendations. The Department is currently seized of all the issues, which
have been so clearly highlighted in the valuable recommendations of the Honourable
Committee. The DIT has geared itself considerably to effectively meet the challenges
relating to the National e Governance Plan; and would constantly look forward to the
guidance and support of the Honourable Committee, in order to effectively meet these
challenges.

49
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
(B) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee observe that the Consultants engaged by DIT for extending their
support to concerned Government Departments in defining scope for the MMPs in
terms of services and service levels have visited a few States and held interactions with
most of the Line Ministries. They also studied international benchmarks for similar
services to arrive at a definition of services and service levels for the various MMPs.
According to the Department, the Consultant’s Report has recently been circulated to
all the concerned Line Ministries and a proper assessment of the Consultant role would
be decided only after obtaining the reaction of the Ministries. The Committee would
like the DIT to take up the matter with the Ministries for early submission of their
comments so that the need and necessity of further retention of the Consultant could be
examined by the Department and also the precise role could be defined in case of further
retention of the Consultant.
Action Taken by Government
The Consultants have submitted their report on the core services and service
levels and the same has been circulated to the Central Ministries concerned in 2005.
The Ministries were requested to incorporate the services and service levels into their
respective MMPs. They were also told that if they had any disagreement with the report
they could send their responses within 15 days so that a view on the same could be taken
by the Apex Committee. A few Departments have raised some issues on the report and
these are being resolved through discussions at the appropriate levels. As regard the
issue of further retention of the consultants, the consultants were appointed for a specific
task, i.e. to conduct the study, and the assignment of the Consultants has not been seen
as open ended. The studies commissioned through the consultants have been completed;
hence there is no need for further retention of these consultants, for the specified task.
III. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee are informed that the requirements of funds to meet the expenditure
for implementation of NeGP have not been finalized yet, the reason being that most of

50
the projects are under various stages of formulation. The DIT is still discussing the
detailed requirement of funds with the concerned Line Ministries/Departments which
are nodally responsible for implementation of various Mission Mode Projects. The
finalization of requirement of funds is stated to take another 3-4 months time. Similarly,
the total requirement of funds for each Mission Mode Project is also being worked out.
The Committee is further apprised that sharing of funds among DIT, Line Ministries/
Departments and the State Governments vary from project to project. The Committee
observe that financial management being a critical area need to be strategically managed
well in advance for successful completion of any project. They, therefore, recommend
that DIT should take immediate steps to prepare and finalize the estimates of not only
the total requirements, of funds for NeGP but also those required for each individual
Mission Mode Projects/Key components under the NeGP with a well defined sharing
pattern of funds among Line Ministries/Departments and the State Governments. The
Committee further desire that planning for funding mechanism for e-Governance projects
should be based on the annual maintenance charges for both the system and the software.
Action Taken by Government
In the implementation framework proposed for the NeGP, the programme management
is with the Apex Committee, of which the DIT is the secretariat, financial sanctions for
projects are based on financial proposals submitted by the concerned line Ministry to
the competent authority. The DIT has been requesting the departments to finalise their
projects and initiate implementation of the same, and the same has also been emphasized
in the meetings of the Apex Committee. However, it is not possible for DIT to quantify
the fund requirements until and unless the line Ministries finalise the scope of their
projects. Thus, in some cases, the cost of a particular project including the maintenance
cost is known precisely e.g. MCA 21 outlay is Rs. 331 crores, SWAN scheme outlay is
Rs. 3,334 crores, CSCs cost estimate is Rs. 5742 crores; in others, the actual cost is
still not known on account of the fact that the detailed project has not been prepared/
finalised. A rough estimation of the Programme Cost has been made by the DIT and
the same can be seen at Appendix. It may however be pointed out that the actual cost of
the NeGP may vary on account of two factors. Firstly on the actual scope of each MMP
and how it is finally defined. Secondly as can be seen from the figures, the National
Citizen ID project of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) (excluding the card) is
estimated to cost Rs. 4000 crores. However, as on date no final decision on whether to
go ahead with the project has been taken.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that a decision was taken on 22.12.2004 in a meeting of Planning
Commission that NeGP should clearly indicate how the Plan would link-up transfer of
2-3 per cent of Plan funds allocated to Line Ministries for e-Governance and IT related
activities and how 2-3 per cent would come from the Ministries where there is no Plan
funding like Ministry of Finance and how they would be accommodated in NeGP. A
clear direction was given in the said meeting that DIT could go for approval only after
ascertaining clear cut funding pattern and process re-engineering method appropriately

51
incorporated in NeGP. The Committee note with displeasure that even after a lapse of
almost one year, admittedly, the concept note is still at the stage of discussion and no
agreed position has emerged regarding pooling of resources and creating a single fund
for NeGP. The Committee, in view of the urgent need of funds for NeGP, strongly
recommend that the DIT should immediately move a proposal for making provision
for allocation of funds for NeGP by all Ministries from their total budgetary allocations
instead of confining such allocations from Plan funds only. This would facilitate those
Ministries in allocation of funds for IT related activities, which do not operate “Plan”
head in their budget.
Action Taken by Government
Under the NeGP, it is not presently envisaged to pool up all financial resources at DIT.
For funding of the NeGP, it has been proposed that the Line Ministries/Departments
concerned would prepare the project report and steer the MMP for obtaining the financial
approval needed. This would apply to MMPs funded through Plan as well as Non-Plan
budgetary provisions. The Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance would
make available the required funds for the MMPs from the relevant budgetary heads.

52
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
II. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PLAN (NeGP)
(c) Major Key-Components of NeGP
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe that to sustain the Mission Mode Projects, 8 key
components viz. Core Policies, Core Infrastructure, Support Infrastructure, Technical
Assistance, R&D, Human Resource Development & Training, Awareness & Assessment
and Organizational Structure have been identified for implementation. While expressing
their unhappiness over non-submission of a precise reply with regard to specific initiatives
being taken by DIT in respect of each of the above-mentioned key components of NeGP,
the Committee would like to be apprised of the factual position in this regard at the
earliest.
Action Taken by Government
Key Components:
Core Infrastructure: State Wide Area Networks (SWANs):  The SWAN
projects of 22 States/UTs, out of total 35 States and UTs, have so far been approved
by the Empowered Committee with an estimated Deptt. of IT (DIT) share of
Rs. 1507.8 crores, out of the total estimated DIT share of Rs. 2005 Crores. Five States
are implementing the project through NIC while remaining seventeen are using PPP
model. Two States i.e. Mizoram and Meghalaya have initiated pre-project activities.
Project proposals received from three States i.e. Bihar, Pondicherry and Lakshadweep
are under scrutiny and revision. Deptt. of IT is discussing with the remaining States/
UTs to expedite the initiatives on the SWAN project.
Support Infrastructure:  The Common Service Centre Scheme has been
formulated and appraised by the EFC. The draft Cabinet Note has been prepared by the
DIT and circulated to the required agencies. The CSC Scheme would be placed before
the Cabinet by July 2006. A National Level Service Agency has been appointed to
assist the DIT in carrying out the work of Project Development for the CSC Scheme.
Core Policies: The Core Policies on the roles and responsibilities, approach and
implementation Strategy for the NeGP have been detailed in the Cabinet Note on the

53
NeGP. Further, core policies on SWAN and CSCs have been framed. Guidelines and
Policies on State Data Centres (SDCs) and Standards are currently being worked out. A
lot of work has been done in defining the Service Levels and implementation framework
of the NeGP. Further, an Apex Committee on standards has also been formed under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, DIT to approve, notify and enforce standards.
Recognizing the critical role that well-designed Standards play in the rapid growth
of e-Governance in the country, DIT has also set up an Institutional mechanism and put
in place processes to evolve, approve and notify Standards. The Standards will be evolved
in consultations with all the stakeholders (Industry, Academia, Associations, Central
and State Governments etc.)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I
(d) Implementation Strategy
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee observe that various Central Ministries/ Departments and State
Governments are involved in the implementation of the NeGP and therefore, the DIT
have proposed separate role and responsibilities for them. As proposed by the DIT, the
Apex Committee would be overseeing the programme and providing policy and strategic
directions for its implementation and resolving inter-ministerial issues. The Line
Ministries/Departments would be responsible for implementation of the assigned Mission
Mode Projects (MMPs)/Components. The State Governments would be responsible for
implementing State Sector MMPs under the overall guidance of respective Line
Ministries. The DIT would be the facilitator and catalyst for the implementation of
NeGP by various Ministries and State Governments. The DAR&PG would be responsible
for the generic process re-engineering, change management, Human Resource
Development and Training, and the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
would allocate funds for NeGP through Plan and non-Plan budgetary provisions. The
Committee feel that the role and responsibilities proposed under the Plan appear to be
too general in nature and, therefore, there is a need to evolve an integrated coordinating
mechanism which could precisely define the functional responsibilities of each
Department in regard to step-wise completion of NeGP within a definite timeframe and
also could review their assigned role and responsibilities regularly to suitably redesign
them to meet the requirement of changing scenario.
Action Taken by Government
The roles and responsibilities of the various agencies have been proposed based
on the allocation of business rules and after extensive consultations with Departments.
The allocations of roles and responsibilities have also been endorsed by the Committee
of Secretaries in its meeting held in March 2006. Further, a detailed implementation
Schedule leading up to the formal launch of the NeGP has also been approved by the

54
Cabinet. In order to meet the requirements of the changing scenario, the DIT and the
DAR&PG have agreed to hold a monthly coordination and review meeting to deal with
changes required.
IV . CREATION AND SHARING OF INFRASTRUCTURE
(c) State Wide Area Networks (SWANs)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee observe that the DIT is primarily responsible for establishing
the shared core backbone infrastructure identified in NeGP. Policy Guidelines have
been issued laying down the modalities for technical and financial support that will
be provided by the DIT to the States for establishing State Wide Area Networks (SWANs).
These include the technical and administrative norms to be followed by the States,
depending on the implementation option adopted by each State to establish the SWAN.
The DIT proposes to establish State Wise Area Network (SWAN) and NICNET to
provide seamless connectivity to Line Ministries/Departments which would be
progressively leveraged to provide services electronically to citizens at the village
levels by extending its reach through wireless and other technologies relevant for the
last mile. The Committee, however, are disappointed to note that only 17 proposals
from the States have been received, considered and approved by the Empowered
Committee and the proposals from other States/UTs are yet to be submitted. In view
of the fact that setting up of SWAN network is the basic requisite for running the
e-Governance projects and admittedly any delay in the implementation of the SWAN
would have direct bearing on the implementation of the e-Governance projects, the
Committee recommend that DIT being the nodal Department for implementation of
NeGP should take the matter with all seriousness with the remaining States/UTs to
expedite submission of their SWAN proposals. The Committee would also like the
DIT to bring out at the earliest an appropriate Policy Framework keeping in view the
recently announced Broadband Policy.
Action Taken by Government
Since March 2005 till date, SWAN projects from 22 States/UTs with estimated
Deptt. of IT share of funding for Rs. 1507.8 crores have been approved in accordance
with the provisions of SWAN Policy Framework and guidelines issued by DIT in October
2004. Five States are implementing the SWAN project through NIC while remaining
seventeen are using Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT) or Build-Operate-Transfer
(BOT) model. Two States i.e. Mizoram and Meghalaya have initiated pre-project
activities. Project proposals received from three States i.e. Bihar, Pondicherry and
Lakshadweep are under scrutiny and revision. Deptt. of IT is discussing with the
remaining States/UTs for expediting initiatives on the SWAN project.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para Nos. 21 & 22 of Chapter I

55
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee observe that one of the eligibility criteria for the States to prepare
and submit SWAN proposal requires implementation of at least three major e-Governance
projects that may require SWAN connectivity. According to the DIT this eligibility
criterion with respect to the preparedness may have caused some delay from some of
the States/UTs to prepare and submit their proposals. The Committee are, therefore, of
the view that if the eligibility criteria happens to be one of the reasons for delay in
submission of SWAN proposals by the States, the Department should review the same
with a view to finding out, whether any, modification, in the eligibility criteria keeping
the spirit of the policy intact, would help the States in early submission of their SWAN
proposals.
Action Taken by Government
The eligibility criteria for the SWAN Infrastructure project for the State/UT have
been kept in order to ensure that SWAN Infrastructure, once created, is utilized properly
and gainfully and does not lie idle. It was also envisaged that this condition would
enhance and catalyse the e-Governance initiatives at States/UTs. It is also a fact that no
State/UT has so far approached DIT requesting for any relaxation of the eligibility
condition to avoid any delay in submission of its SWAN proposal. However efforts are
being made by DIT for formulation of the proposals from the remaining States/UTs by
providing them necessary technical guidance required for formulation of the proposals.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para Nos. 21 & 22 of Chapter I
VIII. INSTITUTIONAL PARTICIPATION
(b) Solution by IT Services Solution Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 58)
The representatives of various IT Services/Solution Providers have given various
suggestions for speedy and effective implementation of e-Governance projects.
Some of the important suggestions are related to the need for a paradigm shift in the
thought process, capital investment by private sector, utilization of available expertise
and technical skills in the private sector, Public Private Partnership (PPP), need for
sharing of infrastructure, concerted efforts for capacity building, change in process and
process reengineering, standardisation of technology for better operability, high
penetration and usage of IT in the country, identification of successful e-Governance
projects and replication thereof, designing self sustainable mode, strengthening of
intellectual property rights, publicity of e-Govemance success stories, guidelines for
outsourcing etc. The Committee note that representatives of the IT Services/Solution
Providers have given some important and valuable suggestions from their perspective.
They, therefore, recommend that the DIT should thoroughly examine these suggestions

56
with a view to exploring the possibility of translating them into practical reality keeping
in view the observations of the Committee on different issues in this Report. They would
like to be apprised of the precise action taken by DIT in the matter. The Committee are
of the view that DIT should have frequent interactions with the IT service/solution
providers to solicit their suggestions to increase the pace of implementation of
e-Governance Projects.
Action Taken by Government
Frequent interactions are held by the DIT with the IT services/ solutions providers
and their input/suggestions taken to help accelerate the pace of implementation of
e-Governance projects. For instance, in the Municipalities MMP, several solution
providers who have implemented projects in the Municipalities have been contacted
and their applications are being assessed and evaluated for speedier implementation.
Solution providers have been advised to have their solution certified by STQC to facilitate
wide spread implementation and roll-out using these solutions.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter I

57
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
VII. AWARENESS CREATION AND RE-ENGINEERING
(c) Process Re-engineering and Change Management (need for suitable changes
in laws and administrative process)
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
The Committee observe that the age old statutes and regulations governing the manual
process will not be suitable for governing the electronic processes which require
altogether a different set of legal framework and guidelines to make the e-Governance
successful. They are of the strong opinion that the legal and regulatory changes in the
processes would be able to deliver the services more efficiently and effectively and
remove a lot of other hurdles of manual regulatory mechanism. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a comprehensive review of all relevant statutes and
regulations should urgently be done to bring about suitable changes therein so as to
make them compatible with the cyber age technology enabling the citizens to obtain
maximum advantage of e-Governance projects. They further recommend that possibility
of bringing a new legislative mechanism may also be explored, if need be, to ensure
that the implementation of e-Governance projects delivers the citizen centric services
in an effective and successful manner.
Action Taken by Government
The DIT along with DARPG will jointly examine and review relevant statutes and
regulations and the possibility of a new legislation in order that the citizens obtain
maximum advantage from NeGP. This will be taken up in the coordination meetings of
DIT with the DARPG.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter I
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
13 December, 2006 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

APPENDIX
PROJECT COST ESTIMATES OF IMPLEMENTING THE
NEGP MMPs : DIT ESTIMATES
Mission Mode Implementing Cost Available/ Remarks
Project Name Department/Line Ministry Estimates Approval
(In Crores) Period
12 3 4 5
CentralMMPs
National ID Project Census Commission, Ministry of 5,098 No Estimate ranges between Rs. 5098—
Home Affairs 14957 crores, depending on the
implementation Strategy & the number of
persons to whom the card would be
issued. For purpose of the costing
exercise the minimum cost has been
considered
Excise & Customs The Central Borad of Excise and 167 Yes
Board Customs
Income Tax Central Board of Direct Taxes 350 Yes
DCA 21 Department of Company Affairs 331 Yes
Immigration Immigration Department 220 Yes
Passport, Visa and Ministry of External Affairs NA NA Yes
e-Courts Judiciary 854 347 Revised financial approval being sought.
58

59
State Government MMP’s
Land Records Ministry of Rural Development 521 Available
Property Registration Ministry of Rural Development 386 No Quick Estimate
Road Transport Department of Road 177 No - PPP Quick Estimate
Transportation and Highways Models
being
proposed
Agriculture (Agrisnet) Department of Agriculture 456 NA Quick Estimate
Treasuries Department of Finance 700 NA Quick Estimate
Municipalities Ministry of Urban Development 1188 No
Panchayats Department of Panchayati Raj 1036 No Quick Estimate
Commercial Taxes Department of Revenue 745 No Quick Estimate
Police Ministry of Home Affairs 600 No Quick Estimate
Employment Exchange Department of employment & 214 No Quick Estimate
Training
Integrated Services
EDI Ministry of Commerce Not
Available
E-Biz Department of Industrial Policy 30 Yes Yes
& Promotion
India Portal DIT 24 Yes Yes
12 3 4 5

60
National E-governance DIT 12 Yes Estimated
State Government MMP’s
Land Records Ministry of Rural Development 521 Available
Property Registration Ministry of Rural Development 386 No Quick Estimate
Road Transport» Department of Road 177 No - PPP Quick Estimate
Transportation and Highways Models
being
proposed
Agriculture (Agrisnet) Department of Agriculture 456 NA Quick Estimate
Treasuries Department of Finance 700 NA Quick Estimate
Municipalities Ministry of Urban Development 1188 No
Panchayats Department of Panchayati Raj 1036 No Quick Estimate
Commercial Taxes Department of Revenue 745 No Quick Estimate
Police Ministry of Home Affairs 600 No Quick Estimate
Employment Exchange Department of Employment & 214 No Quick Estimate
Training
Integrated Services
EDI Ministry of Commerce Not Available
E-Biz Department of Industrial Policy 30 Yes Yes
& Promotion
12 3 4 5

61
12 3 4 5
India Portal DIT 24 Yes Yes
National E-governance DIT 12 Yes Estimated
Service Delivery Gateway
E-Procurement Director General Supply and 20 Yes No
Disposable/DGS&D
MMP Total Cost 13,129
Program Component Activities
Cost
Estimate
(Rs. in
crores)
Core Policies 100
Core Infrastructure
1. State Wide Area Department of IT/DIT 3334 3300 GoI Share 2200 Crores
Network (SWAN)
Common Service Centre Department of IT/DIT 5742 No (Capex and opex over 5 years) Govt.
funds would be of the order of Rs. 1929
crores, rest from PPP
Integrated Services Department of IT/DIT 150 Partial
Technical Assistance Department of IT/DIT 100
Human Resource, Department of IT/DIT & 550
Development and DAR&PG
Training

62
12 3 4 5
R&D Department of IT/DIT 100
Organization Structure Department of IT/DIT 100 Partial
Awareness and Department of IT/DIT & 280 Partial
Assessment DAR&PG
Programme Component 10,456
Total
Mission Mode 13,129
Projects Total Cost
NEGP Total Cost 23,585

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13th December, 2006 from 1500 Hours to
1615 Hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Sohan Potai
5. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Vijay J. Darda
7. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
8. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Draft Reports
and adopted the same with some modification:—
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Implementation of e-Governance Projects’
pertaining to Department of Information Technology.
(ii)
** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and present the
above mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then adjourned.
63

64
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
(THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government :
Paragraph Nos.: 1-5, 7, 8, 10-15, 17, 19-25, 28-53, 55-57, and 59-61
Total : 53
Percentage : 86.88%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 6, 16 and 18
Total : 03
Percentage : 4.91%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 9, 26, 27 and 58
Total : 04
Percentage : 6.55%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies are of interim
nature :
Paragraph No.: 54
Total : 01
Percentage : 1.63%