41
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the  Committee contained in their Twenty Ninth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07)]
FORTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

FORTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the  Committee contained in their Twenty Ninth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 163
Price : Rs. 68.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER IR eport .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government ........................ 51
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 52
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 56
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2006-07)
held on 20.3.2007 ...................................................... 59
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Twenty Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 60

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jatin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
*18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
**19. Shri Narahari Mahato
##20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
21. Vacant
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006 in place of Shri Rajnarayna Budholiya, MP
(L.S.).
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
## Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February , 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
#22. Vacant
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajagopalan M. Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
#Vacated dated 15th December, 2006.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Forty First Report on Action Taken
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) relating to the
Department of Information Technology.
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
2.8.2006 and laid in Rajya Sabha the same day. The Department
furnished Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Report on 2.11.2006.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.3.2007.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
20 March, 2007 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendation/
observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Ninth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2006-07)’ pertaining
to the Department of Information Technology (DoIT).
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
2 August, 2006 and was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha the
same day. It contained 48 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 1, 2, 4-6, 8-20, 22-26, 30-48.
(Total: 42)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Para Nos: Nil
(Total: Nil)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos: 3, 21
(Total: 02)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies
are interim in nature:
Para Nos: 7, 27, 28 & 29
(Total: 04)
(Chapter-V)

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
A. Funds for “Manpower Development”
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3)
5. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that the
DIT had projected an outlay of R.s 60 crore during 2006-07 for the
scheme, “Manpower Development”, but the Planning Commission
brought it down to Rs. 38.40 crore. Also in the previous years of the
Tenth Plan except in the year 2005-2006, the projected outlays for the
scheme were reduced to a larger extent. During the years 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05, against the projections of Rs. 42.70 crore,
Rs. 132.55 crore and Rs. 39.50 crore, the funds were allocated to the
tune of only Rs. 8.00 crore, Rs. 8.50 crore and Rs. 29.00 crore
respectively. Considering the reduction in projected outlay as
unfortunate, the Committee had desired that the position should be
rectified.
6. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated that the allocation of funds for various schemes
pertaining to Manpower Development has been systematically increased
from Rs. 8 crore in 2002-2003 to Rs. 29 crore in 2004-2005. Further, the
allocation for current Financial Year (2006-2007) has been Rs. 32.40 crore.
It has further been informed that the Study Team on Human Resource
Development constituted by the Working Group on IT Sector for the
11th Plan period is in the process of finalizing its report. Based on its
preliminary recommendations, the Study Team has worked out a
considerably higher allocation for HRD activities.
7. While taking cognisance of the fact that Manpower
Development in the IT Sector is one of the thrust areas of DIT, the
Committee find that the funds allocated by the Planning Commission
for the Scheme during 10th Plan period were very much on the
lower side. However, from the action taken reply it appears that
DIT is content with the allocations made over the years for the

3
scheme, as is evident from the reply which says “the allocation of
funds for various schemes pertaining to Manpower Development
has been systematically increased from Rs. 8 crore in 2002-2003 to
Rs. 29 crore in 2004-2005”. However, the Committee strongly feel
that such important schemes should not be starved of funds as it
will have far reaching effects on the pace of growth in the IT Sector.
The Committee would like to be informed whether DIT sought
additional funds for the scheme in 2006-07 at the RE stage. The
Committee further note that a Study Team on Human Resource
Development constituted by the Working Group on IT sector for the
11th Plan period is in the process of finalizing its report and has
worked out a considerably higher allocation for HRD activities. The
Committee trust that due priority would be given to manpower
development in IT Sector and the allocation for Manpower
Development Scheme would be enhanced appropriately in the
11th Plan period.
B. Implementation of Recommendations of Task Force on HRD in IT
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4, 11, 12 & 13)
8. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that the Task
Force on Human Resource Development in IT, constituted with the
objective to analyse the manpower deliver mechanism in terms of
quantity and quality as well skilled set vis-à-vis global ITES requirement
during the 10th and 11th Plan period had submitted its Report way
back in December, 2003. However, no strategy was finalised to
implement its recommendations. Considering that the Task Force
recommendations of paramount importance as far as development of
the requisite manpower in the upcoming IT sector is concerned, the
Committee had desired that the same should be implemented without
further loss of time.
9. The Committee had also observed that the Task Force on HRD
in IT had indicated a shortage of skilled manpower to the tune of
2,35,000 for IT and 2,62,000 for ITES which could increase in 2012
unless special efforts are made in this direction. NASSCOM McKinsey
Report, 2005 had also indicated a need for additional 500,000 suitable
graduates in the next five years beyond the current supply trends to
enable the industry to reach Offshore IT and BPO exports of US$ 60
billion by 2010. The Committee had, therefore, desired that all out
efforts should be made to meet the expected shortage of manpower.
Further, as no specific projections were made for manpower requirement
to realise a target of US$ 200 billion software export by 2010 as
suggested by the Hon’ble President, the Committee had also desired

4
the DIT to work out the same and apprise them of the concrete
measures taken/proposed in this regard. As the overall strategy to
meet the Human Resource requirement rests on the ability to inculcate
the skill sets, establishing a standard to certify the quality of skills
provided and attracting people to get them certified and deployed in
IT/ITES, the Committee had impressed upon DIT to take remedial
measures to meet the challenges so that due to lack of skilled
manpower the target market share in the IT/ITES market does not get
a setback.
10. Further, as per NASSCOM McKinsey Report 2005, the
addressable market for global off-shoring was estimated to be about
US$ 300 billion split evenly between IT and BPO sector and only
around 10 per cent of which had been realised so far thus leaving
ample headroom for the future growth. The addressable market for
the global BPO industry had been equally sizeable and could expand
by more than 10 times from the current size of approximately
US$ 11.5 billion to at least US$ 120-150 billion. The Committee had
hoped that the DIT would work in unison with Ministry of Human
Resource Development and NASSCOM and devise counteractive
measures to exploit the untapped potential in order to meet the
estimated shortfall of manpower.
11. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
notes have stated that the Task Force Report has been discussed in a
series of meetings with NASSCOM and DOEACC. As a result, several
planning and implementing actions have taken place which include
the following:
DIT had initiated a number of measures to generate manpower in
key verticals like Bioiniformatics, VLSI Design & Information Security.
NASSCOM has launched the pilot phase of NAC Programme—
NASSCOM’s Assessment of Competence to help the ITES/BPO
industry.
The DOEACC is implementing ITES-BPO course to enhance skills
of youth for employment/self-employment in ITES/BPO sector in North
East and Srinagar/Jammu region and have already trained more than
3250 numbers of students so far.
In addition, DIT had been supporting various R&D Projects in the
area of IT.
Apart from above many ITES/BPO companies are stated to be
taking up initiatives on their own to train manpower to meet their
requirements.

5
12. The DIT have further stated that to meet the manpower demand
of IT/ITES Sector over the coming years, Government has constituted
a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of
Higher Education with members drawn from NASSCOM, Academia,
Industry, AICTE & other Government Departments. This committee
would address various issues pertaining to expansion of higher
education system to meet the manpower demands of IT/ITES Sector
and based on the recommendations of this Working Group, Government
would initiate necessary measures to implement the same.
13. The Committee find that DIT have taken certain steps for
development of the manpower in the upcoming IT sector. However,
they view these steps to be inadequate when compared to the actual
manpower requirement, as projected by the Task Force on HRD in
IT and also in the NASSCOM Mckinsey Report, 2005. They, therefore,
feel that much more focused attention should be paid towards
meeting the future manpower demands of IT/ITES Sector.
14. The Committee further note that the Government has
constituted a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Higher Education to address various issues pertaining
to expansion of higher education system to meet the manpower
demand of IT/ITES Sector based on the recommendations of the
Working Group and Government would initiate necessary measures
to implement the same. In view of the urgent need for development
of manpower in IT/ITES Sector, the Committee stress that the DIT
should pursue the matter vigorously and they be apprised of the
concrete steps taken in this regard.
C. Software Technology Parks of India (STPIs)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
15. The Committee in their earlier report had stated that STPI was
not getting adequate grant-in-aid for setting up of new STPI Centres
across the country. During the Tenth Plan STPI was never provided
with funds projected by the Department of IT even though IT and
ITES industries under the STP scheme account for about 90 percent of
India’s total software and ITES export. During 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05,
2005-06 and 2006-07, Rs. 57 crore, Rs. 92 crore, Rs. 8 crore, Rs. 10 crore
and Rs. 4 crore respectively were proposed, however the Planning
Commission allocated only Rs. 8 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 4 crore
and Rs. 4 crore respectively. With regard to problem of attrition of
skilled manpower, STPI had started hiring skilled manpower on
contract as per project need basis. The Committee had hoped that the

6
DIT would examine the constraints faced by the STPI without further
loss of time and soon resolve them for improved functioning of STPI
particularly keeping in view the promotional and pivotal role played
by them in the phenomenal success of I.T. Sector in the country.
16. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated that STPI being a Government Society by and large
have been following Government Rules, Regulations and HR policies.
There is a mismatch between salary/package/perks available in
Government and the industry outside. Today the life span of service
of an IT professional in any organization is quite vulnerable and there
is more a sort of floating population in this field.
17. The Committee find that the DIT’s reply is silent on the
corrective measures taken to resolve the constraints faced by STPI
on account of meagre funds allocated to it. It is notable that STPI
units account for about 90 percent of India’s total software exports.
Keeping in view the target set by NASSCOM McKinsey of
$60 billion software export by 2010 and also $ 200 billion software
export target suggested in NASSCOM, 2006 Leadership Summit, there
are proposals for setting up new STPI Centres and also for
strengthening the existing STPI units. The Committee, therefore,
stress that allocations to STPI should be enhanced appropriately
keeping in view the pivotal role STPI Units are expected to play in
boosting the country’s software exports, Further, in order to sustain
and enhance the operations of STPI, DIT should find ways to deal
with the problem of attrition of skilled manpower in STPIs so that
it continues to play developmental role in the promotion of software
exports.
D. Domestic Software
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
18. The Committee in their earlier Report had been apprised that
there were various reasons for the weak domestic software market.
The NASSCOM McKinsey Report, 2005 had suggested certain aspects
for boosting domestic IT market viz. penetration of Indian market in
the high-end software like product development, engineering designs,
e-learning curriculum development, embedded systems designs,
simulations etc.; extending tax holiday, duty free import of capital
goods etc., facilities for BPO/Call Centre companies catering to the
needs of Indian industry; and promotion of localisation efforts of
software and use of local language in office work etc. in order to
address the domestic IT market of multi-lingual, multi-cultural society

7
like India. The Committee had desired that the suggestions given in
NASSCOM McKinsey report, 2005 should be considered and
implemented to make the domestic IT market strong and stable so
that domestic software can sustain a high growth rate and be
competitive in the years to come.
19. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated that due to various overlapping issues involved, the
Development of Domestic Market involves various stake holders within
the Government and the Industry. DIT as one of those stake holders
have initiated various activities which includes the following:
• The activity of launch of domain names in Indian Languages
more popularly known as “Internationalized Domain Names
(IDN)”. It perceived that once the scope of Domain Names
is broadened to support local languages and scripts in the
construction of Domain Names, the process would require
support of multilingual scripts and other linguistic and
cultural tools for human-computing interface and the World
Wide Web/Internet. This in-turn would result in perceived
surge in the domestic market.
• Software tools and fonts in 2 languages-Punjabi and Urdu-
are ready for release. 17 other Indian Languages are expected
to be covered by 2007.
With the availability of IT tools in local languages it
imperatively acts as catalyst for domestic market.
• Department of Information Technology has initiated a
number of steps to train appropriate manpower, in few
chosen knowledge based sector such as Information Security
& VLSI Design. In this sector two major initiatives involving
cluster of engineering college including NITs and IITs have
been implementing manpower development activity. The
total outlay for implementing these two activities over a
period of 5 year is of the order of Rs. 120 crore. The key
output from these projects would be development of human
resources at Bachelors, Postgraduate & Doctoral level in the
respective field.
• E-Governance initiative for transparency, accountability and
simplification in government procedures: The DIT recently
received approval for the National e-Governance Plan. The
plan has a vision to “Make all Government services
accessible to the common man in his locality, through

8
common service delivery outlets and insure efficiency,
transparency & reliability of such services at affordable costs
to realise the basic needs of the common man”. The plan
consists of 27 Mission Mode Projects. The focus of the NeGP
is on service delivery and under the plan all departments
responsible for implementing the MMPs have been directed
to define the services they are targeting and the service
levels they wish to achieve for those services in concrete
terms. The necessary process reengineering and simplification
of procedures required to meet those service levels would
be part of the project design of the MMP . The DIT is
constantly monitoring the progress of the respective MMPs
and apprising the Apex Committee of the status of each
MMP .
• State Wide Area Network over all the States of the country
and one lakh Common Service Centres spread over 6000
blocks: Department of IT obtained approval of CCEA in
March 2005 for a Core e-Governance Communication
Network Infrastructure Scheme, entitled ‘State Wide Area
Network’ (SWAN) for the 29 States and 6 UTs at an
estimated outlay of Rs. 3334 crore to be spent in five years,
for establishment of minimum 2Mbps bandwidth capacity
of wide area network in each State/UT, from the Hqr upto
the Block level. Till date, individual SWAN Projects in 22
States have been cleared by the Empowered Committee with
the commitment of Department of IT, Govt. of India for
approx. Rs. 1508.00 crore for five years. Fortnightly updated
status of statewise implementation of this Scheme is available
in the Programme Tracker hosted in the DIT Website
(www.mit.gov.in)
20. The DIT have further stated that with better connectivity and
availability of e-government in conjugation with local language used,
will induce demand in domestic, it will help to move forward to
crossing the critical-mass (in term of IT users in the country,
connectivity, PC penetration, and availability of relevant-content in the
language of masses), which is necessary for sustainability of the market.
21. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by
the Department of Information Technology as it is silent on the
implementation of suggestions made in the NASSCOM McKinsey
Report, 2005 for boosting domestic IT market, viz. penetration of
Indian market in the high-end software like product development,
engineering designs, e-learning curriculum development, embedded

9
systems designs, simulations etc.; extending tax holiday, duty free
import of capital goods etc. facilities for BPO/Call Centre companies
catering to the needs of Indian industry; and promotion of
localisation efforts of software and use of local language in office
work etc. in order to address the domestic IT market of multi-lingual,
multi-cultural society like India. The Committee consider these
suggestions to be of paramount importance and reiterate their earlier
recommendation to consider and implement the suggestions made
in NASSCOM McKinsey Report, 2005 to make the domestic IT
market strong and stable so that domestic software can sustain a
high growth rate in the prevailing competetive  environment. They
would like to be apprised of the action taken by DIT in this regard.
E. Policy Framework to Promote growth of Electronic/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industries
Recommendation (Para Nos. 24, 25 & 26)
22. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that there
had been various factors responsible for slow growth in Electronics
Hardware Export like disabilities suffered by the Indian Electronics
Hardware industry on account of high incidence of duties/taxes,
inadequate infrastructure, high cost of finance, transaction cost, freight
and power,low volumes of pr oduction, elimination of duties on parts
of Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) items, Free Trade
Agreement (FTA) with neighbouring countries, etc. The Committee also
welcomed various benefits/incentives provided by the Government in
the budget for the year 2006-07 for the electronics and IT sector like
reduction in the peak rate of customs duty from 15% to 12.5%;
imposing excise duty of 12% on computers to complete the value
chain to encourage local manufacturing; reduction of excise duty on
storage device  i.e. DVD drives, USB flash memory and Combo-drives
to Nil; reduction of Customs duty on Integrated Receiver Decoders,
also known as Set Top Boxes to 0% and impositions of excise duty of
16% to encourage local manufacturing. However, they considered these
measures as inadequate and desired that with more interaction with
the people from the industry, grey areas affecting the Hardware Sector
should be identified and remedial steps be taken urgently to boost the
Sector.
23. The Committee further noted with concern that there was no
broad IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy. They hoped that the DIT
would try to remove all the bottlenecks in the way of Hardware Policy
and finalise it at the earliest.

10
24. DIT had prepared a discussion paper on “Conceptual Policy
framework to promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industry” in consultation with the Industry association
and forwarded the same to the PMO. DIT when asked to finalise the
Policy, proposed to the PMO to set up a Task Force at the earliest so
that the Hardware Policy can soon be finalised to help promote the
growth of Electronic/IT Hardware manufacturing industries during 2006
alongwith time-lines for implementing the recommendations. The
Committee had viewed that the absence of a clear Policy on hardware
may hamper the growth of the Hardware Industry.
25. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated that DIT, in consultation with the Industry
Associations, have prepared “A Discussion Paper on the Conceptual
Policy Framework to promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industry”. The grey areas affecting the Hardware Sector
have been identified and remedial steps that need to be taken to boost
the Sector have also been worked out. The major recommendations as
contained in the Discussion Paper are as under:—
• Reduction of customs and excise duties on Electronics/IT
items in a phased manner
•A  single composite VAT at 17% (at par with China) or lower
(at ASEAN levels)
• Rationalisation of Tariff Structure: Reduction of customs duty
on all Raw Materials and Capital Goods for manufacture of
Electronics/IT items to 0%
• Rationalization of State VAT on all Electronics/IT products
to 4% and abolition of CST
• Unification of manufacturing for domestic market and
exports
• Income Tax Exemption on export profits by DTA units
• Reduction of lending rate of interest at par with competing
countries
•P rocedural Simplification
• Improvement of Infrastructure
• Support for International Patents
• Support for Quality and Safety Certification
• Flexibility in Labour Laws
•P romotion of Mega-fabs/ATM and Hi-tech industry

11
26. DIT have further informed that a Task Force has been set up
by the PMO under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Prime
Minister, vide Notification No. 460/31/C/7/06-ES.I dated 4.4.2006. The
Task Force will undertake the following activities:
• Examine the proposals/suggestions contained in the
Discussion Paper on “Conceptual Policy Framework to
promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacture
Industry” prepared by the Department of Information
Technology.
• Examine the existing Government policies/procedures and
recommend suitable amendments/measures/incentives so as
to make India a Hub for Electronics/IT Hardware
manufacturing.
• Monitor progress and coordinate with the concerned
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, State
Governments and other agencies for implementation of the
recommendations in a time bound manner.
• Recommend a mechanism for single window clearance for
State level approvals, wherever necessary.
• Any other activity considered necessary for the achievement
of the objectives.
27. According to DIT the first meeting of the Task Force was held
on 20.4.2006, under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to PM,
wherein a presentation was made on the above Discussion Paper by
DIT. The Task Force has constituted a small group under the
Chairmanship of Member Secretary, Planning Commission to look into
all relevant aspects of the matter and give its recommendations
regarding appropriate fiscal as well as other benefits for the Electronics/
IT Hardware Industry for consideration of the Task Force. The group
is in the process of finalizing the recommendations.
28. The Committee note with satisfaction that a Task Force was
set up to examine the proposals contained in the discussion paper
on the “Conceptual Policy framework to promote growth of
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry” prepared by DIT
and also the existing Government Policies and Procedure and
recommend suitable measures to make India a hub for Electronics/
IT Hardware manufacturing. The Task Force has constituted a small
group under the Chairmanship of Member Secretary, Planning
Commission to look into all relevant aspects of the Indian Electronics

12
Hardware Industry and give its recommendations regarding
appropriate fiscal as well as other benefits for the Electronics/IT
Hardware Industry for consideration of the Task Force. The aforesaid
group is stated to be in the process of finalizing the
recommendations. In view of the urgent need to formulate a policy
framework to promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industry in the country, the Committee desire that
the recommendations of the Task Force be finalised expeditiously
and appropriate changes be brought about in the policies and
procedures to facilitate growth and make the country a hub for
Electronics/Hardware manufacturing. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action taken by Government in this regard.
F. Implementation of National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
29. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the
Cabinet had obtained the approval on the concept note on NeGP .
They desired to be ensured that all the 26 Mission Mode Projects and
8 support components under NeGP are implemented at the Central,
State and Local Governments levels within certain specific time-frame.
30. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated that as per the Cabinet approval, DIT’s prime role
is to facilitate and catalyse implementation of NeGP by various
Ministries/Departments and State Governments. It is also required to
provide assistance to Apex Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Cabinet Secretary and the Body under the Chairpersonship of Prime
Minister, who would be monitoring the implementation of NeGP
programme. The sole responsibility for implementing various Mission
Mode Projects vests with the concerned line Ministers/Departments
and they would be persuaded and provided handholding support to
complete their respective projects in a time bound manner.
31. The Committee note the submission made by the DIT that
the sole responsibility for implementing various Mission Mode
Projects vests with the concerned line Ministries/Departments. They,
however, desire that DIT, being the nodal agency for NeGP , should
play a proactive role and motivate the different Departments/State
Governments/UTs involved so as to ensure implementation of all
the 26 Mission Mode Projects and 8 Support Components under
NeGP within the stipulated time-frame. DIT should also extend all
the required support for the implementation of NeGP .

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
I. General
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that the Department of Information Technology
had proposed an outlay of Rs. 1516 crore for the year 2006-07 in order
to implement their various schemes viz. Research & Development,
Infrastructure Development, Human Resource Development, National
Informatics Centre and towards various programmes, but the Planning
Commission reduced the same to Rs. 1090 crore. In fact, the Planning
Commission had resorted to down-sizing of the outlays during the
entire Tenth Plan period. From the information furnished to them, the
Committee find that the Department of Information Technology had
proposed an allocation of Rs. 937.99 crore, Rs. 1146.90 crore, Rs. 1294.38
crore and Rs. 1400.67 crore during 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06,
but the Planning Commission had downsized the same to Rs. 470 crore,
Rs. 470 crore, Rs. 750 crore, Rs. 929.30 crore respectively during the
corresponding years. Significantly, the utilization of funds by the
Department in the previous years of the Tenth Plan was almost full.
The Committee are of the view that the financial curtailments by the
Planning Commission in the projections made by the Department will
have serious impact on the pace of implementation of various schemes/
programmes proposed to be taken during the year 2006-07 and thus
will delay the benefits that could accrue thereon.
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee’s examination further revealed that for Infrastructure
Development programme, the DIT had projected Budgetary support of
Rs. 818.00 crore, which has been reduced to Rs. 530.10 crore. For
Human Resource Development, Rs. 50.40 crore have been allocated
against the projection of Rs. 72.00 crore. R&D programmes have been
allocated Rs. 218.50 crore against the request of Rs. 298.00 crore. the
Committee find it distressing that even for an important scheme like
E-Governance, the Department will not be getting the required funds
and the programme would be curtailed to a large extent. The Planning
Commission has reduced the proposed allocation of Rs. 670 crore for

14
E-Governance to Rs. 440 crore. it is equally surprising to find that the
allocations have been reduced even for the thrust areas of the
Department like Human Resource Development. Further, for promotion
of electronics and IT hardware manufacturing, the allocation has been
reduced to Rs. 5.00 crore from Rs. 10.00 crore. Technology Development
of Indian Languages in IT has been provided with Rs. 9.00 crore against
the demand of Rs. 12.00 crore R&D programmes including Nano-
Technology for Indian languages will suffer as the allocation have
been made of Rs. 203.50 crore against the request of Rs. 280 crore. The
Committee strongly feel that such important schemes should not be
starved of funds and urge that sanctity of the budget allocation be
maintained at all costs as implementation of these schemes are for the
service of the masses and will accelerate the development of the
country. The importance of the most promising IT Sector in boosting
the efficiency and productivity in today’s fast changing global economy
should be taken into consideration. The Committee trust that these
factors will merit due consideration for appropriate enhancement of
funds at RE stage.
Action Taken on Recommendation Nos. 1 & 2
This matter was taken up with the Adviser (C&I) Planning
Commission informing that the Standing Committee on DIT has
expressed its concern over the reduced budget allocation made by
Planning Commission for the year 2006-07 and during the entire 10th
Plan period as well.
In response of this the Planning Commission have advised that
DIT should undertake a comprehensive scheme-wise review of all its
programmes for making a realistic assessment of the additional funds
required in the financial year 2006-07 with the justification.
This will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission at the RE stage.
Recommendation No. 4
The Committee learn that the Task Force on Human Resource
Development in IT was constituted with the objective to analyse the
present manpower delivery mechanism in terms of quantity and quality
as well skilled set vis-à-vis global ITES requirement during the 10th
and 11th Plan period. They are extremely unhappy to note that though
the said Task Force had submitted its Report way back in December,
2003, no strategy has yet been finalised to implement the
recommendations contained in the Report. They deprecate the

15
indifferent attitude of the DIT in dealing with the important
recommendations of Task Force. The Committee strongly feel that the
Task Force recommendations in the areas of attracting resources into
IT/ITES, educating/developing requisite skills, certifying skills levels
of resources, deploying trained/certified resources and monitoring and
guiding efforts related to IT/ITES and R&D, are of paramount
importance as far as development of the requisite manpower in the
upcoming IT sector is concerned and need to be implemented without
further loss of time.
Action Taken
This report has been discussed in a series of meetings with
NASSCOM and DOEACC. As a result of these discussions, several
planning and implementing actions have taken place. These includes:
DIT had initiated a number of measures to generate manpower in
key verticals like Bioinformatics, VLSI Design & Information Security.
NASSCOM has launched the pilot phase of NAC Programme—
NASSCOM’s Assessment of Competence to help the ITES/BPO
industry.
The DOEACC is implementing ITES-BPO course to enhance skills
of youth for employment/self-employment in ITES/BPO sector in North
East and Srinagar/Jammu region and have already trained more than
3250 numbers of students so far.
In addition, DIT had been supporting various R&D Projects in the
area of IT.
Apart from above many ITES/BPO companies are taking up
initiatives on their own to train manpower to meet their requirements.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 and 14 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee learn that the task of evolving a detailed plan for
implementation of the priority recommendations has been entrusted to
DOEACC. In order to generate manpower in key verticals like
bioinformatics, VLSI Design and Information Security, DOEACC is
implementing ITES-BPO course to enhance skills of youth for
employment/self-employment in ITES/BPO sector in North-East and

16
in Srinagar/Jammu and more than 1500 students are stated to have
been trained. The Committee find the number of students trained by
DOEACC for ITES/BPO sector to be too meagre to meet the present
need of skilled manpower in the country not to speak of future
projections. They further opine the DOEACC should look into the
possibilities of starting ITES-BPO course at its other Centres also.
Action Taken
As per the NASSCOM-McKinsey Report 2005, “the BPO industry
is fairly well supplied with talent in the short term. But short falls are
possible in the long term since talent development seems unlikely to
keep pace with rapid industry growth”.
The training programmes for ITES/BPO are being conducted by
Government as well as NASSCOM & private companies. The private
sector has trained substantial number of students to meet ITES/BPO
requirement, however there is no data available on the numbers trained
by them.
The Government initiatives have been targeted to set up training
facilities at remote and backward areas where private companies usually
do not set up their training facilities. With this in mind, North-Eastern
Region and Jammu & Kashmir had been considered by Government.
Accordingly, DOEACC has launched ITES/BPO courses covering all
states of North-Eastern Region with financial assistance from Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region. Further, the courses have
been extended to Jammu & Kashmir region with financial assistance
from DIT. Also DOEACC Centres at Gorakhpur & Kolkata are
conducting these courses. About 3250 students have been trained so
far through these initiatives.
The Study Team on Human Resources Development constituted
by the Working Group on IT Sector for the 11th Plan Period in its
draft recommendations has suggested the adoption of E-Learning
methodologies by DOEACC to bring more students under its ambit.
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee find that DOEACC in association with the Industry
has developed verticals viz. finance—banking and insurance, travel and
hospitality, pharmaceuticals and retail marketing as the promising areas
requiring immediate attention. However, they believe that with the
on-going growth of the IT-ITES BPO industry and changing technology

17
there may be many more emerging verticals for which specialised
manpower may be required and those need to be identified and
attended to.
Action Taken
The verticals identified for immediate manpower needs are Banking
& Finance, Insurance, Travel & Hospitality, Pharmaceuticals & Retail
Marketing. Two Sub-Committees on Banking & Finance and Insurance
have already been constituted for addressing immediate requirements.
The other verticals would be taken up subsequently. Regarding
identification of more emerging verticals, DOEACC/DIT would work
on inputs obtained from industry/NASSCOM.
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee are informed that DIT propose to launch online
examination, online course delivery—content development etc. for the
selected verticals like Banking and Insurance, Travel & Hospitality—
airline ticketing, pharmaceuticals, etc., by DOEACC. This involves
creating infrastructure including Hardware & Software alongwith
necessary bandwidth, trained professionals, development of courseware
material, launching of online examination, conducting online courses
etc., in the identified potential verticals of ITES/BPO. The committee
consider it a step in the right direction; however, they desire that
some timeframe should also be laid down for completion of the process
in this regard.
Action Taken
The syllabus outline for Banking & Insurance Verticals have been
finalised & proposals for development of learning materials received
from DOEACC Centres are being evaluated. The learning material
development is proposed to be completed by July 2007.
III. Software Export and ITES Export Vs Manpower requirement
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee are happy to note that the Software and ITES
exports in India have grown from US$ 12.9 billion in the year 2003-
04 to US$ 17.7 billion in 2004-05. Further, it is estimated to exceed
US$ 23.4 billion during 2005-06. They further observe that though
NASSCOM-Mckinsey target is to clock $ 60 billion software export by
the year 2010, another suggestion was made in the ASSCOM, 2006

18
leadership Summit by the Hon’ble President to achieve a target of
$ 200 billion software exports by the same year. It is desired that IT
services and ITES-BPO sector which accounts for 3.5 percent of the
global market should be increased to 15 percent by 2010. The
Committee are informed that DIT in collaboration with NASSCOM
and State Governments have been looking into the suggestions of the
Hon’ble President for further implementation and development. They
would, however, like the Department of IT to closely look into the
suggestions made in the NASSCOM, 2006 leadership Summit and
formulate a comprehensive plan to realise the set targets for software
export enabling India to become an IT superpower. They trust that
right initiatives will be taken by the Government to give a new
momentum to the software industry.
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee observe that as per the NASSCOM McKinsey report
2005, the States and Central Governments have been suggested to
accelerate efforts to ensure free trade in services through the Mode 4
negotiations at the WTO and through trade agreements with select
countries; to ensure efficient visa regime for professional workers with
the US, EU, and other source countries; to take reciprocal market-
opening steps such as liberalising important industry sectors such as
financial services and retail; to set up Focused-Education-Zones to
improve quality of higher education; to deregulate higher education in
stages over the next five to seven years, and to shift to a largely
demand-based funding system for colleges and universities; to develop
immediately a master plan for 10-12 integrated townships with
associated urban infrastructure including international airports, roads
and land development; to provide facilities for large scale land
acquisition and land development for each integrated township; to
expedite modernisation of existing international airports and to expand
the domestic IT market by further computerising government functions
and citizen services. The Committee are of the view that DIT will
have to play a proactive role in arranging a closer and more intense
interaction between the State Governments and Central Government
to work out the modalities at a faster pace for smooth implementation
of the suggestions made in the NASSCOM-McKinsey Report, 2005.
Action Taken on the Recommendation Nos. 9 & 10
A high level meeting was held on 02.06.2006 wherein various issues
related to IT and BPO industries based on recommendations and
concerns expressed by NASSCOM and other stakeholders

19
where discussed. The decisions taken in that meeting include following
areas:
1. Urban Infrastructure
2. Improving supply of suitable talent
3. Promoting free trade in service
4. Promoting Domestic IT consumption
5. Fostering innovation
6. Sustaining competitiveness
In view of the above, it is clear that the issue of Software Export
and ITES Export vs. Manpower requirement has been covered in the
above meeting, and it involves different stakeholders within
Government spreading over various Ministries.
However DIT as one of the stakeholders within Government has
initiated various activities which include areas such as:
Growth of IT Software and ITES
To achieve growth of 32 percent in software and ITES export during
the year 2006-07:
Member units of Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) have
exported software of over Rs. 1,00,965 Crore at the end of financial
year 2005-2006. The total exports by STP units in the year 2004-05
were Rs. 74019 Cr. The growth in exports for the FY 2005-06 as
compared to FY 2004-05 is 36%.
Software Exports of Rs. 7050.13 crore has been reported through
STPI in the month of July 2006 as compared to Rs. 4968.57 crore in
the month of July 2005 (a growth of 41.89% in rupee terms). Cumulative
exports from April 2006 to July 2006 are Rs. 23234.88 crore as compared
to Rs. 17704.63 crore during April 2005 to July 2005 (a growth of
31.24% in rupee terms).
•A  special thrust would be given by DIT to tier 2 and tier 3 cities
to ensure equitable growth of this sector and maintain global
competitiveness:
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), an autonomous society
under Department of Information Technology, has already set up 47
STPI centres out of these, 41 STPI centers are located in Tier-II and

20
Tier-III cities. Besides these centres few more centres are also coming
up in various locations of the country.
STPI has helped to incubate the Indian Software Industry. Almost
all the IT majors and many large Units, MNCs are exporting under
the umbrella of STPI. This has given STPI a very enriching experience
to emerge at the forefront of the Indian IT Industry and facilitating
them in a better way. STPI ecosystem has nurtured SMEs as which
has emerged as the largest employer of knowledge workers in the
country. The segment has shown confidence on the STPI ecosystem
provides overall support in the form of start up support under,
incubation facilities, Statutory and fiscal support STP scheme, match
making and training support etc. is well positioned to act as a platform,
which can help companies enhance their marketing abilities through
international exposure.
While acknowledging the developmental role STPI needs to play,
emphasis must be laid by the organization to generate income to sustain
its operations while considering to develop Tier II and Tier II towns.
Towards generating income to sustain its operations, STPI, in addition
to general STPI activities i.e. statutory services, High Speed Data
Communication Services and state-of-the-art plug & play incubation
facility to the IT industry, STPI has undertaken various consultancy
and Project Management activities at National and International level.
STPI is also considering setting up new STPI Centres/Point of
Presence based on the following Objective Criteria like availability
Human Resources, Industrial Infrastructure IT grade Infrastructure, State
Government IT Policy, Pro-activeness and Receptiveness Business
Environment, NRI Linkage and Other Special Package, Social
Infrastructure and Cost.
One critical factor in success of STPI centres is the State
Government policy framework & implementation and the
responsiveness to IT entrepreneurs. While STPI would provide
assistance in framing appropriate policy, the State Government would
have to play a very proactive role. In order to assess the commercial
and business viability of the location, a joint feasibility study has to
be conducted along with State Government keeping the various
parameters as per the Objective Criteria mentioned.
Besides this as per the policy for setting up new STPI centres, the
State Governments have to provide, 3 acres of land, 10,000 sq. ft. built
up space and give a grant-in-aid of Rs. 1.00 cr. to partially defray the
cost for setting up a centre. The built up space is required for the

21
setting up of a state-of-the are incubation facility for Small and Medium
Entrepreneurs in that region. For North-Eastern States, it has also been
decided that to set up a STPI center where none exist today, the State
Govt. may provide 3 acres of land and 3000 sq. ft. of built up space
only. Department of Information Technology (DIT), MCIT, Government
of India also provides Rs. 50 Lakh for each new STPI Centre.
For providing state-of-the-art incubation facility, STPI could go with
a joint development by involving the private developers where the
private developer could be chosen through a transparent competitive
bidding process. The bidder that provides more IT grade built-up space
in lieu of the land could be chosen as partner in this project. In this
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model option STPI need not invest
any capital into the building. In the space that which got acquired out
of the total space available can be used for the incubation purpose
where necessary, part of this could be used for STPI office also.
A number of IT Parks/Academic & Educational Institutes has
shown interest for creation of state-of-the-incubation facility in available
space, in association with STPI. STPI on a experimental basis has
worked out some model and created state-of-the-art infrastructure in
Kumargurau College of Technology Campus, Coimbatore. Benefits from
this model are (1) Secondary cities will get ready available IT grade
and state-of-the-art infrastructure and would be able to contribute
significantly in software exports from the country. (2) Skilled and
Talented students will get platform to interact with industry and it
will enhance their skill set. (3) Both industry and academic institutes
can undertake new project jointly including some R&D projects.
(4) STPI will develop new relation with academic and educational
institutes.
IMPACT EVALUATION STUDIES (IES) ON STPI SCHEME IN
TIER-II AND TIER-III CITIES (other than metros): As 10th five year
plan end is approaching, it is the time of undertaken such Evaluations
and Impact Assessment Studies, which would constitute an important
input for finalizing the programmes for the 11th Plan. STPI is
conducting this study on “IMPACT EVALUATION STUDIES (IES) ON
STPI SCHEME IN TIER-II AND TIER-III CITIES (other than metros)”,
which will be undertaken.
• IT and ITeS sector is projected to provide employment to about
2.2 million software professional by 2008:
Training of professionals/development of manpower is an essential
factor which dictates the employability of professionals in IT/ITeS

22
sector. Department of Information Technology has initiated a number
of steps to train appropriate manpower, in few chosen knowledge
based sector such as Information Security & VLSI Design. In this sector
two major initiatives involving cluster of engineering college including
NITs and IITs have been implementing manpower development activity.
The total outlay for implementing these two activities over a period of
5 years is of the order of Rs. 120 crore. The key output from these
projects would be development of human resources at Bachelors, Post-
graduate & Doctoral Level in the respective field.
It may be stated that in order to improve the supply of suitable
talent in the IT & BPO sector Ministry of Human Resource
Development has constituted a Working Group for making the
recommendation to PMs office on the issue of meeting the supply of
suitable talent in IT & BPO sector. This Working Group was constituted
to deliberate on the report entitled “extending India’s leadership of
the IT & BPO Industries: policy recommendation” made by NASSCOM.
As a sequel to setting up of this working group (in which DIT is duly
represented by its Secretary), two meeting shave already been held.
Based on the deliberations of the working group the following
recommendations are being made by MHRD for improving the supply
of talent in IT & BPO sector:
(i) Establishing Finishing School at 7 NITs (on a Pilot basis) to
make the existing Engineering graduates more employable
and meet the industry requirement.
(ii) A gr oup to be constituted to re-design the curriculum/syllabi
of existing courses to make them compatible with industry
need.
(iii) The working group also noted that the gap between demand
and supply of ITeS manpower as of today is not appreciable.
However, there could be gap by 2012, for which the working
group indicated that further initiatives are to be taken both
in Govt. & private sectors.
(iv) The working group has also deliberated on other issues
pertaining to development of English language skills for
ITeS-BPO sector.
Recommendation No. 11
The Committee are informed that as indicated by the Task Force,
there is a possibility of a shortage of skilled manpower to the tune of
2,35,000 for IT and 2,62,000 for ITeS which could increase in 2012

23
unless special efforts would be made in this direction. At the same
time, NASSCOM McKinsey Report, 2005 has also indicated a need for
additional 500,000 suitable graduates in the next five years beyond the
current supply trends to enable the industry to reach offshore IT and
BPO exports of US$ 60 billion by 2010. The Committee consider it a
matter of great concern. The Committee desire that all out efforts should
be made to meet the expected shortage of manpower as indicated by
the Task Force. Further as no specific projections have so far been
made by DIT for manpower requirement to realise a target of US$ 200
billion software export by 2010, the Committee would like the DIT to
work out of the same and apprise them about the concrete measures
proposed to be taken in this regard.
Recommendation No. 12
The Committee feel that though addressing the anticipated gap in
manpower requirement is critical for India to achieve its target market
share in the IT/ITeS market, however the overall strategy to meet the
Human Resource requirement rests on the ability to inculcate the skill
sets, establishing a standard to certify the quality of skills provided
and attracting people to get them certified and deployed in IT/ITeS.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department of IT to take
remedial measures to meet the challenges so that the target market
share in the IT/ITeS market does not get a setback due to lack of
skilled manpower.
Recommendation No. 13
The Committee note that as per NASSCOM McKinsey Report 2005,
the off-shoring potential for each service line in the IT market and for
each industry vertical in the BPO market, there is a huge untapped
potential. The addressable market for global off-shoring is estimated
to be about US$ 300 billion split evenly between IT and BPO sectors
and only around 10 per cent of which has been realised so far thus
leaving ample headroom for the future growth. The report further
says that the addressable market for the global BPO industry is equally
sizeable and could expand by more than 10 times from its current size
of approximately US$ 11.5 billion to at least US$ 120-150 billion. BPO
growth will be driven largely by traditional industries ( e.g., retail
banking) and cross-industry functions such as Human Resources and
Finance & Accounting. The Committee trust that the DIT would work
in unison with Ministry of Human Resource Development and
NASSCOM and devise counteractive measures to exploit the untapped
potential in order to meet the estimated shortfall of manpower.

24
Action Taken on the Recommendation Nos. 11, 12 & 13
To meet the manpower demand of IT/ITeS Sector over the coming
years, Government has constituted a Working Group under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Higher Education with
members drawn from NASSCOM, Academia, Industry, AICTE & other
Government Departments. This committee would address various issues
pertaining to expansion of higher education system to meet the
manpower demands of IT/ITeS Sector and based on the
recommendations of this Working Group, Government would initiate
necessary measures to implement the same.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 13 and 14 of chapter-I)
IV . Software Technology Parks of India (STPIs)
Recommendation No. 14
The Committee observe that there are 6129 STPI units in India
which are operational and 4088 are exporting units. It is appreciable
to find that during 2004-05, STPI units accounted for software export
of Rs. 74,019 crore out of the total software export of Rs. 80,180 crore
from our country. Further, out of the total estimated software export
of Rs. 106,000 crore in the year 2005-06, STPI accounted for Rs. 100,965
crore. The Committee are informed that several measures are proposed
to strengthen STPI like developing more IT grade built up space for
incubation; setting up STPI centres in secondary cities to promote
exports from across the country and promoting the small and medium
entrepreneurs of the country to enable a level playing field to STP
units vis-a-vis SEZ units. The Committee find that these steps are in
right direction; however, they desire that steps should be taken to
implement them at the earliest, in view of the targets set by
NASSCOM-McKinsey of $60 billion in software export by 2010 and of
$200 billion suggested during NASSCOM, 2006 Leadership Summit.
Action Taken
Keeping in view the recommendation of the Parliamentary
Committee, STPI is also planning to set up state-of-the-art incubation
space at number of places including Chennai, Hyderabad, Dehradun,
Ranchi, Patna, etc.

25
Recommendation No. 15
The Committee appreciate that the norms for setting up of STPI
Centres have been relaxed for smaller States and North-Eastern States
where no STPI centre exist today. Though as per the current policy for
setting up of new STPI centres, the State Government has to contribute
3 acres of land, 10,000 sq. ft. of built up space and grant-in-aid of
Rs. 1 crore to partially defray the total project cost; under relaxed
conditions the State will have to provide 3 acres of land and 3000 sq.
ft. built up space only. The Minister for Communication and
Information Technology has already written letters to State Governments
of Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to provide their
contribution so as to enable STPI to firm up the plans for setting up
of STPI centres in these States. The Committee desire that similar steps
should be taken to set up STPI centres in other North-Eastern States
and also in other smaller States.
Action Taken
STPI has already initiated action to set up STPI Centres at NE
States where none exist today . The matter would be put up to
Governing Council for obtaining administrative approval to set up
STPI Centres in other smaller states.
Recommendation No. 16
The Committee regret to note that during 2005-06, Rs. 2 crore kept
for the scheme ‘STPI’ for NE region remained unutilised, the reason
being non-receipt of any concrete proposal for setting up of new STPI
centre. The Committee strongly recommend that the matter may be
pursued vigorously with these States so that the funds are optimally
utilised and they are not left behind in promotion of Software Industry
and Software Export.
Action Taken
STPI has already planned to set up new STPI Centres at Mizoram,
Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh. STPI is discussing the same with
concerned State Governments.
Recommendation No. 17
The Committee understands that success of STPI centres depend
on the State Government policy framework and implementation as
well as the responsiveness of IT entrepreneurs. While STPI would

26
provide assistance in framing appropriate policy, the State Governments
would have to play a very proactive role. They would have to ensure
an attractive IT Policy and availability of appropriate manpower and
requisite general industrial infrastructure, exemption from power cut
to IT industry, abolition of unnecessary controls/inspections. The
Committee trust that the Department of IT and STPI would work in
unison with the State Governments of those States where no STPI
Centre exist as on date so as to promote software export across the
country.
Action Taken
Department of IT and STPI are working closely with the
State Governments where no STPI Centres exist as on date for possible
development of the software industry.
Recommendation No. 18
One of the constraints being faced by STPI is inadequate grant-in-aid
for setting up of new STPI Centres across the country. The Committee
note with dismay that though IT and ITES industries under the STP
scheme account for about 90 percent of India’s total software and
ITES export. STPI was never provided with funds projected by the
Department. During 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07,
Rs. 57 crore, Rs. 92 crore, Rs. 8 crore, Rs. 10 crore and Rs. 4 crore
respectively were proposed, however the Planning Commission
allocated only Rs. 8 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 4 crore and
Rs. 4 crore. The Committee further note that for dealing with the
constraint of attrition of skilled manpower STPI have started hiring
skilled manpower on contract as per project need basis. The Committee
expect that the Department of IT would examine these constraints
faced by the STPI without further loss of time and soon resolve them
for improved functioning of STPI particularly keeping in view the
promotional and pivotal role played by them in the phenomenal success
of I.T. Sector in the country.
Action Taken
STPI being a Government Society is by and large have been
following Government Rules, Regulations and HR policies. There is a
mismatch between salary/package/perks available in Government and
the one prevalent in the industry outside. Today the life span of service
of an IT professional in any organization is quite vulnerable and there
is more a sort of floating population in this field.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I)

27
Recommendation No. 19
The Committee are informed that due to the emergence of Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) Scheme announced by the Ministry of
Commerce, the Companies operating under STP scheme have expressed
serious concern about the sustainability of STP scheme and continuity
of fiscal incentives for the IT Industry. The SEZ Scheme in its present
form does not meet the objective of spreading the growth of the
software industry across smaller cities and towns, and at the same
time STP scheme provides this flexibility. The Government have,
therefore, been requested to bring IT specific SEZs under the
Department of Information Technology, so that the existing operational
framework of STPI can be effectively used to further strengthen the
SEZ scheme itself in the interest of the IT Industry, bringing-in a level
playing field for the IT Industry, STP/EHTP units with the other
additional benefits that are extended to the SEZ units. The Committee
desire that the matter should be taken up at the highest level and
pursued vigorously to its logical conclusions. They would like to be
informed of the progress made and decision, if any taken, in this
regard.
Recommendation No. 20
The Committee also note that STPI has planned to commission a
study to assess the impact to SEZ Act and phasing out of concessions
under the STP scheme on software industry. The Committee of
Secretaries from Department of IT, Commerce, Revenue, Economic
Affairs and Member Secretary, Planning Commission as Chairperson
would then examine the report and furnish the recommendations to
PMO for consideration of Hon’ble Prime Minister. The Study was
expected to be completed by 15 April 2006. The Committee would like
to know the present status in this regard. They would like to be
apprised of the major recommendations contained in the aforesaid
report and the action taken thereon, in due course.
Action Taken on Recommendation Nos. 19 & 20
In order to have independent view and assess the impact of SEZ
Act and phasing out of concession under STP Scheme, STPI appointed
M/s. Ernst & Young as a consultant for the study . After completion of
the study on 17th April 2006, a meeting was held by a committee
under the Chairmanship of Member Secretary, Planning Commission
where M/s. E&Y made a presentation.

28
This Committee, chaired by Member Secretary, Planning Commission
with Secretaries from Deptt. of Commerce, Information Technology,
Revenue and Economic Affairs as members have submitted its report.
2. The major recommendations include:
(a) IT/SEZ may be subjected to the combination of built up
area and employment parameters.
(b) There should be some additional parameters related to the
quality of infrastructure.
(c) On the issue of extension of fiscal benefits beyond 2009-10,
to existing STPI units, the Committee felt that there was
intrinsic merit for doing so for following reasons:
(i) It does not make much sense to force existing STPI units
from existing locations to SEZs for availing fiscal benefits,
already available under existing STPI Scheme (upto 2009).
While extending fiscal benefits under SEZ Scheme to
scattered STPI units, in situ, would militate against the basic
character & philosophy of SEZ Scheme which is based on
area based infrastructure approach; it is much easier to
extend similar fiscal benefits, under 10A & 10B of Income
Tax Act beyond 2009. Such an amendment may be taken
up by Department of IT separately.
(ii) ITES which encompass Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)
& Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) sectors work
internationally on slim margins & migrate from one location
to another depending on comparative advantage. In this
sector, there will be distinct advantage where the developer
develops and owns the brick and mortar assests & the BPO
Company hires premises as a plug & play operation.
3. In the meeting of the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM)
held on 10th May 2006, it was inter alia  decided that:
(a) IT/SEZs may be subjected to a combination of built up
area & employment parameters.
(b) In addition, parameters related to quality of infrastructure
will be added.
(c) The Chairman directed that the Ministry of Finance would
consider separately the recommendations relating to the
extension of benefits beyond 2009 under section 10A and
10B of the Income Tax Act to STPI units.

29
4. In the meeting of the EGOM held on 23rd August 2006 it was
inter alia  decided that
• “IT/ITES SEZs should be monitored separately from other
Sector specific and multiproduct SEZ.”
VI. PC penetration in the country
Recommendation No. 22
The Committee find that PC penetration in India is very low
around 14 per 1000 people in March, 2005. This is one of the factors
for low IT capital in India. They appreciate the initiative taken by the
DIT to roll out sub Rs. 10,000 fully loaded computers to increase PC
penetration in the country. DIT had discussions with various computer
manufacturers and many of them have launched their low cost PC at
a price below Rs. 10,000 during 2005. However, the Committee believe
that providing low cost PCs cannot be one solution to increase PC
penetration in India and therefore, desire that besides making the PCs
affordable by lowering the taxes/tariff, increasing the depreciation rates
etc., there is a need for helping and funding the content developers in
the local languages; launching a mass campaign on the electronics
media about the utility of PC and replication of the successful
programmes piloted by different States throughout the country as
mission modes, promotion of use of PC and internet by spreading
e-Governance and citizen centric services offered by the Government
by extending SWAN at the village level and scaling up of State level
initiatives. Needless to mention that these measures have to be
implemented with a sense of urgency so that the targets of PC
penetration at 65 per 1000 and Internet penetration to 40 per 1000 by
2008 do not remain Illusory. According to the Committee, such steps
would certainly give a boost to the IT capital in India.
Action Taken
(1) The Government has already taken the following measures to
bring down the cost of PCs:
(i) Basic Customs Duty on Computers is 0%.
(ii) Excise duty on computers is 12%.
(iii) Microprocessors, Hard Disc Drives, Floppy Disc Drives, CD
ROM Drives, DVD Drives, USB Flash Memory and Combo-
Drives have been exempted from excise duty.
(iv) Depreciation on computers is @ 60%.
(v) V AT on computers is @ 4%.

30
(2) The Committee believe that providing low cost PCs cannot be
one solution to increase PC penetration in India and therefore,
desire that besides making the PCs affordable by lowering the
taxes/tariff, increasing the deprecation rates etc., there is a need
for helping and funding the content developers in the local
languages; launching a mass campaign on the electronics media
about the utility of PC and replication of the successful
programmes piloted by different States throughout the country
as mission modes, promotion of use of PC and internet by
spreading e-Governance and citizen centric services offered by
the Government by extending SWAN at the village level and
scaling up of State level initiatives.
As far as tariff rationalization for PCs is concerned, that has
been already achieved. The Committee has observed above that
more needs to be done by content developers in local languages,
promotion of Internet, e-governance and citizen centric services
offered by the Government through SWAN etc.
(3) As part of the e-Governance initiatives, DIT has been engaged
in e-Readiness assessment of the States/UTs in the country. This
takes into account the network readiness, penetration of ICT,
computer literacy, PC penetration etc. in the States/UTs. This
assessment has helped the States to carve out a roadmap for
improving their positions/e-Readiness ranking and for economic
development.
(4) The Expert Committee on ‘PC Penetration, Internet and Domestic
Software’ set up on January 11, 2005 by the Ministry of
Communications & Information Technology; Department of
Information Technology submitted its report to the Hon’ble
Minister, Communications & Information Technology on
April 26, 2005. The Committee delineated a vision for India
which encompasses to increase the pace of PC penetration in
the country by 2008 to the levels of 65 per 1000 from the existing
14 per 1000, internet penetration of 40 per 1000 from existing
5 per 1000, the domestic software industry to grow from USD
4 bn to USD 28 bn and IT should contribute significantly to the
growth of the national GDP .
In pursuance to the above, the Department of Information
Technology set up the following Committees to examine the Report
and prepare Action Plan in respective sectors and composition of the
Committees:
1. Committee on Low Cost PC Manufacturing
2. Committee on Education

31
3. Committee on e-Governance, IT for Rural and Social sectors
4. Committee on Multilingual Software Applications and
Contents
5. Committee on Internet Penetration
6. Committee on Telemedicine
Recommendation No. 23
The Committee are of the view that besides the above mentioned
steps to bridge the digital divide and to make e-Governance programme
successful, there is a need to increase the availability of PCs that can
withstand the dusty and extreme climatic conditions prevailing in most
parts of India especially rural areas. All these factors are required to
be looked into well in time to increase PC penetration thereby
minimising the digital divide.
Action Taken
The matter was taken up with the Manufacturers’ Association for
Information Technology (MAIT), who have conveyed that the PCs
available in India today are designed to withstand the weather
conditions in India including the heat, dust and humidity.
As part of the e-Governance initiatives, DIT has been engaged in
e-Readiness assessment of the States/UTs in the country . This takes
into account the network readiness, penetration of ICT, computer
literacy, PC penetration etc. in the States/UTs. This assessment has
helped the States to carve out a roadmap for improving their positions/
e-Readiness ranking and for economic development.
VII. Electronics Hardware Exports
Recommendation No. 24
The Committee are concerned to find that Electronics Hardware
Exports in India during the years 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05
and 2005-06 were Rs. 5,800 crore, Rs. 5,600 crore, Rs. 7,700 crore,
Rs. 8,000 crore and Rs. 8,500 crore (estimated) respectively. The
percentage increase in the Electronics Hardware Export during all these
years remained at 21.4 per cent, -3.45 percent, 37.5 per cent, 3.90 per
cent and 6.25 per cent respectively. The factors responsible for slow
growth in Electronics Hardware Export are stated to be the disabilities
suffered by the Indian Electronics Hardware industry on account of
high incidence of duties/taxes, inadequate infrastructure, high cost of

32
finance, transaction cost, freight and power, low volumes of production,
elimination of duties on parts of Information Technology Agreement
(ITA-1) items, Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with neighbouring countries,
etc. A need has been felt to unify manufacturing streams for domestic
and export market to help in realising benefit of economies of scale.
The Committee are happy to note the various benefits/incentives for
the electronics and IT sector have been provided in the budget for the
year 2006-07 viz. reduction in the peak rate of customs duty from 15%
to 12.5%; imposing excise duty of 12% on computers to complete the
value chain to encourage local manufacturing; reduction of excise duty
on storage device i.e. DVC drives, USB flash memory and Combo-
drives to Nil; reduction of Customs duty on Integrated Receiver
Decoders, also known as Set Top Boxes to 0% and impositions of
excise duty of 16% to encourage local manufacturing. The Committee
welcome these steps taken by the Government for the benefit of the
Hardware Sector. However, they are afraid that these measures may
not be adequate and desire that with more interaction with the people
from the industry, grey areas affecting the Hardware Sector should be
identified and remedial steps be taken urgently to boost the Sector.
VIII. National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy
Recommendation No. 25
The Committee consider it a matter of serious concern that till
date there is no broad IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy, which is of
utmost importance to the development of the Hardware Sector. They
are deeply anguished to find that though the Task Force constituted
by the Prime Minister had given a Report on Hardware way back in
the year 2003 and the discussions were going on since them to
formulate the said Policy, it has not been finalised as yet. No reason
can however justify such inordinate delays in finalising the matter.
Evidently the matter was not getting the due attention it deserved.
The Committee hope that now when the Government has identified
the growth of Electronics and Hardware Manufacturing as one of their
thrust areas, the Department of IT would try to remove all the
bottlenecks in the way of Hardware Policy and finalise it at the earliest.
Recommendation No. 26
The Committee further learn that the DIT has prepared a discussion
paper on “Conceptual Policy framework to promote growth of
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry” in consultation with
the Industry association and the same has been forwarded to the PMO

33
which in turn asked the DIT to finalise the Policy. The Committee
desire that as proposed by the Department of Information Technology
to the PMO, a Task Force should be set up at the earliest so that the
Hardware Policy can soon be finalised to help promote the growth of
Electronic/IT Hardware manufacturing industries during 2006
alongwith time-lines for implementing the recommendations. The
absence of the clear Policy on hardware may hamper the growth of
the Hardware Industry.
Action Taken on Recommendation No. 24, 25 & 26
DIT, in consultation with the Industry Associations, have prepared
“A Discussion Paper on the Conceptual Policy Framework to promote
growth of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry”. The grey
areas affecting the Hardware Sector have been identified and remedial
steps that need to be taken to boost the Sector have also been worked
out. The major recommendations as contained in the Discussion Paper
are as under:
• Reduction of customs and excise duties on Electronics/IT
items in a phased manner
•A  single composite VAT at 17% (at par with China) or lower
(at ASEAN levels)
• Rationalisation of Tariff Structure: Reduction of customs duty
on all Raw Materials and Capital Goods for manufacture of
Electronics/IT items to 0%
• Rationalization of State VAT on all Electronics/IT products
to 4% and abolition of CST
• Unification of manufacturing for domestic market and
exports
• Income Tax Exemption on export profits by DTA units
• Reduction of lending rate of interest at par with competing
countries
•P rocedural Simplification
• Improvement of Infrastructure
• Support for International Patents
• Support for Quality and Safety Certification
• Flexibility in Labour Laws
•P romotion of Mega-fabs/ATM and Hi-tech industry

34
A Task Force has been set up by the PMO under the Chairmanship
of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, vide Notification No. 460/31/
C/7/06-ES.I dated 4.4.2006. The Task Force will undertake the following
activities:
• Examine the proposals/suggestions contained in the
Discussion Paper on the “Conceptual Policy Framework to
promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacture
Industry” prepared by the Department of Information
Technology.
• Examine the existing Government policies/procedures and
recommend suitable amendments/measures/incentives so as
to make India a Hub for Electronics/IT Hardware
manufacturing.
• Monitor progress and coordinate with the concerned
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, State
Governments and other agencies for implementation of the
recommendations in a time bound manner.
• Recommend a mechanism for single window clearance for
State level approvals, wherever necessary.
• Any other activity considered necessary for the achievement
of the objectives.
The first meeting of the Task Force was held on 20.4.2006, under
the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to PM, wherein a presentation
was made on the above Discussion Paper by DIT. The Task Force has
constituted a small group under the Chairmanship of Member Secretary,
Planning Commission to look into all relevant aspects of the matter
and give its recommendations regarding appropriate fiscal as well as
other benefits for the Electronics/IT Hardware Industry for
consideration of the Task Force. The group is in the process of finalizing
the recommendations.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I)
X. Centre for Development of Advance Computing (C-DAC)
Recommendation No. 30
The Committee note that DIT proposed an allocation of Rs. 90
crore for C-DAC for the year 2006-07. The Planning Commission,

35
however, approved only Rs. 64.50 crore. They are perturbed as with
the reduced allocation, C-DAC inspite of the compelling needs would
not be able to migrate to main GARUDA National Grid Computing
initiative; much needed infrastructure/development, upgradation/
augmentation, etc. Further C-DAC would not be able to take some of
their developed initiatives into the market to enable large-scale
commercialisation. The Committee take a serious view of the substantial
reduction of funds for C-DAC and desire that the Planning Commission
should re-look into the matter and enhance the allocation suitably.
Action Taken
The Proof of Concept (PoC) phase of the GARUDA National Grid
Computing initiative programme will lay foundation for the nation to
develop a broad range of competencies in all the associated tools and
technologies as they evolve and ensure that these are quickly put to
productive use by a wide range of science and technology disciplines
for research and problem solving challenges. GARUDA phase is
satisfactorily progressing and the Main phase of GARUDA will be
taken up based on the experience in the PoC phase.
C-DAC is progressing well in meeting the objectives of PoC
GARUDA. Most importantly, apart from the infrastructure, (fabric and
resource aggregation), research, development of middleware and tools,
it is building a valuable community of some of the best academic and
research institutions in the country to collaborate and grid enable
applications. In this process, besides a set of selected application areas,
community building is taking place in a number of areas to
demonstrate the power and relevance of the Grid. These will form the
foundation of the Main GARUDA.
During the current year all the objectives of PoC GARUDA will
be met and maintenance of the community activities will be ensured
through augmentation of funds for the PoC phase even while
submission and approval process for main GARUDA will be pursued.
Action towards the above are taking place.
C-DAC is taking the up-gradation of infrastructure based on the
available funds. C-DAC is reviewing, from time to time, to see how
best delivery and commercialisation vehicles and eco-systems can be
developed to enable commercialisation. C-DAC has entered into MOUs
with a number of agencies recently to enable commercialisation, as in
the case of Telemedicine and e-Governance projects. Similarly, transfer
of technology has also been taking place to commercialise products
and system delivery.

36
Recommendation No. 31
The Committee are informed that PoC GARUDA phase represents
Proof of Concept phase of National Grid Computing initiative and
would answer many questions in efforts involving resource sharing
and collaboration tool framework that Grid Computing represents. They
note that first (GARUDA Meet in December 2005 showed excellent
response. Most partners who participated agreed to become partners
contributing resources and actively involving themselves in the
deliberations. The Committee are in complete agreement with the
Department that there continuous efforts will enthuse many more
agencies to join the National Grid Computing initiative and the main
GARUDA will get the approval of the Government during the year
2006-2007.
Action Taken
The Proof of Concept (PoC) GARUDA phase is progressing well
and is expected to meet its objectives. This has enabled not only the
development of infrastructure, technologies, and applications, but has
enabled a grid partner community to come into operation. 38 premier
Institutions in 45 locations across the country have become partners in
the project. All the partners have also contributed resources. There
was a tremendous enthusiasm and vibrant participation in the two
Grid Partner Meets held in Bangalore.
Taking into account the experience of the PoC phase, the proposal
for Main Phase of GARUDA will be submitted for requisite approval
in the current financial year.
Recommendation No. 32
The Committee note that DIT/C-DAC propose to take several steps
for optimum utilisation of grid computing like they would exhibit
value proposition of Grid Computing from end-user viewpoint; develop
the capability to understand and develop many of the underlying
concepts, components and technologies which are still evolving as part
of Grid Computing paradigm; share the resources among a limited set
of institutions as a representative case study of the value of Grid
Computing; develop collaboration tools and platforms and bring
institutions and individuals together to the work collaboratively etc.
The Committee feel that these steps are in the right direction and
would sustain interest in utilisation of grid computing among
participating agencies.

37
Action Taken
We are enthused by the vision and support of the Hon’ble Members
of the Committee and will work to nurture the Grid Partner
Community to blossom fully to enable India to reap, the benefits of
Grid Computing paradigm in various sectors in the long run. The
Proof of Concept (PoC) will help in laying the foundation for the
above.
Recommendation No. 33
The Committee further note that there is a serious short supply of
supercomputing resources. There is a need to have more
supercomputing resources and building capacity in the form of shared
facilities, building user competence to learn benefit from
supercomputers etc. The Committee recommend that the Government
should provide adequate financial support to build more
supercomputers to help meet the research, scientific and engineering
need of India. As Grid is one way to enable a large number of academic
and research institutions distributed nationwide to access and share
scarce supercomputing resources located at a few institutions and thus
increase access, the Committee strongly desire that efforts should be
made to deploy Grid Computing for a number of promising
applications as well as promoting resources sharing through distributive
computing as a stable and viable alternative.
Action Taken
C-DAC and its Grid Partners have contributed computing resources
during the Proof of Concept (PoC) GARUDA phase.
C-DAC will be delivering a 10 Teraflop system in March 2007
which will add significant capacity to the Grid and enable the resources
to be made available to the Academic and Research Community
nationwide.
The main Grid phase proposal will provide for significant addition
in these resources for use by the Academic, Science & Engineering
Community—enabling use of Supercomputing for Research, community
building and for providing a framework for addressing grand challenge
problems.
XI. National Plan on e-Governance (NeGP)
Recommendation No. 34
The Committee are disappointed to note that though National e-
Governance Plan (NeGP) was conceived in the year 2003, the

38
Department of Information Technology prepared a concept note on
the vision, Mission Mode Project (MMPs) and Key Components of the
NeGP , Strategy, Roles/Responsibilities being discharged by various
Government entities and the Management Structure etc. and placed
the same before the Cabinet only on 17.4.2006. Though an Apex
Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet
Secretary and individual projects were being taken up by the Ministries
concerned and financial approvals taken, it was only after reviewing
the progress with regard to implementation of different projects and
elements by different Ministries from time to time and also based on
the experience over the two or three years, IT felt a need to take a
formal Cabinet approval for laying down the responsibilities and the
powers and functions of various players involved. The Committee feel
that DIT should have anticipated that to run such a vast programme
like NeGP across the country in which different agencies/Ministries/
State Governments are involved, some sort of clarity would also be
needed to be laid down in terms of responsibilities of various agencies.
Undoubtedly, the status and quality of implementation of the
Programme would have been different, had the responsibilities been
formally assigned well in time. At this stage, Committee can only
hope that necessary lessons would be drawn by DIT from this with a
view to avoiding such instances in future.
Action Taken
For the implementation of NeGP , various agencies from the Central
and State Governments are involved. Their efforts are required to be
channelised so that national resources are put to optimum usage. For
this purpose, need arose to evolve consensus amongst various
implementing agencies to create a Common Core ICT Infrastructure
that could be shared and optimally utilized for various e-Governance
applications. Consensus was also needed to go for a Minimum set of
Standards that is required for integration and interoperability of various
e-Governance applications. This consultation process has taken time
and the final proposal incorporated valuable inputs from Central
Ministries/Departments & State Governments. The Cabinet, in its
meeting of 18th May 2006, has approved the Vision, Strategy, Role &
Responsibilities and the Programme Management Structure for the
implementation of NeGP . This Structure would help in speedy
implementation of NeGP .
Recommendation No. 35
The Committee find that the Cabinet approval has now been
obtained on the concept note on NeGP . They would like to be ensured

39
that all the 26 Mission Mode Projects and 8 support components under
NeGP are implemented at the Central, State and Local Governments
levels within certain specific time-frame as assured by the
representatives of DIT during evidence.
Action Taken
As per the Cabinet approval, DIT’s prime role is to facilitate and
catalyse implementation of NeGP by various Ministries/Departments
and State Governments. It is also required to provide assistance to
Apex Committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary
and the Body under the Chairpersonship of Prime Minister, who would
be monitoring the implementation of NeGP programme. The sole
responsibility for implementing various Mission Mode Projects vests
with the concerned line Ministries/Departments and they would be
persuaded and provided handholding support to complete their
respective projects in a time bound manner.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 36
The Committee are informed that the progress in respect of projects
under NeGP depend upon the States in the emphasis they confer on
the project/s. They feel that the DIT cannot escape from their
responsibilities on this ground. On the other hand, being the nodal
agency for NeGP , DIT has to play a proactive role by motivating the
different Departments/State Governments/UTs involved and help them
in the areas wherever it is required so that NeGP achieve a better
level of implementation.
Action Taken
DIT is proposing to motivate central line Ministries/Departments
and States through Awareness and Capacity Building measures. DIT
in consultation with the Planning Commission has prepared the
Capacity Building Guidelines and issued to all the States and Union
Territories (UTs.) The Planning Commission has already allocated funds
as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to all the States for taking up
Capacity Building measures as a first step towards NeGP . DIT is also
providing handholding support to Central Line Ministries/State
Governments for conceptualising their projects. In the Preparatory
Meetings and Apex Committee meetings various implementing agencies

40
are encouraged to come up with their specific areas of concern where
they need intervention and handholding from DIT.
Recommendation No. 37
The Committee are apprised that one of the reason for slow
achievement of projects is that the process of conversion of some of
the data is tardy and time-consuming as one cannot do it without
verifying those records. In such a situation, the Committee desire that
the possibility of taking the help of the outside agencies should be
looked into to avoid delays in implementation of the projects. The
Committee are apprised that NeGP as a whole is an ongoing umbrella
programme and, therefore, does not specify a fixed time-frame for
complete roll-out. However, various Mission Mode projects/initiatives
which are elements of this composite plan have their implementation
plan decided by the Line Ministries. Individual projects are also
expected to have specific timeline for complete roll out. The Committee
further learn that some of the more advanced projects like Income
Tax, Central Excise, MCA-21, EDI, e-Courts, etc. have already indicated
specific timelines and financial requirements for complete roll-out, while
a few of the projects are still at the conceptualisation phase, the detailed
timelines for roll-out would be available in due courses. The Committee
would like to be informed of the specific time frame indicated in the
implementation plan of all the 26 Mission Mode Projects and
8 components under NeGP . They would further like to be apprised of
the present status with regard to each of these projects.
Action Taken
The responsibility for implementing various Mission Mode Projects
rests with the concerned line Ministries/Departments and they are
being persuaded to conceptualise their project and work out its details
including financial requirements and the timelines. DIT has gathered
information from various implementing agencies and the status of
implementation is at Annexure-I.

41
APPENDIX
Sl.No. MMP Owner Project Whether Whether Whether any Whether Target Date for
Ministry Concept Mission Empowered Project Project has Project
Identified Crystallized Leader Committee Document been Completion
has been Constituted Prepared Sanctioned
designated
12 3 4 56 78 9
Central
1. Income Tax Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Dec.-06
2. Passport Yes Yes? No No Yes Yes May-06
3. Excise Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Apr-07
4a. MNIC Yes Yes Yes No Yes No NA
4b. UID Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Apr-07
5. Pensions Yes No No No No No NA
6. Banking
7. Insurance
8. MCA Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Jul-06
9. e-Office Yes No No No No No No
State
10. Land Records Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes#
11. Registration Yes Yes No No Yes No No
12. Transport Yes No Yes No No No No
13. Treasuries Yes No No No No No NA
14. Panchayats Yes Yes No No Yes No No
15. Municipalities Yes Yes Yes No Yes No 2011
16. Police Yes No No No No No No
17. Agriculture Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes#
18. Employment Exchange Yes No No No No No NA
19. Commercial Taxes Yes No No No No No NA

42
12 3 4 56 78 9
Integrated
20. EDI No Yes No Yes Yes No NA
21. Ebiz (Pilot) Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No
22. CSC Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Dec.-07
23. Gateway Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Jun-07
24. e-Courts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No
25. India Portal Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Jan-07
26. e-Procurement No Yes No No Yes No No
27. e-Districts (Pilot) Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Apr-07
Components
28. Core Infrastructure Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes #
(SWAN, SDC)
29. Support Infrastructure Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Dec.-07
(CSCs)
30. Core Policies Yes
31. Technical Assistance Yes
32. R&D Yes
33. HRD and Training Yes
34. Awareness and Yes
Assessment
35. Organisation Structure Yes
NA: Not Available    # : This has state specific targets  NAP : Not Applicable
These are Continuing Processes
and thus they have several
activities and sub-activities which
are being done as a parallel

43
XII. State Wide Area Networks (SWANs)
Recommendation No. 38
The Committee note that the Government have approved a scheme
for the establishment of SWAN at a total outlay of Rs. 3,334 crore
over a period of 5 years. The Committee regret to note that though
the scheme for establishment of SWAN was approved by the
Government on 28th March, 2005, the SWAN proposals have so far
been received from 22 States only. The States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Nagaland, Andaman & Nicobar,
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu have not submitted their
SWAN proposals as yet. They are further informed that the DIT SWAN
Team and the SWAN Programme Management Consultant (SPMC)
Group are in constant touch with the States/UTs mentioned which
have not submitted their proposals. The Committee take a serious
note of this inordinate delay in submission of SWAN proposals by the
States as SWAN is an important component of the NeGP and has
been identified as an element of core infrastructure for supporting
e-Governance initiatives. Under NeGP SWAN policy, it is proposed to
connect State Head Quarters (SHQ) with all the Districts Head Quarters
(DHQ) and subsequently all the DHQ to be connected with Sub-
division Head quarters/Blocks (SDHQ/Block). Further delay in
submission of SWAN proposals may seriously hamper the
implementation of SWAN and hence NeGP . The Committee trust that
necessary steps will be taken by all concerned for submission and
finalisation of proposals for establishment of SWAN.
Action Taken
Efforts are being made jointly by the DIT SWAN team and SWAN
Programme Management Consultant (SPMC) Group on a continuous
basis, to speed up the finalization of SWAN proposals of remaining
States/UTs like Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur,
Nagaland, Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman &
Diu. So far, the team made efforts by visiting the States of Nagaland,
Manipur, Goa etc. and by having regular interaction through Video
Conferencing with other States. This has resulted in precipitation of
the understanding by State/UT of various provisions of the SWAN
Guidelines and various other documents related to the implementation
process issued by DIT in this regard.

44
XIII. State Data Centres
Recommendation No. 39
The Committee observe that establishment of State Data Centres
(SDCs) is proposed to create data repositories/data centres in various
States so that common secured data storage could be maintained to
serve host of e-Governance applications. The Committee are, however,
concerned to note that the Policy guidelines on State Data Centres are
still under formulation. DIT is in the process of formulating Policy
Guidelines for Technical and Financial Assistance to the State for
creation of State Data Centres which are expected to be ready by June
2006. The Committee hope that the proposed guidelines have been
formulated by DIT within the specified time frame. State Data Centres
are one of the important Component of National e-Governance Plan
(NeGP) and is an element of the core-infrastructure. Hence they are
necessarily required to put in effective e-Governance plan and delivery
of services to the Citizens on-line. Data Centres are relevant in the
form of Central repositories or Common Technology Infrastructure
which will avoid duplication or separate computing and store facilities
by each department in the State and incur avoidable cost. As
considerable time has already been taken to roll out NeGP , the
Committee feel that any further delay in establishing the core
infrastructure will delay the facilities to be provided to the masses.
Hence, the matter require urgent attention of the appropriate authorities
at the highest level.
Recommendation No. 40
The Committee are informed that the projects like Income Tax,
Central Excise SWAN, CSCs, MCA 21 and India Portal are expected to
be substantially completed by 2007. However, they find that the very
purpose in setting up SWAN and CSCs would be defeated if State
Data Centres are not established by them. The Committee would like
to be informed of the status of SDCs by 2007.
Action Taken on Recommendation No. 39 & 40
The concern expressed by the Standing Committee has been noted.
DIT has already formulated Policy Guidelines on providing Technical
and Financial Assistance to the States/UTs for setting up of State Data
Centres (SDCs). These have been further discussed with the State IT
Secretaries on 24th August, 06 and their views are being incorporated
in the Guidelines.

45
It is proposed to obtain necessary approvals (EFC/CCEA etc.) so
that the scheme on State Data Centres can be launched and proposals
invited from the States/UTs. SDCs are expected to be operational in
most of the States.
XIV . Capacity Building
Recommendation No. 41
The Committee learn that the DIT, in consultation with the Planning
Commission, have prepared the Capacity Building Guidelines and
issued the same to all States/Union Territories (UTs) and advised them
to prepare their proposal for Capacity Building implementation.
However, it is disquieting to note that so far 11 States and only one
Union Territory have submitted their proposals. Eighteen States and
5 UTs are yet to submit their proposals. At the same time, the
Committee to their satisfaction observe that the Planning Commission
has allocated funds as Additional Central Assistance to all the States
for taking Capacity Building measures. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon DIT to follow up with the remaining States/UTs for
submission of capacity building proposals as already much time has
elapsed since guidelines were issued by DIT in March 2005.
Action Taken
In a prelude to take up the NeGP to the States/UTs, this
Department has been regularly following up and now Capacity
Building Proposals have been received from 25 States and 2 UTs. EFC
meeting will be held shortly for the approval of Capacity Building
scheme.
Recommendation No. 42
The Committee further note that three capacity building workshops
were held in DIT, in NISG, Hyderabad and in Kolkata. Further, NISG
under financial support from DoPT is conducting special training for
e-Champions from 17th April 2006. Besides, the State-wise training
requirements are being received through Capacity Building proposals
(CBRMs) and are being processed for initiating training courses during
2006-07. The Committee consider these are steps taken in the right
direction and desire that such courses should remain a continuous
feature of the e-Governance programme.

46
Action Taken
Advice of Committee noted. Conducting training of various
stakeholders are continuing features of the programme.
XV . Common Service Centres (CSCs)
Recommendation No. 43
The Committee learn that DIT had finalised the draft framework
for establishment of 100,000 CSCs and got the approval of the
competent authority in 2005. Based on the framework and extensive
consultations, a detailed project Report on the CSC Scheme has been
prepared and waiting Cabinet approval. The Committee are perturbed
to note such inordinate delay in finalising the policy guidelines for
CSCs and desire that the same should be finalised without further
loss of time to give the much needed impetus to the undergoing CSCs
project development activities.
Action Taken
The draft guidelines for the Common Service Centre Scheme have
been finalized and circulated to IT Secretaries of States and Union
Territories. The guidelines will be finalized once the responses to the
same are received from States.
Recommendation No. 44
The Committee note that DIT has to set up 100,000 CSCs by the
end of the year 2007. They are aware that in order to make CSCs a
real success, certain steps are very important like, the need for
developing Indian language content over the Internet and also to
developing innovative software/hardware solutions to utilise content
effectively. The Committee, however, trust that the Department
are taking all measures to make available these features in the
1,00,000 CSCs which are likely to be set up by December, 2007.
Action Taken
Department of Information Technology has appointed an agency
for developing the CSCs Project. One of the key tasks of this agency
is to recommend the technology framework as well as the aggregate
content, including local language content and service provider for the
CSCs.

47
XVI. Media Lab Asia
Recommendation No. 45
The Committee observe that the Media Lab Asia was set up with
a vision to research and innovate developments in the areas of
information and communication technologies relevant for the common
man and to promote deployment of research projects in rural and
remote areas to serve the poor and needy population. A sum of Rs.
65 crore was released during the first 2 years of its operation. In the
second year, Media Lab Asia programme was restructured and the
services of all the employees were terminated. The funds already
available with Media Lab Asia were being used for the ongoing and
also for new projects initiated by them. Then nothing has been done
during the last 4 years which is a matter of concern to the Committee.
The Committee further note that during 2006-07, DIT proposed an
allocation of Rs. 65 crore, however, the Planning Commission has
reduced the same to Rs. 10 crore. The Committee trust that restructuring
of MLA would soon be completed.
Action Taken
One of the key elements for completing the restructuring of Media
Lab Asia is the appointment of a full time MD/CEO who has since
joined. The full scale operation of Media Lab Asia is expected to pick
up.
XVII. Cyber Security
Recommendation No. 46
The Committee learn that Information Security is one of the thrust
areas of the Department of Information Technology. The Department
had set up an inter-Ministerial Working Group on Cyber Security
Education and Awareness Programme which has given
recommendations on an Action Plan and strategy for Human Resource
Development in the country in the area of Cyber-Security/Information
Security leading to development of indigenous hardware and software
capabilities in the core area of Information Security. Based on them,
the Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) Project for
development of human resources in the area of Information Security
has been initiated, which has a component of creating awareness of
Cyber Security amongst industry/educational institutes and the masses.
This campaign will help them know about cyber attacks and how to
protect their data and systems. The project also aims at imparting

48
training to the Central and State Government Officers on issues related
to Cyber/Information Security. The Committee would like to be
informed of the strategy developed for implementation of the
recommendations of the Working Group and also how far these have
been implemented. They hope that the measures on Information
Security recommended by the Working Group will be implemented in
the right earnest.
Action Taken
The activity of introduction of Information Security curriculum
under Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) Project is
being implemented through 5 Resources Centres and 34 Participating
Institutes (PIs). The Resource Centers (RCs) are premier institutes like
IITs, IISc Bangalore and TIFR Mumbai, while the Participating Institutes
include National Institutes of Technology, Government Degree
Engineering Colleges, Societies of DIT, etc. The activity of training of
Central and State Government officers is being implemented through
six DIT organizations. The Resource Centres, Participating Institutes
and other implementing agencies have taken action to launch various
courses in the area of Information Security. The syllabus and the course
structure for various courses at the levels of B. Tech., M. Tech., etc.,
have been prepared by leading academicians and made available to
all the Resource Centres and Participating Institutes. Two Faculty
Training Programmes for the PIs have been conducted by TIFR,
Mumbai. An expert Committee had finalized the specifications of
Hardware/Software for setting up of Information Security Labs at RCs
and PIs. The Hardware/Software are in the process of delivery for
setting up of the labs. Short-term training programmes for the
executives/officers of Government organisations are being organised
by the Implementing Agencies.
Recommendation No. 47
The Committee further observe that the Government have also
taken specific initiatives for enhancing the legal framework through
proposed amendments to the IT Act, 2000. The Act is currently under
review thus increasing interaction between industry players and
enforcement agencies to help create greater awareness about information
security issues and facilitate mutual support as and when required.
An Expert Committee set up to review the IT Act had proposed
appropriate amendments which are being finalised and will be put up
to the Parliament very shortly. The Committee strongly feel that with
the ongoing implementation of the e-Governance programme all over

49
the country, it has become all the more important to take urgent steps
to ensure privacy of the data stored. Success of e-Governance
programmes lie in the safe and secure environment to internet access
and transfer of information. There is a need to frame stronger legal
framework for cyber security. The Committee desire that the process
for amendment in the IT Act, 2000 should be expedited. It is high
time for the Government to tighten cyber security laws.
Recommendation No. 48
The Committee feel that with the continuous development of
technology and also with the increase in the number of internet users,
the cyber laws become outdated in a short span of time and require
amendment by adding new clauses or changes in the existing cyber
laws. The Committee, therefore, desire that timely measures should be
taken to see that the Cyber laws are reviewed at regular intervals for
updation and amended accordingly.
Action Taken on Recommendation No. 47 & 48
The Information Technology Act was enacted in the year 2000,
primarily to boost e-commerce in the country and also to create an
enabling environment for e-Governance in the country. The Act
provided a legal framework for transactions carried out using
computers and the internet technologies. The Act was enacted keeping
in view the technology directions and scenario existing at that time.
As the technology is an ever-evolving process for providing efficient
and cost effective options, it was felt that a fresh look to the technology
driven law needs to be given. Concerns have been raised both within
the country as well as by the customers abroad regarding adequacy of
data protection and privacy laws in the country. A need is, therefore,
felt to strengthen the legislation pertaining to data protection and
privacy. The security practices and procedures are needed to be
prescribed to be followed by body corporates and organizations and
to enquire personal information of customers.
Further new forms of computer misuse like video voyeurism,
identity theft, e-commerce frauds like phishing, frauds on online auction
sites, sending offensive emails and multimedia offences have also
emerged. With proliferation of e-governance and other Information
Technology applications, security practices and procedures relating to
such applications need to be prescribed.
There is also an emerging view that IT laws should be
technologically neutral in line with the recommendations made by

50
UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signature. Such approach will
promote development of alternative technologies for authentication of
electronic records and will not warrant legislative changes each time
a new and equally effective technology is evolved.
The Department of Information Technology had set up an Expert
Committee to review the provisions of the IT Act, 2000 and suggest
suitable amendments to address these issues highlighted above. Based
on the recommendations made by the Expert Committee, the Bill to
amend the IT Act was drafted and circulated to the Ministries and
Departments. The Bill has been prepared and duly vetted by the
Ministry of Law and Justice. The Bill proposes amendment in some of
the existing sections of the Information Technology Act, 2000 and also
to insert new sections to address the various issues discussed above.
The Cabinet has approved the Bill to amend the IT Act, 2000 and
its introduction in the coming session of Parliament.

51
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
-Nil-

52
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
II. Task Force on Human Resource Development
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that manpower development is one of the
thrust areas of the DIT during the year 2006-7. DIT had projected an
outlay of Rs. 60 crore for the scheme, but the same has been brought
down to Rs. 38.40 crore by the Planning Commission. With the
projected outlay , the Department had palnned to carry the ongoing
progrmames viz. Information Security Education and Awareness
Programme, Skill Enhancement for Employment in the ITES/BPO Space
at DOEACC Cerntre, Srinagar/Jammu, Special Manpower Development
Programme (SMDP-II) in VLSI Design & Related Software, ME/M.
Tech. Programme at C-DAC, Mohali and projects in the area of
Implementation of recommendations of the Task Force on Human
Resource Development in IT and a new project—Special projects in
embedded system & VLSI Design. However, as informed it seems that
with the reduced allocation the Department will not be able to
undertake all these projects. The Committee to their dismay further
note that in the previous years of the Tenth Plan also except in the
year 2005-2006, the projected outlay for the scheme “Manpower
development” was reduced to a larger extent. Like in the years
2002-03, 2003-04, against the demand of the DIT of Rs. 42.70 crore and
Rs. 132.55 crore, the funds were allocated to the tune of only
Rs. 8.00 crore and Rs. 8.50 crore respectively. During 2004-05 also,
Rs. 39.50 crore were proposed, however the Planning Commission
allocated Rs. 29.00 crore. The Committee consider it unfortunate that
the scheme, “Manpower Development/Employment Generation” has
never got the importance it deserves. Undoubtedly, this position needs
to be rectified.
Action Taken
The allocation of fund for various schemes pertaining to Manpower
Development has been systematically increased from Rs. 8 crore in
2002-2003 to Rs. 29 crore in 2004-2005. Further, it may kindly be seen

53
that the allocation for current financial Year (2006-2007) has been
Rs. 32.40 crore.
The Study Team on Human Resource Development constituted by
the Working Group on IT Sector for the 11th Plan period is in the
process of finalizing its report. Based on its preliminary
recommendations, the Study Team has worked out a considerably
higher allocation for HRD activities.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I)
V. Domestic Software
Recommendation No. 21
The Committee note that the Domestic Software turnover during
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 accounted for Rs. 13,400 crore,
Rs. 16,250 crore and Rs. 21,740 crore respectively. Domestic Software
turnover during 2005-06 is estimated to be of Rs. 26,460 crore. Reasons
for a weak Indian domestic software market are stated to be while
ITES-BPO penetration is very low, a sizeable proportion of end-user
organisations have an internal division to focus on these specific
business processes; expressed intent to move from an in-house captive
sourcing model to outsourcing is very low; satisfaction with existing
systems; lack of trust in outsourced service providers; high cost of
services; non-availability of suitable vendors and lack of skilled
personnel (with vendors) as reasons for not looking to outsource.
Further, little overlap between the service providers serving the
domestic and export markets; key players currently serving the
domestic market have little export exposure or are niche horizontally—
focused players; most traditionally export focused players are not very
keen on the domestic market and they prefer to wait-and-watch for
the segment to develop. The Committee find that NASSCOM McKinsey
Report, 2005 has suggested certain aspects for boosting domestic IT
market viz. penetration of Indian market in the high-end software like
product development, engineering designs, e-learning curriculum
development, embedded systems designs, simulations etc.; extending
tax holiday, duty free import of capital goods etc., facilities for BPO/
Call Centre companies catering to the needs of Indian industry; and
promotion of localisation efforts of software and use of local language
in office work etc. in order to address the domestic IT market of
multi-lingual, multi-cultural society like India. Although the Committee
find force in the reasons cited for weak domestic market, they desire

54
that the suggestions given in NASSCOM McKinsey report, 2005 should
be considered and implemented to make the domestic IT market strong
and stable so that domestic software can sustain a high growth rate
and be competitive in the years to come. In the opinion of the
Committee, a strong and developed domestic market would immensely
contribute to the growth of the Indian IT-ITES industries in the future.
Action Taken
It is stated that due to various overlapping issues involved, the
Department of Domestic Market involves various stake holders within
the Government and the Industry. DIT as one of those stake holders
have initiated various activities which includes:
• The activity of launch of domain names in Indian Languages
more popularly known as “Internationalized Domain Names
(IDN)”. It perceived that once the scope of Domain Names
is broadened to support local languages and scripts in the
construction of Domain Names, the process would require
support of multilingual scripts and other linguistic and
cultural tools for human-computing interface and the World/
Wide Web/Internet. This in-turn would result in perceived
surge in the domestic market.
• Software tools and fonts in 2 languages—Punjabi and
Urdu—are ready for release. 17 other Indian Languages are
expected to be covered by 2007.
With the availability of IT tools in local languages it is
imperatively act as catalyst for domestic market.
• Department of Information Technology has initiated a
number of steps to train appropriate manpower, in few
chosen knowledge based sector such as Information Security
& VLSI Design. In this sector two major initiatives involving
cluster of engineering college including NITs and IITs have
been implementing manpower development activity. The
total outlay for implementing these two activities over a
period of 5 year is of the order of Rs. 120 crore. The key
output from these projects would be development of human
resources at Bachelors, Postgraduate & Doctoral level in the
respective field.
• E-Governance initiative for transparency, accountability and
simplification in government procedures: The DIT recently

55
received approval for the National e-Governance Plan. The
plan has a vision to “Make all Government services
accessible to the common man in his locality, through
common service delivery outlets and insure efficiency,
transparency & reliability of such services at affordable costs
to realise the basic needs of the common man”. The plan
consists of 27 Mission Mode Projects. The focus of the NeGP
is on service delivery and under the plan all departments
responsible for implementing the MMPs have been directed
to define the services they are targeting and the service
levels they wish to achieve for those services in concrete
terms. The necessary process reengineering and simplification
of procedures required to meet those service levels would
be part of the project design of the MMP . The DIT is
constantly monitoring the progress of the respective MMPs
and apprising the Apex Committee of the status of each
MMP .
• State wide area Network over all the States of the country
and one lakh Common Service Centres spread over 6000
blocks: Department of IT obtained approval of CCEA in
March 2005 for a Core e-Governance Communication
Network Infrastructure Scheme, entitled ‘State Wide Area
Network’ (SWAN) for the 29 States and 6 UTs at an
estimated outlay of Rs. 3334 crore to be spent in five years,
for establishment of minimum 2Mbps bandwidth capacity
of wide area network in each State/UT, from the Hqr upto
the Block level. Till date, individual SWAN Projects in
22 States have been cleared by the Empowered Committee
with the commitment of Department of IT, Govt. of India
for approx. Rs. 1508.00 crore for five years. Fortnightly
updated status of State-wise implementation of this Scheme
is available in the Programme Tracker hosted in the DIT
Website (www.mit.gov.in)
With better connectivity and availability of e-government in
conjugation with local language uses, will induce demand in domestic,
it will help to move forward to crossing the critical-mass (in term of
IT users in the country, connectivity, PC penetration, and availability
of relevant-content in the language of masses), which is necessary for
sustainability of the market.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I)

56
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee further note that two sub-committees for selected
verticals viz. banking and insurance sectors have been set up under
the Syllabus Committee of DOEACC with experts drawn from
professional bodies, representatives of the Industry, experts from
academia etc. These sub-committees would identify the vertical segment
specific manpower and skill-set requirement, their levels, curriculum
and course structure, training methodology & institutional mechanism
for implementation including finance, evaluation and certification
methodology. The Committee trust that these subcommittees would
work out the detailed implementation plan and institutional mechanism
within a short-time so that they can soon be rolled out. They further
desire that sub-committees in respect of other verticals viz. travel and
hospitality, pharmaceuticals, retail marketing and other such promising
areas should also be set up at the earliest.
Action Taken
The two Sub-Committees constituted for Banking & Insurance
Verticals are in the process of finalizing the syllabus and training
methodologies, the examination system and certification. Once these
are finalized, steps would be taken to constitute the Sub-Committees
for the other verticals by March 2007.
IX. Setting up of Mega Fab
Recommendation No. 27
The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the
Government for setting up Semi-Conductor Fab in the country. One of
the initiatives taken by the Government is the visit of the Minister,
Communications and Information Technology to USA to attract FDI in
the hardware manufacturing and in particular, for semiconductor
manufacturing in the country. As a result, a number of CEOs of
American MNCs visited India. The Committee further note that the
investors are seeking for preferential treatment/total exemptions for a

57
longer period for Fabs in respect of income tax, excise duty, customs
duty, sales tax, service tax, etc. and envisages incentives available under
the Special Economic Zones (SEZs) Policy. They are also seeking
infrastructure support from States regarding land, water, power,
connectivity, effluent treatment plants etc. The Committee are glad to
note that various States have devised incentive packages to attract
investment in the Semiconductors Fab and other high-tech industries.
They recommend that the Government should exdent all possible help
and assistance to encourage the investors to establish the hardware
manufacturing facilities in India. Needless to say, these bottlenecks
have to be overcome urgently to give impetus to the hardware
manufacturing in India.
Recommendation No. 28
The Committee learn that a number of reputed world renowned
companies have announced their investment plans to invest in
Electronics/IT/Telecom hardware manufacturing in the country. M/s.
Sem-India Inc. and the Government of Andhra Pradesh have signed a
Memorandum of Understanding on 16.02.2006 for establishing a Fab
in Hyderabad. Intel also is in discussions to set up ATM facilities in
India. The first Fab unit in the private sector in the country, promoted
by Nano-Tec. Solutions Pvt. Ltd. (NTSI) is being set up at Rajiv Gandhi
Nano-Technology Park, Hyderabad. The Committee hope that in view
of the incentive packages devised by various other States also to attract
investment in the Semiconductor Fabs, DIT should explore every
possibility to set up Semi-Conductor Fabs in all parts of the country.
Recommendation No. 29
It is a known fact that India has no dearth of engineering and
technical manpower and is an intended target for global players. With
the establishment of the Semiconductor Fabs, India would have an
added advantage in manufacturing of electronics products. If this
advantage is fully exploited, there would be numerous job and business
opportunities enabling India to become a major electronic products
manufacturing and consuming country. The Committee learn with
satisfaction that the Department of Information Technology have
prepared a “Draft policy for investments for setting up semiconductor
fabrication and other micro and nano-technology manufacture industries
in India” and is presently with the Ministry of Finance for consideration
and early finalisation. The Committee would like to impress upon DIT
to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and
finalise the Policy as early as possible to enable India to propel itself
into Hardware development.

58
Action Taken on Recommendation Nos. 27, 28 & 29
Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2006-07 announced
intention of the Government to make ‘India a preferred destination for
manufacture of semiconductors and other high technology IT products
etc.’
The Draft Policy has been prepared by DIT and the same was
forwarded to Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs.
MoF’s response on the Draft Policy had been received and an
inter-ministerial meeting held on 25.8.06 to firm up the package of
incentives under Fab Policy. The policy is under consideration and is
likely to be announced soon.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
20 March, 2007 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

59
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th March, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
4. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
7. Shri Motiur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Ahluwalia — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Twenty Ninth Report on “Demands for Grants
(2006-07)” relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information
Technology).
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalize and
present the Reports to the House on a day convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

60
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN TWENTY NINTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos: 1, 2, 3, 4-6, 8-20, 22-26, 30-48
Total: 42
Percentage: 87.5%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. Nos:- Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Sl. Nos: 3, 21
Total: 2
Percentage: 4.16%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Sl. Nos: 7, 27, 28 & 29
Total: 4
Percentage: 8.33%