 
1 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.8.2004. 
Laid   in   Rajya  Sabha  on 24.8.2004 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2004 / BHADRAPADA, 1926 (Saka) 

     
 
CONTENTS       
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
REPORT   
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
Annexure – I    --    Minutes of the Third sitting held on 11 August, 2004……… 
 
Annexure – II  --    Minutes of the Fourth sitting held on 18 August, 2004…         
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2004-2005) 
 
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS – LOK SABHA 
2.    Shri Nikhil Chaudhary, M.P 
3.    Shri Mani Cherenamei, M.P. 
4.    Shri Sanjay Dhotre, M.P. 
5.    Kunwar Jitin Prasad, M.P. 
6.    Shri Kailash Joshi, M.P. 
7.    Shri P. Karunakaran, M.P. 
8.    Dr. P.P. Koya, M.P. 
9.    Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P. 
10.  Shri Ajay Maken, M.P. 
11.  Smt. Nivedita S. Mane, M.P. 
12.  Smt. P. Jayaprada Nahata, M.P. 
13.  Col. G. Nizamuddin, M.P. 
14.  Shri Sohan Potai, M.P. 
15.  Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat, M.P. 
16.  Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu, M.P. 
17.  Shri Vishnu Sai, M.P. 
18.  Shri Tathagat Satpathy, M.P. 
19.  Shri K.V. Thangka Balu, M.P. 
20.  Shri P.C. Thomas, M.P. 
21.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav, M.P. 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Vijay J. Darda, M.P. 
23.  Shri Ashwani Kumar, M.P. 
24.  Dr. Akhilesh Das, M.P. 
25.  Shri Balbir K. Punj, M.P. 
26.  Shri Dara Singh, M.P. 

27.  Smt. Sarla Maheshwari, M.P. 
28.  Shri N.R. Govindarajar, M.P. 
29.  Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao, M.P. 
30.  Shri Motiur Rahman, M.P. 
31.  Shri Sanjay Nirupam, M.P. 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.   Shri P.D.T. Achary                ----        Additional Secretary (P) 
2.   Shri S.K. Sharma       ----        Joint Secretary (SK) 
3.   Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma       ----        Deputy Secretary 
4.   Shri K.L. Arora       ----        Under Secretary 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
          I, the Chairman Standing Co mmittee on Information Technology (2002) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this First Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2004-2005)’ relating to the Ministry of Communicat ions and Information 
Technology (Department of Information Technology). 
 
2.         The  Standing  Committee  on  Informa tion  Technology   (2004-05)   was  constituted on 
5 August, 2004.  One of the functions of the Sta nding Committee, as laid down in Rule 331E of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, is to consider Demands for Grants 
of the concerned Ministry/Department and make a Report on the same to the House. 
 
3.    The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Dep artment of Information Technology) for the 
current year i.e. 2004-2005 which were laid on the Table of the House on 14 July, 2004. The 
Committee took evidence of the representatives of  the Department of Information Technology on 
August 11, 2004. 
 
4.      The Report was considered and adopted  by the Committee at th eir sitting held on 18 
August, 2004. 
 
5.   The Committee wish to express its thanks to  the Officers of the Department of Information 
Technology for appearing before the Committee and for furnishing the information, that the 
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
6.     For facility of reference and conveni ence, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
    
New Delhi                            M. M. PALLAM RAJU, 
19 August, 2004                                    CHAIRMAN,  
       28 Sravana, 1926 (Saka)                     STANDING   COMMITTEE   ON  
  INFORMATION   TECHNOLOGY  
 
PART-I 

REPORT 
INTRODUCTORY 
      The Department of Information Technology (DIT) which forms part of the 
Ministry of Communications and Information technology is inter-alia  responsible for 
formulation, implementation and review of  National Policies in the field of 
Information Technology, Silicon facility, Computer based information technology 
and processing including hardware and softw are, standarisation of procedures and 
matters relating to inter national bodies, promotion of  knowledge based enterprises, 
internet, e-commerce and information technol ogy education and all matters relating 
to international bodies, pr omotion of knowledge bas ed enterprises, internet, e-
commerce and Information Technology Educ ation and all matte rs relating to 
development of electronics and coordinat ion amongst its various matters. The 
various schemes/programmes of the Depar tment of Information Technology are 
implemented both in house as well as th rough PSUs/Societies under DIT and also 
through various programmes being funded under R & D.  National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) provides computer su pport to Central/State Governments 
Departments and District Administrations. The Major Schemes/Projects taken up by 
DIT are e-Governance, Media Lab Asia(MLA), Community Information 
Centres(CICs), Indian Computer Em ergency Response Team(CERT), Indian 
Language Technologies, Digital Library, Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing(C-DAC), Megafab, Nanotechnology, Cyber Security, Special Manpower 
Development for VLSI Design, Electronics in Healthcare, Br aille in Indian 
Languages, Telemedicine,  Task Force on Human Resource Development in IT, 
Educational and Research Network(ERNET) , Vidya Vahini and Gyan Vahini. All 

these schemes are covered under the Plan funds whereas  Non-Plan allocation is 
towards Secretariat expenditure of DIT, its attached offices namely Standarisation 
Testing & Quality Certifications(STQC) Directorate and its registered societies.  
2.   Demand No.16 pertaining to Grants in respect of Department of Information 
Technology for the year 2004-05 is as under:- 
 
2004-2005 Plan Non-Plan Total 
Revenue  700.50 36.00 736.50 
Capital 49.50 --- 49.50 
Total 750.00 36.00 786.00 
 
A. TENTH PLAN ALLOCATION 
3. The Committee drew attention to the Tenth Plan allocation for Department of 
Information Technology which is to t he tune of Rs. 2714.00 cr ore. The actual 
expenditure incurred by the Departm ent during 2002-03 and 2003-04 was Rs. 
465.35 crore and Rs. 494.63 crore respective ly(i.e. Rs. 959.98 crore in total). 
Therefore,  in the next three years of the Tenth Plan, the Depart ment would have to 
spend Rs. 1754.02 crore (Rs. 2714 crore  - Rs. 959.98 crore).  Now BE for 2004-05 
fixed for Rs. 750 crore would leave Rs. 1004.02 crore (Rs. 1754.02 crore minus Rs. 
750 crore) for last two years of the Tenth Plan. 
4.        The Committee pointed out that even if 10 percent increase in BE of Rs. 750 
crore for 2004-05 was taken into account, the budgetary provisions for 2005-06 and 
2006-07 should be Rs. 825 crore and Rs. 907. 05 crore respectively. Hence a total 
of Rs. 1732.05 crore (Rs. 825 crore  plus Rs. 907.05 crore ) would be required for 

the last two years of the Tenth Five Ye ar Plan. When enquired how the Department 
proposed to get the additional requirement of Rs 728.07 crore (Rs. 1732.05 crore – 
Rs. 1004.02 crore) for last tw o year of the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Department 
replied that DIT would incur an expendit ure of about Rs. 1,710 crore on its Plan 
schemes in the first three year of the Plan and a balance of only Rs. 1,004 crore 
would be left for the last two years of t he Plan (Rs. 465.35 plus  Rs.494.63 plus Rs. 
750).  
5.   In this context, the Secretary, DIT during evidence stated t hat at the level at 
which allocations are now being made, it cannot be sustained if they confined to the 
ceiling which has been indicated for the Department of Information Technology. The 
Department in a written note have clarified that they would be requiring  a  minimum 
Budgetary Support in the range of Rs. 2,500 cr ore for the last 2 years of the Tenth 
Plan i.e. for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 to run these programmes at an optimal 
level.  The Department of Information Technology has planned to take up the 
matter with the Planning Commission at the time of Mid-Term Appraisal of the 
Tenth Plan.   
 
B. Budgetary Support for 2004-05 
6. The Department of Information Technology had proposed an Annual Plan 
Outlay of Rs. 1433.65 crore with a  Gro ss Budgetary Support of Rs. 1294.38 crore 
for the year 2004-05 for its various schemes viz. R & D, infrastructure Development, 
Human Resource Development, PSUs, NI C, ESC & Export Market Development 
and other miscellaneous programmes. Ho wever, Planning Commission has 

approved an outlay of Rs. 889. 27 crore with a Gross B udgetary Support of Rs 750 
crore. 
 
7. The Committee desired to know the reasons given by the Planning 
Commission for reducing the proposed outlay. In reply, it has been stated that 
within the constraints of overall ceiling on the Ann ual Plan budgetary support for 
2004–05, the Planning Commissi on has given a specia l consideration to 
Department of Information Technology’s Plan allocation. Keeping in view the 
importance of e-Governance and other IT projects being implemented by the DIT, 
Planning Commission has incr eased the level of budgetar y support from  Rs. 495 
crore (RE) in 2003-04 to Rs. 750 crore in the year  2004- 05 which is an increase of 
over 50 percent.  
8. The various schemes/programmes, which have got reduced allocations 
against projected demand are as under: 
      (Rs. in crore) 
S.No Name of the Scheme Projected Allocation Difference 
1. E-Governance 630.00 215.00 415.00 
2. National Informatics Centre (NIC) 234.63 210.00 24.63 
3. Semi-conductor Complex Limited (SCL) 28.67 10.00 18.67 
4. DOEACC 10.00 5.00 5.00 
5. ESC 13.67 8.50 5.17 
6. Manpower Development  19.50 10.00 9.50 
7. Special Manpower for ASIC Design 20.00 10.00 10.00 

8. STQC Programme 41.00 33.50 7.50 
14. C-DAC 46.00 40.00 6.00 
15. IT for Masses 20.00 11.00 9.00 
16. CIC 45.00 30.00 15.00 
17. Miscellaneous  185.91 167.00 18.91 
           Total 1294.38 750.00 544.38 
 
9.       When asked as  to how the reduced budget woul d effect the implementation 
of their various schemes/programmes, the Department in a note has been stated 
that the allocation for e-governance pr ogramme at Rs. 215 crore has been  
substantially lower than the proposed budg etary support of Rs.630 crore and would  
affect the scheduling of the activities proposed to be funded from the budget of the 
Department of Information Technology.  
 
C. 2-3 PERCENT ALLOCATION BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
10. The Government had recommended that each Ministry/Department should 
allocate 2-3 percent of its Budget on IT pr omotion. On this issue, the Department 
has informed that the Planning Commissi on issued an advisory to all Central 
Ministries/   Departments on  24th April, 1998  to earmark 2 to 3 percent of their Plan 
budget for programmes/schemes relating to  Information Techno logy. Also while 
formulating the Annual Pl an 2004-05, the Planning Commission has taken an 
undertaking from all the Ministries/Depar tments to earmark a minimum of 2-3 
percent of their allocation for promoting Information Technology in their sector. In 
this regard, the Secretar y, DIT has also requested all Chief Secretaries of 

States/UTs to allocate at least 3 per cent of their budget for e-Governance 
applications and infrastructure.  
National Action Plan on e-Governance(NEGAP) 
11.      The Common Minimum Progra mme (CMP) of the United Progressive 
Alliance (UPA) had affirmed the commitm ent of the Alliance to promote e-
Governance on a massive scale.  This also  figured prominently in the address of 
the President to the Parliam ent on 7.6.2004.  To give effect to this commitment, a 
thrust in the DIT budgetary support would be required for the implementation of the 
National e-Governance Action Plan (NEGAP).  
12. In this context, the Department of Info rmation Technology has stated that it is 
primarily intending to strengthen the core infrastructure , including establishment of  
State-wide Area Networks upto the level of Blocks and Na tional/State level Data 
Centres, promotion of common servic e delivery centres and replication of 
successful E-Governance applications on a pilot scale.  DIT has been working out 
the modalities of establis hing a National e-Gover nance Fund with a view to 
strengthening the programme management st ructure and leveraging Government 
budgetary resources to mobilize non-Government resources and competencies, 
which would require a seed capital to start with.  Therefore, a National e-
Governance Fund has been proposed with a seed capital of Rs. 1,000 crore. The 
other Core programmes of the Department have a close linkage with the larger 
objectives of the CMP in regard to develop ment of human res ources, employment 
generation and improvement of the quality of life of disadvantaged areas. 
13. It has been observed from the material furnished to the Committee that DIT 
had proposed an outlay of Rs.630 crore fo r 2004-05 for e-Governance, however, 

the Planning Commission has  approved Rs.215 crore onl y. When enquired as to 
how the Department  would be able to fulfill their physical targets kept for the year 
2004-05 with the reduced allocation, the Department of Information Technology in a 
written note stated that t he projection was based on t he premise that network 
infrastructure would need to be extended upto block level in the first 18 months. But 
with the reduction in the plan allocation fo r e-Governance, these activities would 
need to be taken up in a suitably phased manner.  
14. The Secretary, Depar tment of Information Technology during evidence 
clarified that,   “We have been assur ed that depending on the policy formulations 
and depending on the approv als which are accorded, supplementary demands 
would be considered at the state of Revised Estimates. But here the most important 
thing that I would like to dwell upon is the manner in which the allocations are made 
under e-Governance. That is of signific ance. It is not necessary that all e-
Governance applications have to be provided for in the DIT Budget. What is being 
presented is the national e-Governance plan. All of it is not the plan of the 
Department of Information Te chnology. We have  the ro le of programme manager 
and programme coordinator. There are some  sectoral responsibilities which are 
also allocated to the Department of In formation Technology. So, what I am 
submitting is that we had pr ojected a demand of Rs. 63 0 crore and an allocation of 
Rs. 215 crore has been made, does not m ean that due priority is not being 
accorded to the e-Governance action plan.” 
15.   According to the Department th e Mission Mode Projects account for the 
major fund requirement of the National e-Governance Action Plan. The major share 
of the approved outlay of Rs .215 crore would be spent on creation of State Data 

Centres and State Wide Area  Networks extending upto the Block level. Other 
activities include  Development of India Portal, Service Delivery Gateway, 
Replication of successful e-Governance app lications on a pilot scale (extending to 
more States and taking up of newer applicat ions like municipalities, e-procurement 
etc.), promotion and establishment  of common service delivery centres, awareness 
and assessment of e-Governance Projects  and formulation of core policies and 
standards etc.  Draft policies  for providing support to various States  under  the 
Scheme for State Wide Area Network and for State Data Centres  have been drawn 
up.  
16.    The Committee were informed that th e Planning Commission in its meeting to 
discuss the Annual Plan 2004-05 observed that Rs. 215 crore should be adequate 
enough to implement initial phase of National Action Plan on e-Governance and 
desired that the DIT in the meantime should assess the realistic requirement of 
additional funds for the year and send the proposals to them for consideration for 
the regular budget.  
17.    In this connection, the Secretar y of the Department of IT stated during 
evidence that, “some of the projects which had been identified as Mission Mode 
projects are yet to be formulated. Some of the initiatives which were underway had 
been included in the national e-governance plan. A sharper focus on the quality of 
service and the delivery of service woul d be an important benefit  accruing as a 
result of this inclusion. For instance, the Income Tax projec t had been going on for 
several years.  There is Electronic Data  Interchange(EDI) project which covers the 
entirety of foreign trade-exports and imports.  That had been going on for ten years.  

Provisions for these projects  were being made not necessar ily in the Plan Budget.  
Many of the on-going initiatives are funded by the non-plan side”.   
18.    As regards the meas ures taken/proposed to fulfill the targets, the Department 
of IT informed the Committee that all efforts had been made to ensure that these 
were co-ordinated and keep pace with t he progress on the various Mission Mode 
projects being executed by Line Ministries and State Governments.  Therefore, 
infrastructure were being created on priority  in regions and sectors where progress 
in project implementation was greater.    
 
DIT’s Role in E-Governance 
19. e-Governance has an allocation of Rs. 215 crore for 2004-05. Another 
Rs.210 crore has been alloca ted to NIC for the year 2004-05. Department of 
Information Technology’s role in the National Action Plan in e-Governance is that of 
an implementing agency and as  the programme manager for co-ordination across 
different Ministries. The different Line Mi nistries are setting aside 2-3 percent of 
their budget for IT. On being asked how the Department would spend Rs. 215 crore 
and Rs. 210 crore, only on providing ne cessary funds for infrastructure, the 
Department stated during evidence that, “for eight activities(Components under 
National e-governance Action Plan), the budget ary provisions in Government of 
India was made through DIT. It  was not made in any other Ministry except for two 
areas namely (i) Awareness & assessment and (ii) Human Reso urce Development 
& Training for which some provisions were  also made in the budget of Department 
of Personnel, Training & Administrative Re forms. Except to this event, the primary 

responsibility for these eight areas was that of the Department of IT including NIC 
and all other agencies”.   
 
Media Lab Asia(MLA) 
20.    The role of Media Lab Asia is to facilitate the invention, refinement, and 
dissemination of innovations that benefit the masses. The project is closely working 
with industry, NGOs, and Government fo r this purpose. According to the 
Department of IT the basic idea of the Media Lab programme is to take off research 
end-to-end, from the labs to the stage of productionisa tion and prototyping and 
thereafter field testing it fo r demonstrating replicable scalability and sustainability. It 
has been observed that the financial outlay for Media Lab Asia for the Tenth Plan is 
Rs.262 crore, out of which Rs.227 crore has to be contributed by the Department of 
Information Technology and Rs.35 crore from other funding agencies. 
21.    It was observed from the Budget Br ief for the year 2003-04 of Department of 
Information Technology that in the year 2002-03, Budget Estimate (BE) for MLA 
was kept at Rs.1 crore but RE was NIL.   During 2003-04, Rs.10 lakh was allocated 
for the project and RE was again NIL.  Projection for the year 2004-05 has been 
made of Rs.65 crore. The reason for NI L utilisation of funds during 2003-04 was 
stated to be the process of  restructuri ng of MLA. It has been added that after the 
expiry of the initial one y ear exploratory phase of the Media Lab Asia, an internal 
review of the Media Lab Asia project was carried out in consultation with the lab 
coordinators of the Media La b Asia’s labs (the five IIT’s at Mumbai, Kanpur, 
Chennai, Delhi and Kharagpur) in March 2003. Based on the  review, it was 
decided to restructure the Media Lab As ia programme. A full scope nine year 

restructured programme was initiated from  May 2003. 31 projects were initiated at 
the exploratory phase of MLA. As a part of restructuring of MLA it was decided that 
the existing projects at all centers would continue.  
22.     As regards getting sponsorship, the Committee desired to know that how far 
the Department had been successful in getting the adequate number of 
sponsorship and also about  the amount received through them. In reply, the 
Department in a note stated that MLA has been working with the Industry, NGOs 
and academicians to attract sponsorship. So far M/s Tata Sons had sponsored 
Media Lab Asia research by contributing Rs. 1.5 crore.  
 
Deployment of Media Lab Asia(MLA) 
23.     Clarifying on the role of Medi a Lab Asia and its deployme nt, the Department 
during evidence stated that,  “Media Lab Asia has some centres that are working on 
technologies to enable faster content development. They have also developed 
educational content in local languages.  The prominent ones being at IIT Kharagpur 
in Bangla Language.  They have deployed th is content at seven centres in West 
Bengal for the purpose of pilot testing.  It is  possible to convert that content in other 
Indian languages for wider deployment.  But Media Lab As ia is not going to roll out 
on a very large scale.  It will do pilot deployment and prove that the content is useful 
in enabling learning of school children.  The children are motivated to learn and 
they can learn better.  There is a specia l focus on education in Media Lab Asia that 
has been taken up recently.  We had discussions on this subject and it has been 
suggested that rather than taking up content development by Media Lab Asia alone, 
we should leverage on the content already available and try to help its conversion in 

local languages.  Our role should not be in  content development as such but to 
facilitate conversion of existing content in local languages.  We will be trying out this 
content on a pilot scale basis but not on a very large scale deployment in villages.  
We will do a pilot deployment in areas in which content is made available in local 
languages quickly”. 
 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing(C-DAC) 
24.     Development of super computers is  the main focus of C-DAC. Last year it 
has developed a facility which was rat ed as one amongst 500 top super computers 
in the world. I-Grid, an Information Technology Grid would connect 17 centres in the 
country with 100 MBPS. It has 14 labs in 10 locations, with close to 1900 people 
work-force. Technical agenda has been re-a ligned carefully, reflecting its core 
competency built over the year, adding emerging te chnology areas of great 
importance and synergizing the skill sets av ailable at various centres into a co-
ordinated action-plan.  
25.    Research and Development with a ssociated Technology creation will be the 
core focus. Carrying these to the mark et place through Business Development and 
partnership with various stake-holders (industry, academia and other R&D labs) will 
be the next priority issues, enabling techno logy development to be converted into 
marketable products, solutions, IPRs and proj ects while bringing in revenue to C-
DAC. High-end Education and Training will fo llow logically as the next step - arising 
out of C-DAC's significant competence in R&D and emerging technology areas and 
benefiting industry through provision of  finishing school, readily usable manpower. 

26.     The Committee have been info rmed that Grid Computing and High 
Performance Computing will form a major Research area for the year. The former 
will involve the interconnection fabric at high speed across premier scientific, R&D 
and academic institutions for sharing of computing resources. Grid computing 
middleware software development will be the related focal area. PARAM series of 
computers will be upgraded with next genera tion interconnection fabric (including 
associated VLSI chips), new performanc e chip-sets, additional grid-enabled 
applications. Other additional computing resources will be ad ded to respond to 
various high performance needs of mult i-vendor, inter-operable grid computing 
environment of various users. 
27.    The other R&D areas of high focus during the year have been stated as 
Multilingual & Multimedia Computing, Applied Artificial Intelligence issues (including 
speech processing, information retrieval tool s, machine translation, text-to-speech), 
e-Security, Embedded Systems (power dist ribution, industria l automation), GIS 
(agriculture, water resources), DSS,  ICT for masses (Development Gateway 
Foundation's Research and Training Cent re), Medical Informatics, Software 
Technology Tools, Open Source Software, Graphics & Animation, besides high-end 
Education and Training (Ph-D,  M.E., M-TECH, MCA, DA C, PGDST, Specialized 
courses in VLSI, Embedded S ystems, Bioinformatics, Systems Administration and 
Networking, Multimedia, GIS, etc.).  
28.     The Committee would like to poi nt out that the Pl anning Commission while 
discussing the Plan Budget proposals for the year 2004-05 suggested that C-DAC 
needed to develop an appropriate business m odel ensuring that its R&D activities 
could be carried out in a sustainable manner. Commercial applications had to be an 

integral part of the high-end research. One of the supe r computing nodes could be 
devoted to storage of large-scale data to  meet the business requirements of 
commercial organizations like banks, insurance etc. 
29.      During 2002-03 and 2003-04, t he revised Estimate for C-DAC was Rs.10 
crore and Rs.25.50 crore respectively. Ho wever BE of Rs.40 crore has been kept 
for the year 2004-05. As regards the higher  allocations made for the year 2004-05, 
it has been informed that the year 2004-05 would be the first full year of 
consolidated and expanded C- DAC, emerging as the largest and most premier 
R&D institution in ICT in t he country. Out of Rs. 40 crore, Rs. 15.00 crore has been 
allocated for the project “Proof of Concept Phase of National Grid Computing 
Initiative:Garuda”. The balance of Rs. 25. 00 crore is for sustaining the ongoing R & 
D activities. The level is the same as in the year 2003-04. The RE for 2002-03 at 
Rs. 10 crore was only for the erstwhile C-DAC. After NCST, ER&DCI and CEDT, 
Mohali were merged with C-DAC, their re spective budget allocations also got 
merged in the enhanced budget in 2002-03. 
30.     In this connection, the Committee wanted to know as to whether Rs. 40 crore 
would be sufficient to effectively and fr uitfully implement the programme. The 
Department stated in their reply that the current budgetary allocation was not 
posing any operational constraint at pres ent. The position would be reviewed in 
depth at the time of formulation of Revised Estimates 2004-05 and additional 
resources sought, if required. 
Hardware policy 
31.    The Committee were informed that dr aft Hardware policy had been prepared by 
the Department of IT and t he same had been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for 

their views.  Discussions had also been held with the Cabinet Secr etary on the policy.  
The Department had expressed t hat it would be able to finalize the policy paper by 
July, 2004. As regards the present status  regarding the Hardware Policy, the 
Department in a written reply have informed that the Draft Paper on “National 
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Po licy” was formulated after wide ranging 
consultations with industry associations and other stakeholders. The paper, which was 
widely disseminated, elicited enthusiastic support from the industry. 
32.    During evidence t he Secretary, DIT further added that “Now, under the 
National Common Minimum Programme, there is a proposal for establishment of 
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council. The mandate of th is Council is to 
provide a forum for evolution of policy in regard to the competitiveness of various 
segments of the manufacturing sector and IT hardware is specifically mentioned as 
one of the target areas, as are consumer products and capital goods. In all these, 
electronics and IT have a role to play. There is consumer electronics; there is 
instrumentation and power elec tronics. All these things will be covered. The draft 
policy, which has been formulated, would be placed before the National 
Manufacturing Competitiveness Council and it will be debated there. Then, we will 
go through the process of approval and adoption. 
33.       At the same time, we are not  waiting for that to happen. The rationalisation 
of the fiscal structure, the tariff policy, the export-import policy, all that is being 
worked upon, and many of the fiscal reco mmendations of the draft hardware policy 
have already been implemented. Most of them were announced in the interim 
Budget presented in January this year, and some of the measures have been taken 
up in the recent Budget. It has been made clear by the Finance Minister that the 

coming Budget would address these structural issues in a more significant way. We 
are hopeful that many of t he recommendations of the draft hardware policy would 
be adopted by the Government”. 
 
National Venture Capital Fund for Software and IT Industry(NFSIT) 
34.     The Committee had been informed in a written note that the National Venture 
Capital Fund for Software and IT Industr y (NFSIT) was set up in December 1999, 
with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore.  The erst while Ministry of IT had decided to hand 
over the scheme to Small Industries Developm ent Bank of India (SIDBI).  It created 
a fund called SIDBI Venture Capital Fund wherein 50 percent of the money was put 
by SIDBI, 20 percent of the money  by IDBI and  30 percent  of the money by 
Ministry of IT. During 2002-03, a provis ion of Rs. 10 crore was made and the 
amount was fully utilized.                       
35.       BE for the year 2003-04 was  Rs. 5 crore but the utilization was NIL.  During 
the current year 2004-2005, no allocation has been made. Asked about the reason 
for nil utilization of funds, the Department in a reply stated that  the NFSIT had not 
yet fully committed its net corpus and there was no request from the SIDBI for 
additional funds.  
36.     To a specific query as to whether the fund had become operational, the 
Department stated that Na tional Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry 
(NFSIT), launched in December 1999, made its first disbursement in March 2000 
and till date it had sanctioned assistance to  24 units aggregating Rs.58 crore. The 
units were in the area of Software, Services, IT enabled services, BPO, IT 
education and Internet related services.  

37.    The Committee then enquired about the steps taken/proposed to make the 
scheme a success. The Departm ent in their reply stated  that the NFSIT and the 
State/Regional level funds promoted by the SIDBI are the only funds which catered 
to the requirements of the Small and Me dium Enterprises (S ME) sector and the 
start ups. Based on the current deal flow, the NFSIT was expected to  commit its 
entire corpus soon.  It had been  able to exit from two unit s and the total investment 
of Rs.4.15 crore in these units has generat ed a gain of Rs.1.23 crore to the Fund. 
The Fund had  started redeeming the fund corpus to the three contributors.   The 
Scheme of Venture Capital F und promoted by DIT with SIDB I and IDBI is stated to 
be successful and  performing satisfactorily.  
38.     Giving reasons for not alloca ting any amount in BE 2004-05, the Department 
during evidence stated that “even out of the corpus of Rs. 100 crore which is 
created, hardly Rs. 58 crore have been spent and rest of the money is in fixed 
deposits of SIDBI and they are earning interest. The interest is enough to subsidise. 
So, it is not because we do not  want to give more fund; it is because the fund is 
already existing and it has not been fully  utilised, we have not given any fund 
allocation this year. Even what we have al located is still there in the corpus. But 
they are more conservative in disbursi ng fund, which I have been taking up with 
them in every meeting, but then the standard reply of SI DBI bankers or the 
Managing Director has been that because non-performing assets of this country are 
worth Rs. 1,50,000 crore among the banks and now, there is  a lot of tightening 
which is taking place in terms of seeing that there are no mo re non-performing 
assets, they had to be very careful. They have also been quoting all the circulars of 

the Ministry of Finance to us saying that they cannot be very li beral like the private 
Venture Capital”. 
39. In an final action taken reply on the Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants(2002-03) of the Department of Information Technology, the Department has 
stated that Ministry of Small Scale I ndustries had constituted a Task Force on 
Financing Knowledge Based Indu stries for Small Enterprise s Sector  including IT 
industry to look into the issues pertaining to  availability of Venture Capital for small 
scale entrepreneurs in the country. Duri ng evidence, the Committee desired to 
know about the findings of  the Task Force. In reply, a representative of the 
Department submitted that the Task Force thus constituted has yet not submitted its 
Report. 
Semi-conductor Complex Limited 
40.     The Committee have observed that  during 2002-03 and 2003-04, the targets  
of Rs.83 crore and Rs.84.10 crore were laid down fo r sales turnover, but the 
achievements remained Rs.40.22 crore and Rs.56.20 crore respectively. A target 
has been kept to achieve the sales turnov er of Rs.91 crore for the year 2004-05. 
When asked about the reasons for shortfall during the last two years and how the 
Department proposed to achieve the target during 2004-05, the Department in their 
reply stated that the shortfall during 2002-03 had been mainly on account of a major 
order having spilled over to  the next fiscal because of  the delay in according 
approval for the product by the customer.  
41.      Further during 2003-04, some of  the orders envisaged did not materialise 
and demand constraints affected the sale s in certain products. The actual  

achievement was stated to be total sales of  Rs.54.88 crore (audited) against the 
target of Rs.84.10 crore.  
42.     Keeping in view the company’s current produc t portfolio and the business 
opportunities envisaged, the target during 2004-05 is stated to have been revised to 
Rs. 70.50 crore from Rs. 91 crore.  While some orders were already under 
execution, concerted efforts were stated to have been made by way of participation 
in tenders and interaction with customers for securing business  so as to realize the 
target set for the year.   
43.      The Committee further noted that during 2002-03, against a target to 
produce 1138.910K Dies/Device s and 205K System/Board level products,  the 
achievement remained 373.318K and 85.501K  respectively.  Similarly during 2003-
04, a target was kept to produce 1228.93K Dies/Devices but the achievement 
remained 236.550K.  During 2004-05, a target to prod uce 1300K Dies/Devices and 
300K System/Board level products has been kept. 
44.     As regards reasons for non-ac hievement of target s during 2002-03, the 
Committee have been informed that order s of some products planned for 
production could not fructify.  Similarly, in  respect of Systems/Board level products, 
the shortfall is stated to be on account of the delay in less production of a product 
and  the finalization of orders for energy me ters by the customers. During 2003-04, 
the main shortfall is stated to be on accoun t of a product not getting transferred to 
production on account of iterations need ed in product design for incorporating 
additional specifications as  per customer requirement s.  The production plan of 
another product was reduced in view of funds constraints of a customer. 

45.       When asked about the measures taken/proposed to fulfill the targets fixed 
for the year 2004-05, the Department stated that the targets had been revised from 
1300K Dies/Devices and 300K S ystem/Board level products to 907K dies/devices 
and 316K Systems/Board level products.  The Company has been vigorously 
following up with various customers and parti cipating in tenders for ensuring timely 
execution of the orders in hand to achieve the set target. 
46.      The Committee have observed from the quarterly performance review 
meeting for the quarter ending December, 2003 and March 2004 t hat the Principal 
Advisor, Planning Commission comment ing on Department of Information 
Technology stated that the various committees including Disinvestment 
Commission had considered various alternativ es for the revival of the Company.  
Disinvestment Commission had recommended the merger of SCL with Defence 
organizations like SITAR/BEL and also fo r implementing VRS in the Company. 
However, Defence organizations were not keen to take over the Company.  The 
Chairperson observed that since Disinve stment Commission had given a direction 
in this regard, Department of Information Technology may consider taking up this 
matter with the Committee of Secretaries.  With regard  to making funds available 
for VRS package, since this activity cannot  be funded from plan funds, SCL has to 
go for self sustaining model in  collaboration with financial in stitutions/banks etc.  It 
was further suggested that parallely DIT may form a small group of experts in the 
Department to suggest two-three alternative plans and this Group should submit the 
Report within two months time. 
47.      Asked about the progress so far made in this matter and whether the 
Committee had since submitted its Report, the Department in their written note 

stated that the Disinve stment Commission had recommended that SCL be merged 
with a Public Sector company in a relat ed  line of business such as BEL.  The 
Disinvestment Commission had further suggested that in case  a merger  with BEL 
was not considered feasible, Govt. could expl ore the possibility of integration of the 
VLSI facility  of the Society for Int egrated Circuits Technology and Applied 
Research (SITAR) and the Gallium Ar senide  Enabling Technology Centre 
(GAETEC) with SCL.  The matter  of mer ger of SCL with BEL was formally referred 
to the Secretary, Defence Pr oduction  and Supplies.   While that of  merger of SCL 
with SITAR/GAETEC was taken up with the SA to RM and Director General, 
DRDO.  The response of both the  Department  of Defence Production and Supplies 
and the DRDO was in the negative.     
48.   In this context, the Committee were further informed that the Company, had 
implemented VRS during the ye ar 2004.  A total of 46 em ployees (21 executives 
and 25 non-executives)  were allowed vo luntary retirement and have since been 
relieved.   
49.      Giving a first hand account of SC L, Secretary, DIT during evidence stated 
that, “SCL was conceived with certain objectives and we are far from accomplishing 
all those objectives. There have been some  problems. You are aware of the fire 
incident which took plac e and thereafter the invest ments that should have 
happened to keep pace with technological developments, have not materialised 
and the domestic market has been rather  slender. SCL was primarily addressing 
the domestic market. So, the viability of  those investments was also being 
questioned. Progressively, the core of SCL has been depleting: the core in terms of 
the manpower, the resources and also in terms of the working capital. 

50.     Elaborating on the attr ition rate, Secretary, DIT clarified that,  “a lot of people 
have been picked up from SCL. In fact, all t he top organisations that are working in 
the field of chip design have drawn heavily  upon SCL. All these developments have 
forced us to have rethink on the orientatio n of SCL and that ex ercise is on. The 
Board of Directors has been pondering ov er various proposals. Manpower 
rationalisation is one initiative. There has been a limited success in that regard. 
Then, SCL would be repositioning  itself”. On capacity utiliz ation, the Secretary, IT 
clarified that it was abysmally low. 
 
Vidya Vahini Programme 
51.    The Committee have observed that during the year 2002-03, Rs. 30 crore was 
allocated for Vidya Vahini and Gyan Vahi ni programme, however the Department 
could spent  Rs. 20 crore only. During  2 003-04, Rs. 5 crore wa s allocated and the 
amount was fully utilized.  Now BE of only Rs. 1 crore has  been kept for the year 
2004-05. On being enquired as to how the Department  propose to strengthen the 
programme with the decreasing outlay to a token of Rs.1.00 cr ore during 2004-05,  
they stated that the progra mme “Vidya Vahini” was conc eived by DIT as a pilot 
project to make full use of Informa tion & Communication Technology (ICT) and 
Internet to transform the learning envir onment from mono-dimensional to multi-
dimensional. The pilo t project had been im plemented in 7 districts in the country. 
The real objective of the pilot project was to demonstrate proof of concept and 
establish standards.  
52.    Further, the Committee have informed that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has revised its CLAS S Programme and formulated a scheme 

“Introduction of ICT in Schools”. The scheme incorporates all the key features of the 
Vidya Vahini Programme. Further replicat ion of the programme  in schools across 
the country would be carried out by Ministry  of HRD/State Governments as part of 
the scheme “Introduction of IC T in Schools”. Accordingl y, no significant budget 
allocation has been made for taking up mo re schools under the programme. The 
allocation of Rs. 1.00 cror e has been kept only as a to ken amount in the Annual 
Plan 2004-05. 
53. Clarifying the point furt her, the Department of IT dur ing evidence stated that,  
“they have been able to get some results in the last one year of it s implementation. It 
has now almost been accepted that teacher training is the most important aspect of 
bringing ICT into schools”. 
 
Community Information Centres (CICs) 
54.    The Community Information Centres( CICs) Project is intended to reduce the 
digital divide by providing internet access and IT enabled services to the community 
and also to facilitate citizens interface with the Government. It has been informed 
that  CICs have been dedicated to the people of North-Eastern States on 17 th 
August, 2002.  The Department of  Information Technology in  the first two years of 
the Tenth Plan has set up CI Cs at 487 block headquarters in  North-Eastern States.  
486 CICs have been established at a cost of Rs. 122.16 crore. All are operational.   
 
55.     The scheme is stat ed to be replicated during 20 04-05 in the State of Jammu 
& Kashmir for setting  up 139 CICs at a capital cost of Rs. 24.62 crore and a 
recurring expenditure of Rs. 16.05 crore. The  Rs. 30.00 crore allocated for 2004-05 

as BE is towards maintainance of the CI Cs in North-Eastern States costing Rs. 
25.00 crore and the CICs in J & K costing Rs. 5.00 cror e.  CICs in the 60 Block 
Headquarters of J&K State would be made operational during 2004-05.  
56.    Reacting to a specific query r egarding setting up of  CICs in other 
inaccessible / hilly States like Uttar anchal and Himachal Pradesh, the Department 
of Information Technology have stated that there is a proposal to set up 328 CICs in 
the  State of Uttaranchal. The estimated cost is around Rs 70 crore to be incurred 
over 4 years. The project will be implemented by the Stat e Government,  which will 
mobilise a contribution of 10 percent of the outlay.  T he DIT’s support will be to the 
extent of Rs 63 crore. The project will  be implemented in  two phases.  This would 
necessitate an additionality in the Plan Budgetary support  at the rate of Rs 16 crore 
per year. 
Manpower for ASIC Design 
57.   Considering the availability of quality human resources as key analyst for 
increasing India’s share in VLSI design global market, Department of Information 
Technology started in the year 1998 a project “Special Manower Development 
Programme in the area of VLSI Design & related Software” involving 19 institutions( 
7 Resource Centre(RCs) and 12 partcipati ng institutions(Pis) for a duration of 5 
years. It is seen from the Budget Brief that during 2002-03, BE and RE for the 
scheme was kept at Rs. 2 crore and 70 lakh  respectively.  However, the actual 
expenditure was Rs .70 lakh.  During 2003-04, the Department proposed an 
allocation of Rs. 125 crore, however Pl anning Commission approved only Rs. 3.5 
crore. The allocation was reduced to Rs. 37 lakh at RE st age and the amount was 

fully utilized.  During 2004- 05, the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 20 crore 
and the Planning Commission has approved Rs. 10 crore.  
58.      When asked about the reasons fo r lower financial achievements in the last 
two years, the Department of Informa tion Technology stated that as earlier 
suggested by the Standing Committee on Info rmation Technology (2003) in their 
Report, a vigorous follow up was made with the participating institutions for 
progressing various activities of the pr oject. Utilisation certificates and other 
financial details were duly obt ained. However, the instit utions were not able to 
absorb more funds.  The training of the facult y of Participating Institutions under the 
activity Instruction Enhancement Pr ogramme (IEP) had been completed and no 
further expenditure was incurred on this  activity.  The project envisaged 
development of Learning Material (LM) by the Resource Centres on 25 topics.  Out 
of 25 LMs, 14 have been completed.  Out of the remaining 11 LMs, the first drafts of 
4 LMs have been prepared and are being review ed.  The first drafts of the 
remaining 7 LMs are yet to be submitted. T he release of funds to the RCs for this 
activity is linked with the completion of va rious stages of the development of LMs. 
The matter is being pursued vigorously. 
 
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses (DOEACC) Society 
59.    From the Perform ance Budget of the Department of IT, the Committee have 
observed that during 2003-04, for conduct of O, A, B & C Levels of Courses; 75,000 
students were targeted to be registered , against which only 49,391 were actually 
registered.  Similarly 1,50,000 candidates were ta rgeted to appear in various levels 
of Exams, against which only 1,30,057 candidates were actually admitted. Also 

during 2002-03, against 92612 st udents to be registered and 177329 candidates to 
be admitted, actually 75884 students were registered a nd 160028 candidates were 
admitted. The reasons for shortfall were st ated to be the impact of  slowdown in IT 
Industry including IT education during the year 2001-02. 
60.     The Committee further observed t hat during 2004-05, a target has been kept 
to register 82,500 students and to admit 1,65,000 candidates to various O, A, B & C 
level courses. The Committee enquired about the steps taken to fulfill the targets 
kept for the year 2004-05, especially in view of the shortfalls during the last two 
years. In reply, the Department have stated that in addition to  the continuing impact 
of the slowdown in the global IT spend, the decline in registration during 2003-04 
was mainly due to absence of academic recognition of DOEACC Courses.  The 
mushrooming of Universities  and Deemed to be Universities offering various IT 
Courses in the Distance Learning mode through institutes in the Private Sector also 
contributed to the decline.  In order to meet the ta rgets set for 2004-05, the 
Department is proposed to secure academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level 
Course, which would increase the acc eptability of DOEAC C Courses amongst 
students and industry.  
61.     It has further been informed that the AICTE has consti tuted a Committee to 
look into the matter of recognition of qualifications awarded by non-formal sector 
institutions including DOEAC C.  The said committee has  advised the Society to 
approach Distance Education C ouncil, Indira Gandhi Na tional Open University 
(IGNOU) for academic recognition of DO EACC ‘B’ Level qualifications.  The 
application for academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level is under process by 

IGNOU.  The Society is also monitoring a publicity campaign to raise the level of 
awareness in regard to DOEACC courses amongst students and parents 
 
National Informatics Centre(NIC) 
62. NIC has been instrumental in st eering information and Communication 
Technology applications in Government Depar tment at Central, State and Districts 
facilitating improvement in Governm ent services, wider transparency in 
Government functions and improvem ent in decentraliz ed planning and 
management. During 2002-03, NIC spent Rs. 174. 42 crore,  in 2003-04 it spent Rs. 
185.70 crore and now during 2004-05, it has a budgetary support of Rs. 210 crore. 
63. On being asked how the NIC would spend Rs. 210 crore, the Department 
during evidence stated as under: 
“We have got Rs. 25 crore extra now and you wanted to know what we are 
going to do. I would just inform you that ov erall we got about six per cent increase 
of which approximately 15 per cent we have an increase  of the revenue budget. As 
you are aware, the NIC is a service st ructure. We have more than 3,000 people 
spread across the country and our outgo on salaries, increments, et c. involves a lot 
of money. So, Rs. 9 crore would go into salary enhancement and approximately Rs. 
13 crore we get for new band width and at the end of the day the c apital budget we 
get is less by about 15 per cent to 20 per cent” 
64. Regarding manpower fron t, the Department informed that, “the manpower 
has by and large remained the same over t he last five to six years but the workload 
must have gone up at least fifty to seventy times”. 

Squaring on the role of NIC in e-Go vernance, the Depar tment stated that 
“NIC will continue to play a central role in the scheme of the national e-governance 
plan.  At the same time, the competenc ies, which have been created in other 
institutions and other areas, would also be drawn up on because NIC does not 
purport to be the sole solution provider for a programme of such magnitude.    So, 
NIC would play a lead role and it will be supplemented by other agencies”. 

PART-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Tenth Plan Allocation 
 The Committee observe that keeping in view the actual expenditure 
during the first two years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 2002-03 and 2003-04 of Rs. 
465.35 crore and Rs. 494.63 crore respectively(i.e. Rs. 959.98 crore in total) 
and Rs. 750 crore allocated for 2004-05 if fully spent during the year, the 
Department would be incurring a total expenditure of Rs. 1709.98 crore in the 
first three years of the Te nth Plan. Hence the  Department would be left with 
only Rs. 1004.02 crore, for the rema ining two years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, 
out of a total Tenth Plan allocation of Rs. 2714 crore.  
The Committee further note that the Department has projected a 
demand of the Rs. 2500 crore for the last two years of the Tenth Plan and 
propose to take up the matter of addi tional funding with the Planning 
Commission in the Mid-term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan. 
The Committee are concerned over the huge gap between the demand 
and the availability of money on the one side and the fate of the on-going 
projects on the other. It is a well known fact that in the planning process it is 
not possible to accommodate all the demands which come from different 
sectors.  According to the Committee, it may not be an easy task for the 
Department to get an additional Rs.1500 crore in two years. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Information 
Technology should approach the Planning Commission with a factual data of 

utilization and projected demand to impress upon them the need for the 
additional funds.  The y may keep the Committee apprised of the 
developments on a regular basis.  
 
RECOMMENDATION No.2  
Budgetary Support for 2004-2005 
           The Committee note that  Department of Info rmation Technology had 
proposed an Outlay of Rs.1294.38 cror e for the year 2004-05 for its various 
schemes viz. R & D, infrastructure Development, Human Resource 
Development, PSUs, NIC, ESC & Export Market Development and other 
miscellaneous programmes. However, keeping in view the importance of E-
Governance and other IT projects being implemented by the DIT and within 
the constraints of overall ceiling on the Annual Plan budgetary support for 
2004–05, the Planning Commission has given a special consideration and has 
increased the level of budgetary support fr om  Rs. 495 crore (RE) in 2003-04 
to Rs. 750 crore in the year  2004-05 which is an increase of over 50 percent. 
              The Committee note that out of th e total budget of Rs. 750 crore, Rs. 
215 crore will go to the E-Governance projects which have been given special 
emphasis in the Annual Plan 2004-05. The Committee feel that with the 
remaining Rs. 535 crore, the Department may only be able to sustain the other 
schemes/projects without any scope of further progress.  
             The Committee is happy to note that the Department has been able to 
fully utilise its earlier Plan allocations.  Against the allocation of Rs. 470 crore 
in 2002-03 and Rs. 495 crore in 2003-04, the Department is able to utilize 

Rs.465.35 crore and Rs.494. 63 crore respectively.  This makes it amply clear 
that the Department is serious in its assignment and has the capability to 
absorb and deliver. In the opinion of the Committee, this will prove to be a 
firm ground for the Department for demanding additional funds.   
 The Committee, therefore, impr ess upon the Department to seek more 
funds at the supplementary grants stage and also strongly recommend to the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Fina nce that they should make suitable 
higher allocation as demanded by the Department. 
 
Recommendation No.3 
2-3 per cent allocation by Ministries 
 The Committee note that the Pla nning Commission had issued an 
advisory to all Central Ministries / Departments on 24 th April, 1998 to earmark 
2 to 3 percent of their Plan budget for programmes / schemes relating to 
Information Technology, but regrettably the same has not been strictly 
adhered to by them. While formulati ng the Annual Plan 2004-05, the Planning 
Commission has taken an undertaking from  all the Ministries/Departments to 
earmark a minimum of 2-3 percent of their allocation for promoting 
Information Technology. The Secretary, DIT also informed the Committee that 
he has also requested all Chief Secretar ies of States/UTs to allocate at least 
3% of their budget for e-Governance applications and infrastructure.  
 The Department of IT is an implementing agency and a programme 
manager for coordinating across di fferent Ministries.  In case the 
Ministries/Departments/States do not allocate the 2-3 per cent and do not 

adhere to the suggestions of the pr ogramme manager in providing necessary 
infrastructure, the DIT has less to lose in comparison to what the stakeholder 
will lose and the greatest loser will be the nation.  
The Committee, therefore, would advi se all the departments concerned 
to allocate 2-3 percent of their Plan Budg et for IT in their own interest.  The 
Committee also recommend that the DIT should closely  monitor those 
Ministries/Departments/States who do not follow their advice. 
 
Recommendation No.4 
National Action Plan on E-Governance (NEGAP) 
The Committee note that the Comm on Minimum Programme (CMP) of 
the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) h as affirmed the commitment of the 
Alliance to promote e-Governance on a massive scale. In order to give effect 
to this commitment, the Department of Information Technology needs 
adequate budgetary support for implementation of the National e-Governance 
Action Plan (NEGAP), which has been elaborated by the Department of 
Information Technology (DIT) in coll aboration with the Department of 
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances.  
The Committee further note that the Department of Information 
Technology intends to strengthen th e core infrastructure, including 
establishment of  State-wide Area Ne tworks upto the level of Blocks and 
National/State level Data Centres, promotion of common service delivery 
centres and replication of successful E- Governance applications on a pilot 
scale, for which the Department had pr oposed an outlay of Rs.630 crore for 

2004-05. The Committee are concerned to  note that the Planning Commission 
has approved only Rs.215 crore. As a result the Department would not be able 
to extend the network infrastructure upto block level in the first 18 months as 
it was planned and will take it up in a phased manner.  
However, keeping in view the that pr ovisions are not necessarily being 
made in the Plan Budget and that many  initiatives are funded on the non plan 
side, the Committee are convinced with the line of action of the Planning 
Commission that Rs. 215 crore is suffic ient in the initial phase and the 
Department should assess the realistic requirement of additional funds 
before making a demand for more funds. 
While appreciating the efforts in doing the study on the e-readiness 
Index of States and UTs, the Committee feel that the e-readiness of States and 
UTs has to be re-assessed annually on an ongoing basis in order to get them 
into e-Governance mindset. The Committ ee also desire that the Department 
should formulate the proposals for additional requirements of funds on e-
Governance keeping in view the level of  implementation and execution of the 
plan.  
 
Recommendation No.5 
National E-Governance Fund  
DIT has proposed a National e-Gover nance Fund with a seed capital of 
Rs. 1,000 crore with a view to stre ngthening the programme management 
structure and leveraging Government budgetary resources to mobilize non 
Government resources and competencies. Core programmes of the 

Department, have a close linkage with the larger objectives of the Common 
Minimum Programme in regard to  development of human resources, 
employment generation and improvem ent of the quality of life of 
disadvantaged areas. In order to fulf ill their objectives, the Committee desire 
that the Department should urgently work out the modalities of establishing a 
National e-Governance Fund.  
 
Recommendation No.6 
Media Lab Asia(MLA) 
The Committee note that the role of Media Lab Asia is to facilitate the 
invention, refinement, and disseminati on of innovations that benefit the 
masses. The project is closely working with industry , NGOs, and 
Government for this purpose. The basic idea of the Media Lab programme is 
to take off research end-to-end, fr om the labs to the stage of 
productionisation and prototyping and thereafter field testing it for 
demonstrating replicable scalability and sustainability.  
The MLA project  had been approved  for one year exploratory phase 
commencing from 1 January, 2002 to 31 December, 2002. The restructuring of 
MLA carried on till July, 2003 as a result  of which no funds were utilized 
during the last two years.  The Committee observe that  a full scope nine year 
restructured programme was initiated from May 2003. The restructured MLA 
carries the earlier vision forward with the same objectives wi th an outlay of 
Rs. 262 crore for the Tenth Plan.  

 The Technical Advisory Board (TAB) of the programme reconstituted in 
December 2003 has identified four thrust areas namely; ICT applications in 
education, Primary healthcare, empow erment of person s with physical 
disabilities and providing rural connectiv ity. Stakeholders’ workshops were 
conducted in each of these areas to workout road maps and prepare 
proposals for large scale deployment of  technologies developed.   According 
to the Department of IT, based on the conclusions of these workshops, new 
projects are being initiated for developm ent and deployment of technologies. 
The outlay of Rs. 65 crore earmarked in the year 2004-05 is proposed to be 
utilised for ongoing projects and new projects being evolved as well as for 
pilot deployment.  
The Committee are constrained to note that the Research Collaboration 
Agreement (RCA) with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), USA was 
not extended and the research projects t aken up directly by Media Lab Asia 
had to be dropped as a part of the restructuring whereas the restructured 
programme has the earlier visions and same objectives.  Pr ecious two years 
of the Tenth Plan have been lost without any progress.  
 The Committee are apprehensive wh ether the Department would be 
able to utilize Rs. 227 crore which is to be contributed by the DIT to the 
project in the remaining 3 years of the Tenth Plan. 
 The Committee are also concerned on the deployment of the projects 
which are in a pilot stage. Technologies w ill be developed but will they be put 
to use effectively? Who will monitor the deployment of Media Lab Asia 

Projects? According to the Committee, the initiative is good but it requires 
more serious thought and planning at the ground level. 
 In view of all these projects in the mind of the Committee, they 
recommend that the budgetary provision for the left over programme, not be 
allowed to lapse after the Tenth Plan . The Committee further recommend that 
the Ministry of HRD, Health and others  should also be associated to play a 
decisive role in the deployment of t echnologies. The Committee desire that 
they may be kept updated, on a quarter ly basis about the progress of the 
various programme of MLA currently under development. 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Sponsorships for Media Lab Asia 
     The Committee note that the Depa rtment has so far been able to get 
only one sponsorship from M/s Tata Sons for Media Lab Asia research thus 
contributing Rs. 1.5 crore against a target  of Rs.35 crore.  The Committee feel 
that the programme lacks sponsorship because of its complexities and the 
short-sightedness of the Department towards its outcome.   
The Committee desire that the Depa rtment should have a continuous 
dialogue with various industrial houses who spend on universal obligation for 
identifying the lacunae in their efforts so as to take steps to attract more 
sponsorship.  
 
Recommendation No.8 
Centre For Development of Advance Computing(C-DAC) 

The Committee observe that the allocation for C-DAC for the year 2004-
05 is Rs. 40 crore which is substantially higher than allocations of Rs.10 crore 
and Rs.25.50 crore made during 2002-03  and 2003-04 respectively. However, 
the Committee learn that the year 2004- 05 would be the fi rst full year of 
consolidated and expanded C-DAC, emerging as the largest and most premier 
R&D institution in ICT in the country. The Committee desire that keeping in 
view the broad objectives of C-DAC duri ng the year 2004-05, the allocation of 
Rs. 40 crore made should be optimally ut ilised. If need be, the request for 
additional requirement of funds shou ld be placed before the Planning 
Commission in Mid-term appraisal of the Annual Plan.     
An ongoing exercise to identify potential users and 
applications(commercial), effective ma rketing of the potential of Grid 
Computing and the benefits, packaging of appropriate solutions through 
timely development of appropriate software and Middleware for various 
commercial applications could increase the prospects of additional revenue 
earnings through C-DAC. In this connect ion, the Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken by the Department of IT with regard to suggestion made by 
the Planning Commission that C-DAC should develop an appropriate 
business model ensuring that its R&D act ivities could be carried out in a 
sustainable manner. In view of the Committee, the Commercial applications 
had to be an integral part of the high-end research. One of the super 
computing nodes could be devoted to stor age of large-scale data to meet the 
business requirements of commercial or ganizations like banks, insurance 
etc. 

Recommendation No.9 
Hardware policy 
   The Committee note that the Depart ment of IT has prepared a draft 
Hardware policy and forwarded the same to the Ministry of Finance for their 
views.  While discussing the Policy with the Cabinet Secretary, the Department 
had expressed that it would be able to finalize the policy paper by July, 2004.  
The Committee note that the Draft Paper on “National Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing Policy” was formulated a fter wide ranging consultations with 
industry associations and other stakeholders. Further, a number of promotional 
and EXIM policy/procedural measures incl uded in the Draft Policy paper could 
not evolve the consensus required. The promotional and other measures 
contained in the Draft Paper concerns  not only the Electronics/IT Hardware 
industry but also, the rest of  the manufacturing sector in the country. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire th at keeping in view the vision of the 
Hardware Policy to make India one of the key players in the global electronics/IT 
hardware manufacturing sector and inte grate the same with the global value-
added-chain, the Hardware Policy should get the appro val of the Manufacturing 
Sector Competitiveness Council.  The Committee also recommend that effort 
should be made by the Department to give boost to the hardware sector as this 
could generate substantial revenue due to  the greater value added nature of the 
business. 
 
Recommendation No.10 
National Venture Capital Fund for Software and IT Industry(NFSIT) 

The Committee note that National Venture Capital Fund for Software 
and IT Industry was set up in December 1999,  with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore.  
The scheme was later handed over to Sm all Industries Development Bank of 
India (SIDBI) which created a fund ca lled SIDBI Venture Capital Fund wherein 
50 percent of the money was put by SIDB I, 20 percent of the money  by IDBI 
and  30 percent of the money by Ministry of IT.  Government has a 
representative nominee. So far SIDBI ha s sanctioned assistance to 24 units 
aggregating Rs.58 crore.  The rest of the money is in fixed deposits earning 
interest.  
The success rate of SIDBI has been highest amongst all venture capital 
funds.  The reason being that SIBDI is very conservative in giving funds.  It 
has the fear of turning valuable capital into non-performing assets. 
The Committee note that the Task Force constituted on ‘Financing 
Knowledge Based Industries for Sma ll Enterprises Sector including IT 
Industry’ to look into the issues pertaining to availability of Venture Capital 
for Small Scale entrepreneurs in the country has not yet submitted its Report. 
The Committee would like to be appris ed of the major recommendations of 
the Report of the Task Force as soon as it  is finalized and also action taken 
by the Government on the same. 
The Committee further suggest that  the Department which is a 1/3 rd 
partner in the Fund should impress upon the NFSIT to sanction amounts to 
relatively sound proposals an d should not be so conservative as 50 percent 
of the Fund is left unutilized. The Committee would like to be updated 

quarterly on the performance of the Companies funded by the Venture Capital 
Fund.    
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Semi-conductor Complex Limited(SCL) 
  The Committee are constrained to fi nd that SCL was not able to achieve 
the targets for sales turnover during the l ast two years. As against the target 
to achieve sales turnover of Rs. 83 cr ore and Rs. 84.10 crore during 2002-03 
and 2003-04, the Company could achieve the sales turnover of Rs. 40.22 crore 
and Rs.54.88 crore respectively. The Committee are not convinced with the 
reasons for shortfall in achievement of the targets like a major order was 
spilled over to the next fiscal year due  to delay in according product approval 
time, some of the orders envisag ed did not materialise and demand 
constraints affected the sales in certa in products. The Committee feel that 
these constraints are not new to th e Company and timely corrective 
measures on the part of the Company could have avoided such major 
shortfalls.  
           The Committee further observe that SCL has revised the target for 
2004-05 to achieve the sales turnover fr om Rs. 91 crore to Rs. 70.50 crore 
keeping in view the current product portfolio and the business opportunities 
envisaged by the Company. The Committee disapprove such a sudden 
change in targets fixed by the SCL.  The Committee would like to know the 
reasons as to why these factors were not considered beforehand while fixing 
the targets. The Committee deprecate th e lackadaisical approach of the 

Department in fixing the targets. They trust that by  learning from the past 
experience, the SCL woul d leave no stone unturned to achieve the targets 
during 2004-05. 
      The Committee find that during 2002-03, against a target to produce 
1138.910K Dies/Devices and 205K System /Board level products,  the 
achievement remained 373.318K and 85.501K  respectively.  Similarly, during 
2003-04, against a target to produc e 1228.93K Dies/Devices, SCL could  
however produce only 236.550K Dies/ Devices. The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons put forth by the Department  for shortfall in 
targets like orders of some produc ts planned for production could not 
fructify, in case of Systems/Board level products, less production of a 
product and delay in finalization of orders for energy meters by the 
customers, a product could not get tr ansferred to production on account of 
iterations needed in product de sign for incorporating additional 
specifications as per customer requirements and the production plan of 
another product was reduced in view of funds constraints of a customer. The 
Committee feel such shortfall could have been avoided, had the Company 
taken timely remedial measures and ensured proper co-ordination.  
 
The Committee deplore the sudden revision of the targets laid down for 
the year 2004-05. They note that SCL ha s scaled down the ta rgets laid down 
earlier for producing 1300K Dies/Devices to produce 907K dies/devices.  The 
Committee, however, trust that the Company would explore all ways and 
means to ensure that the targets are achieved in time and in totality.  

 
The Committee observe that various committees including 
Disinvestment Commission had consider ed various alternatives for the 
revival of the SCL.  However the matter  of merger of SCL with BEL and that 
of merger of SCL with Society for Inte grated Circuits Technology and Applied 
Research (SITAR)/the Gallium Arseni de  Enabling Technology Centre 
(GAETEC) have not materialized. The Committee further find that the Planning 
Commission had suggested that the Depa rtment of IT should form a small 
group of experts in the Department to suggest two-three alternative plans for 
revival of SCL and desired that the Group should submit the Report within 
two months. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
the Department in this regard. Subseq uently, the Committee desire that SCL 
should get the Report examined by bu siness experts and make viable and 
feasible plan for profitable functioning of SCL. The Committee are of the view 
that SCL should also aggressively look to the disinvestment option with the 
Companies in the Semi-Conductor Industries. 
The Committee are informed that SCL has implemented VRS during the 
year 2004 and given volunt ary retirement to 46 em ployees (21 executives and 
25 non-executives). The Committee would like to know from which source the 
funds have been procured by the Company to implement the VRS during this 
year.  
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Vidya Vahini Programme 

The Committee note that the Department of Information Technology 
conceived “Vidya Vahini” programme as a pilot project to make full use of 
Information & Communication Technology (ICT) and Internet to transform the 
learning environment from mono-dimens ional to multi-dimensional and the 
same has been implemented in 7 distri cts of the country. The Committee are 
informed that further replication of  the programme in schools across the 
country would be carried out by the Ministry of HRD/State Governemnts as 
part of the scheme “Introduction of ICT in Schools”. The Committee desire 
that the Department of IT should fo llow-up with the Mini stry of HRD/State 
Governments for successful replication of the Vidya Vahini Programme and 
provide them the technical and other support, if necessary.
 
 
 
Recommendation No.13 
Community Information Centres (CICs) 
The Committee appreciate the e ffective implementation of the 
Community Information Centres(CICs) Project in the North-Eastern States. So 
far DIT have set up CICs at 487 block headquarters in North-Eastern States, 
out of which  486 CICs have been est ablished and all are operational.  The 
Committee note that the scheme is being replicated during 2004-05 in the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir for setting  up 139 CICs.  CICs in the 60 Block 
Headquarters of J&K State would be made operational during 2004-05.  
    The Committee further observe that  a proposal is in the pipeline to 
set up 328 CICs in the State of  Utta ranchal. The estimated cost is around Rs 
70 crore to be incurred over 4 years.  The project would be implemented by 

the State Government,  which will mobi lise a contribution of 10 percent of the 
outlay.  The DIT’s support will  be to the extent of Rs 63 crore. The project will  
be implemented in two phases.  This woul d necessitate an additionality in the 
Plan Budgetary support  at the rate of Rs 16 crore per year. The Committee 
recommend that similar efforts should be made for setting up of CICs in other 
States of the country.  The Commi ttee further observe that recurring 
expenditure on the maintenance of the CI Cs is being provided for as RE Plan 
by the Government.  The Committee ar e of the opinion that once the 
infrastructure is in place, maintenance should be funded by the State after the 
successful continuance of the project for a limited period, say 3 years. 
 
Recommendation No.14 
Manpower for Application Specific Integrated Circuit(ASIC) Design 
The Committee regret to note that allocation made for the scheme has 
always been revised downward. Duri ng 2002-03, BE was Rs. 2 crore which 
was reduced to Rs. 70 lakh at RE stage and the same was fully utilized. Also 
during 2003-04, though the Department pr oposed an outlay of Rs. 125 crore, 
the Planning Commission approved only Rs. 3.5 crore. The allocation was 
reduced to Rs. 37 lakh at  RE stage which was full y utilized.  The Committee 
note that during 2004-05, th e Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 20 crore, 
however, the Planning Commission approved Rs. 10 crore.  
In this connection, the reason gi ven by the Department that the 
institutions were not able to absorb more funds is disturbing.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that either the progr amme content is not popular to attract 

students or there is lack of awaren ess among the students. The Committee 
strongly feel that the reasons for su ch a phenomenon should be gone into by 
a high level team of experts and adeq uate measures taken to ensure better 
utilization of funds provided for the scheme.   
According to the Committee, a much better plan has to be drawn up for 
an effective curriculum which enhanc es the potential for employment, in 
consultations with the Semi-Conducto r Industry players and suitable 
measures taken to effect ively improve the curriculum in ongoing basis. The 
curriculum could be passed on to C-DAC which is already offering training 
courses in the field.  
 
Recommendation No.15 
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses (DOEACC) Society 
During 2003-04, 75,000 students were targeted to be registered, against 
which only 49,391 were actually registered .  Similarly 1,50,000 candidates 
were targeted to appear in various levels of Exams, against which only 
1,30,057 candidates were actually admitted . Also during 2002-03, against 
92,612 students to be registered a nd 1,77,329 candidates to be admitted, 
75884 students were registered and 1,60,028 candidates were admitted.  
The reason for decline in registrati on during 2003-04 is stated to be 
absence of academic recognition of DO EACC Courses in addition to  the 
continuing impact of the slowdown in the global IT market. The Committee 
note that in order to fulfill the target s of 2004-05 to register 82,500 students 
and to admit 1,65,000 candidates to vari ous O, A, B & C level courses, the 

Department has proposed to secure academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ 
Level Course. This would also increase the acceptability of DOEACC Courses 
amongst students and industry. All India Council for Technical 
Education(AICTE) has constituted a Co mmittee to look into the matter of 
recognition of qualifications awarded by non-formal sector institutions 
including DOEACC.  The said committee h as advised the Society to approach 
Distance Education Council, Indira Gandhi  National Open University (IGNOU) 
for academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level qualifications.  The application 
for academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B ’ Level is under process by IGNOU.  
The Society is also monitoring a publicity campaign to raise the level of 
awareness in regard to DOEACC courses amongst students and parents. 
The Committee, therefore, desire th at the matter should suitably be 
followed up with IGNOU at the highest  level for registration of DOACC ‘B’ 
level courses. They would fu rther like to know whether there is any proposal 
from IGNOU to give recognition to DOEA CC to ‘O’, ‘A’ an d ‘C’ level course 
also. 
 
Recommendation No.16 
National Informatics Centre(NIC) 
 The Committee observe that NIC is primarily an implementing agency 
having 3000 people workforce spread ac ross the country.  Thus most of the 
funds allocated to NIC are spent on salaries, increments etc. and merely 15 to 
20 percent is left as capital budget.  The manpower has remained constant for 
the last 5 to 6 year wher eas the workload has increased fifty to sixty times.  

NIC has an institutional mechanism whic h gives it the flexibility to engage 
indirect additional manpower in response to the requirements of a particular 
project.  However, NIC is alwa ys short of talent as the attrition rate is fairly 
high as talented hands leave the organizations for greener pastures. 
 According to the Committee, as NIC is the IT backbone of the country, 
it should not be overburde ned with so much of work where the volume of 
work to manpower ratio is 50:1. NIC will  never be able to do justice to the 
assignments entrusted to it resulting in delayed projects. 
 The Committee feel that serious thought should be given to the 
functioning, manpower requirement , preserving talent, congenial 
environment in NIC by utilizing modern management techniques and 
attracting fresh talents as adopted by multinational companies.  
 
 
 
New Delhi                                 M. M. PALLAM RAJU, 
19 August, 2004                                  CHAIRMAN,  
28 Sravana, 1926 (Saka)                                 STANDING COMMITTEE   ON  
                                                                            INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  

          ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2004-05) 
-------- 
  
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11 August, 2004 from 1100 hours to 
1405 hours in Committee Room No. ‘53’,  Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri M. M. Pallam Raju  --  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                    LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary  
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran  
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin  
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu 
10. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu 
11. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Ashwani Kumar  
13. Shri N.R.Govindarajar 
14. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao 
15. Shri Motiur Rahman 
16. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. K. Sharma --      Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Sharma  --  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K. L. Arora             --         Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
1. Shri K.K.Jaswal, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Lakshminarayanan, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Ajeer Vidya, JS & FA 
4. Shri Pankaj Agrawala, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri R. Chandrasekhar Sahu, Joint Secretary 
6. Dr. A.K.Chakravorty, Advisor 
7. Dr. U. P. Phadke, Advisor 
8. Shri R. K. Ar ora, Sr. Director 
9. Shri V.V.Taneja, Sr. Director 
10. Dr. N. Vijayaditya, Director General 
11. Shri Ramakrishnan, ED, C-DAC  
12. Dr. M.J.Zarabi, CMD, SCL 
At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed the representatives of 
Department of Information Technology to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Secretary, DoIT then gave a brief account of the Demands for Grants (2004-2005) 
with the help of a presentation.    
 
The Hon’ble Members sought certai n clarifications to which the 
representatives of the Department of Information Technology replied one by one. 
 
    The Committee thanked the representatives of the Department for 
appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing all the required information. 
  A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH  SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2004-05) 
                                                        ------------ 
  
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 18 August, 2004 from 1500 hours to 
1745 hours in Committee Room No. G074, K-Block, Parliament Library Building, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri M. M. Pallam Raju  --  Chairman 
 
                MEMBERS 
                             
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Mani Cherenamei 
3. Shri P. Karunakaran  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane 
6. Shri Sohan Potai 
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
8. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu 
9. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu 
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.   Shri Ashwani Kumar  
12.   Shri Balbir K. Punj 
13.    Shri Dara Singh 
14.    Shri N.R.Govindarajar 
15.    Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
4. Shri P.D.T. Achary  --      Additional  Secretary 
5. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma --  Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri K.L.Arora               --         Under Secretary 
7. Shri D.R. Shekhar  --         Assistant Director  
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports and adopted the same with some modifications:- 
 
 
(i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) relating to 
the Department of Posts. 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) relating to 
the Department of Information Technology. 
 
The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present 
the above mentioned Reports to the House after factual verification by the 
Department concerned on a date and time convenient to him. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 