42
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of  the  Committee  contained  in  their  Thirty Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07)]
FORTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

FORTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of  the  Committee  contained  in  their  Thirty-Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 164
Price : Rs. 67.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER IR eport .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 46
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 47
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 52
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2006-07)
held on 20.3.2007 ...................................................... 58
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Thirty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 60

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
*18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
**19. Shri Narahari Mahato
#20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
21. Vacant
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006 in place of Shri Rajnarayna Budholiya,
MP (L.S.)
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
# Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February , 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
##22. Vacant
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajagopalan M. Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
##Vacated dated 15th December, 2006.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Forty Second Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty Second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) relating to the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
2.8.2006 and laid in Rajya Sabha the same day. The Department
furnished Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Report on 15.12.2006.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.3.2007.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty-Second  Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
20 March, 2007 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2006-2007)’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 2
August, 2006 and was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha the same
day. It contained 28 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 1 to 6, 11, 13 to 16, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24 & 27
Total: 17
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government:
Para Nos: Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos: 10, 17, 22 & 26
Total : 04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim in nature:
Para Nos: 7 to 9, 12, 20, 25 & 28
Total: 07
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason
for the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in
Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early
date.
A. Digitalisation of Archives
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
5. Emphasising the need for digitalisation of the archival records
in Prasar Bharati, the Committee had recommended as follows:
“Historic speeches of prominent leaders, memorable contributions
of great musicians, singers etc have immense value. The
Committee’s examination has, however, revealed that due to paucity
of funds, the digitalisation of these archival records is not taking
place in the place it is desired. The Committee strongly feel that
such valuable possessions should be digitalized without any further
delay and the Ministry should make the funds available for its
speedy digitalisation. The Committee would like to be kept
informed of the progress made on this count.”
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
“Digitalisation of the holdings in Doordarshan has already been
started from 2004, but it is not being carried out at the optimum
pace. Required funds have been projected in the 11th Plan.
However, it may take three years for the funds to reach the
Archives for procuring necessary equipments for establishing
professional and digitised Archives.
All India Radio has achieved a major goal by digitising its analog
archives of 43,000 tapes collected up to November, 2001 and the
project was over on 31 January , 2005. All the recordings have been
converted into digital format with proper data entry. However,
approximately 10,000 tapes collected in the archives from November,
2001 till date are yet to be digitised. For this purpose a project has
already been approved by CEO/Director General, All India Radio
and allocation of funds is under examination.”

3
7. While taking note of the progress achieved by All India Radio
(AIR) in digitalisation of its analog archives comprising of 43,000
tapes collected upto November, 2001, the Committee express their
serious displeasure at the tardy progress achieved so far in
digitalisation of holdings in Doordarshan. It is a clear indication of
the low priority accorded to digitalisation of archives consisting of
recordings of historic events, speeches, etc. which are required to be
preserved for posterity. The fact that some of these recordings are of
immense national importance, calls for serious attention of Prasar
Bharati for according due priority to digitalisation of its archives,
since we owe a legacy to the future generations, such valuable asset
should not be squandered away. The Committee, therefore, would
like to stress that the Ministry should make concerted efforts to
obtain the required funds for procuring necessary equipments for
establishing professional and digitalized Archives in Doordarshan
without waiting for three more years as indicated in the reply. They
also trust that by now the required funds for completion of
digitalisation in AIR must have been obtained and the digitalisation
process must be in full swing. The Committee would like to be
updated of the progress achieved in this regard.
B. J&K Special Package
Recommendation ( Para No. 16)
8. Calling for expeditious implementation of J&K Special Package,
the Committee had recommended as follows:
“The Committee observe that in the examination of DFG for 2004-
05 the Committee were informed that the Kargil 200 KW 14 MW
Tr. Project which was targeted to be completed in 2003-04 would
be completed in 2004-05. The Committee were also informed that
five technically ready projects with 1 KW FM MW transmitters at
Diskit, Drass, Nyoma, Radum and Tiesuru are awaiting
commissioning for want of operational and maintenance staff. In
their reply on low utilisation of funds under Revenue (Misc.) head
2005-06 the Ministry stated that the Kargil project is technically
ready but there is a delay in commissioning of the project and
hence there was no expenditure in the operation & maintenance.
The shortage of manpower, the Ministry stated, is there because of
a ban on recruitment against newly created posts. In fact, the
shortage of manpower is the principal reason for non-
commissioning of almost all the technically ready projects of both
AIR and Doordarshan. The Committee are of the opinion that apart

4
from the sizeable amount of money that have been spent and are
not being put to use because of the non-commissioning of projects
even after 2-3 years of their being technically ready, not only is
the very purpose of providing a special package to AIR &
Doordarshan for J&K defeated but it is also making the equipment
unserviceable and obsolete with each passing year. In the opinion
of the Committee, this is a clear case of poor co-ordination among
the two Ministries (Finance & Personnel) of the Government on
account of which the Ministry of I&B is made to suffer. The
Committee are of the view that if additional allocation of funds
can be given under a J&K Special (Plan), special sanction for the
execution and maintenance of the assets created from these special
funds by way of sanction of posts and allowing the Ministry to
recruit manpower should also be given simultaneously. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make
special efforts to convince the Ministries of Finance and Personnel
of the urgency of removal of the ban on recruitment in J&K as a
special case. In the meantime, Prasar Bharati may explore the idea
of hiring defence personnel on deputation and deploying them
alongwith redeployed staff of Prasar Bharati on attractive
deputation terms exclusive to J&K so that the projects may be
operationalised at the earliest for the benefit of local people.”
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:
“All India Radio: Approval of the Ministry for continuation of
posts sanctioned for operation & maintenance of Projects under
J&K Special Package upto February , 2007 has been conveyed to
AIR.
However, matter regarding manpower requirements of Prasar
Bharati is under consideration of GoM, whose recommendations
are awaited.
In the meantime the 200 KW MW Transmitter at Kargil and 1 KW
FM MW Transmitters at Drass at Tiesuru have been partially and
provisionally commissioned w.e.f. 1st September, 2006 by arranging
staff on tour and transfer. In this way 9 out of 12 projects included
in J&K Special package have since been operationalised at
1. Kathua -10 KW FM Tr. (Replacement of 6 KW FM)
2. Srinagar -300 KW FM MW Tr. (Replacement of 200 KW
FM)
3. Khalsi - 1 KW MW Tr. (Relay)

5
4. Kupwara - 20 KW FM MW Tr. (Relay)
5. Naushera - 20 KW FM MW Tr. (Relay)
6. Rajouri - 10 KW FM Tr. (Relay)
7. Drass - 1 KW FM MW Tr. (Relay)
8. Tiesuru - KW FM MW Tr. (Relay)
9. Kargil - 200 KW FM MW Tr.
Three projects namely, Relay centres with 1 KW FM MW Trs. at
Diskit, Nyoma and Paduma are technically ready.
Doordarshan: 362 (356 + 6) posts were sanctioned for operation &
maintenance of projects approved under J&K Special Plan. All the
projects under J&K Special Plan have since been commissioned.
Scheme of Rajouri Studio was approved later, Installation of Rajouri
Studio has been completed and is technically ready.”
10. The Committee note with satisfaction that the 200 KW MW
Transmitter at Kargil and 9 out of 12 Projects included in J&K Special
Package have since been operationalised by AIR. However, the three
projects, viz., Relay Centres with 1 KW FM MW Transmitters at
Diskit, Nyoma and Paduma which are technically ready, have not
been operationalised. Similarly, 200 KW MW Transmitter at Kargil
and 1 KW FM MW Transmitters at Drass and Tiesuru were
commissioned on 1st September, 2006 only provisionally and partially
by arranging staff on tour and transfer. The Committee trust that
approval for continuation of posts sanctioned under J&K Special
Package upto February, 2007 must have been further extended to
facilitate operation and maintenance of the Projects which have been
commissioned under the Special Package.
11. It is needless to say that when it comes to matters like J&K
Special Plan, Government needs to adopt a more pragmatic approach
keeping in view the overall interest of the nation and lift the ban
on recruitment against newly created posts. Only then could the full
benefit of the projects sanctioned under the Special Plan reach the
local people. The Committee, therefore, desire that the manpower
requirements of Prasar Bharati in J&K region should be attended to
on top priority as a special case. They reiterate the earlier
recommendation that till such time the ban on recruitment against
newly created posts is lifted, Prasar Bharati should seriously consider
the possibility of hiring defence personnel on deputation basis and
also deploying its own staff on attractive terms of deputation so

6
that the partially commissioned projects and those which are
technically ready, but have not yet been commissioned for want of
operational and maintenance staff are commissioned and made fully
operational. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
C. Expansion of FM Services
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
12. Expressing dissatisfaction over the inordinate delays in rolling
out FM services at various places across the country, the Committee
had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that out of a total outlay of Rs. 328 crore for
expansion of FM Services of All India Radio (AIR) and total
allocation of Rs. 154.51 crore from 2002-03 to 2005-06, only an
amount of Rs. 22.12 crore had been spent. The Committee are
informed that out of 51 Nos. of FM transmitters targeted for
2005-06 ( viz. 33 Nos. 10 KW FM FM, 6 Nos. 20 KW FM FM,
4 Nos. 5 KW and 8 Nos. of 1 KW FM FM transmitters) 8 Nos. of
1 KW FM transmitters have been operationalised and rest will be
shifted to next year ( i.e. 2006-07). On a closer examination of the
data provided by the Ministry during 2003-04 and 2005-06 the
Committee find that some of these transmitters ( i.e. Banswara,
Alwar, Chittorgarh, Kurukshetra, Surat, Kochi & Jorhat) were on
the original physical target list for 2003-04 ( see Annexure-IV) and
some ( i.e. Nagpur, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Sholapur, Vijayawada,
Jalandhar, Patna, Bikaner, Ranchi & Trinelveli ( see Annexure-V and
VI) were on the original physical target list for 2004-05. Targets
are shifted repeatedly over the years. The expenditure in 2002-03
has been 7.27%, in 2003-04 was 14.26%, in 2004-05, 15.2% and in
2005-06, 13.69%. The Ministry owe an explanation on these
perceptible shortcomings resulting not only in low expenditure ratio
under this scheme but also denying the benefits to the people.
The Committee’s examination further revealed that in several cases,
where approvals and the funds had been available, the
implementation process was slow. All these, clearly show the totally
unsatisfactory progress in the expansion of FM services of AIR
which is a matter of great concern to the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
thoroughly look into the reasons for the delay and fix responsibility
for the same.”

7
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
“Targets which have been shifted from the previous years are
mainly 10 KW FM Transmitter projects. This has resulted due to
the delay in procurement of these transmitters. After finalizing the
tenders, the purchase proposal for procurement of 33 Nos. of
10 KW FM Transmitters was sent to the Ministry for clearance in
September, 2005. After detailed examination procurement of
28 transmitters out of 33 has been approved by the Ministry on
09.10.2006.
6 Nos. of 20 KW FM Transmitter projects included as targets during
2005-06 were shifted to 2006-07 due to delay in procurement of
these transmitters. The purchase order for these transmitters was
placed on M/s Nautel in September, 2005 after receiving DG’s
approval. The Delivery period was due upto 15.01.06, the firm
offered their transmitter for inspection at their works in Nova
Scotia, Canada in November, 2005. The factory acceptance test was
an essential condition for the acceptance of Transmitters. Factory
inspection test of 20 KW FM Transmitters has been conducted
from 23.08.2006 to 02.09.2006 and the transmitter consignments are
expected to arrive by November, 2006.
Further 4 Nos. of 5 KW FM Transmitters have since been procured.
3 already installed at Kurseong, Baripada & Hyderabad and the
remaining one will be installed at Oras after building is ready in
the ongoing financial year.”
14. The Committee note that the contention of the Ministry that
targets were shifted from previous years mainly in respect of 10 KW
FM Transmitters is not factually correct. On a close scrutiny it is
found that except in the case of 8 Nos. of 1 KW FM Transmitters
which were operationalised in 2005-06, the targets in respect of about
43 FM Transmitters were invariably shifted by a year or even more.
The Ministry’s own role in contributing to the delay is evident from
the fact that it took almost 13 months to process the purchase
proposal for procurement of 33 Nos. of 10 KW FM Transmitters, of
which only 28 Nos. were finally cleared. In the case of 6 Nos. of 20
KW FM Transmitter Projects also the Project had to be shifted from
2005-06 to 2006-07 on account of delay in procurement of Transmitters.
The planning and implementation process for projects in AIR and
the Ministry leaves much to be desired. Therefore, it is not surprising
that there have been slippages in the implementation of projects
and the utilization of allocations has been abysmally low year after

8
year. It leads to the inevitable conclusion that planning and
implementation process needs to be geared up both in AIR and the
Ministry in order to ensure timely execution of projects and
utilization of allocated funds. The Committee trust that steps will
be taken to streamline the system and all out efforts will be made
for installation and operationalisation of all the FM Transmitters
targeted for 2006-07 in the current financial year itself.
D. New Technologies like Internet Radio Broadcasting, Digital
Broadcasting, etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
15. Favouring induction of new technologies like Internet Radio
Broadcasting, Digital Broadcasting, etc., the Committee had
recommended as follows:
“The Committee are informed that ‘in-principle’ approval of
Planning Commission for new technologies like Internet Radio
Broadcasting, Digital Broadcasting etc. of 10th Plan is yet to be
received by the Ministry and hence the schemes have not yet
started. The Committee are of the opinion that these technologies
may be advantageous to the listeners of AIR as they provide
multiple options for tuning into AIR programmes alongwith many
other add-on services which seem promising. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may take up the matter
with Planning Commission for an early approval for this scheme.”
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as follows:
“Planning Commission is insisting for tying up of funds for ‘in-
principle approval’. Since no fund has been earmarked in either
DBS or IEBR of 2006-07, the AIR Schemes like Digital Broadcasting,
etc. are proposed to be deferred to 11th Five Year Plan.”
17. In an era of fast changing technology, it is imperative that
AIR inducts innovative technologies in electronic media in order to
upgrade and modernize its operations and to equip itself it face the
emerging challenges effectively. It was with this objective in view
that the Committee had emphasized that the Ministry should pursue
with the Planning Commission the proposal for induction of new
technologies like Internet Radio Broadcasting, Digital Broadcasting,
etc. Since the Planning Commission is reportedly insisting for tying
up of funds for ‘in-principle approval’. The Committee would impress
upon the Ministry to pursue the proposal in right earnest so that

9
AIR will have the benefit of new technologies for achieving its
mission and objectives.
E. National Press Centre (NPC)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
18. Expressing dissatisfaction over the slow progress in the National
Press Centre (NPC) Project, the Committee had recommended as
follows:
“The Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) had expressed concern over the delay in the setting up
of the National Press Centre having state of the art facilities at
New Delhi. On an assurance by the representatives of the Ministry
during evidence to the effect that the project would be
commissioned on time, the Committee had desired that the funds
earmarked for the year be utilized for the Press Centre. While
considering the Action Taken by the Ministry, the committee were
not satisfied with the progress and therefore, impressed upon the
Department to complete the project with utmost urgency. The
Committee have now been informed that an MoU has been signed
with NBCC on 16th February 2006 for the construction of National
Media Centre at New Delhi stating that the project should be
executed in a time bound manner, and that the building handed
over duly furnished in “Ready to occupy conditions” to PIB within
24 months which shall start from the date of approval of design/
drawings from statutory authorities, release of initial deposit and
handing over of land for construction. The Committee are further
informed that the approval of designs/drawings from statutory
authorities is still pending. The Committee’s examination has, in
fact, revealed that the work is still going on at a snail’s pace. They
desired that necessary steps should be taken with a view to
ensuring completion of the project within the stipulated two years.”
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
“The work on the project has not taken off for want of necessary
clearances from Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC), New Delhi
Municipal Council (NDMC) and Ministry of Urban Development
(MoUD). Secretary, I&B, has written to Secretary, Urban
Development, on 18th April, 2006 and again on 2nd August, 2006
requesting him to instruct the CPWD to present the revised urban
form proposal at the earliest to DUAC, so that DUAC can clear
the same and Ministry of I&B can then request the NDMC to pass
the building plan proposal which is already with them. However
despite follow up, the response of the MoUD is still awaited.”

10
20. It is highly distressing to note that even after 12 years have
passed since a plot of land in Raisina Road, New Delhi was allotted
to the Ministry and the foundation stone for the project was laid
twice, viz. on 1st October, 1994 and 5th December, 2001, by none
other than the Prime Ministers of the country, the project for setting
up the National Press Centre has almost remained a non-starter. Until
clearances are received from the statutory authorities like Ministry
of Urban Development (MoUD), Delhi Urban Art Commission
(DUAC) and New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and the land
is handed over to NBCC with the initial deposit, construction of the
project cannot commence. The Committee take a serious note that
clearance from MoUD has been pending for a long time, that too
despite the follow-up done by the I & B Ministry. According to the
Committee this project is a glaring example of a crucial project caught
up in red tape because of which the nation is being deprived of a
world class National Press Centre with state-of-art facility for
receiving and disseminating information to the media.
21. The Committee express their serious displeasure at the way
the entire project has been inordinately delayed and the slow
progress made in clearance by the statutory authorities. They desire
that the matter be taken up at the highest level to clear the project
without any further delay. The Committee trust that all mandatory
clearances will be obtained in the shortest possible time and the
land will be handed over to NBCC for completion of construction
of the National Press Centre within the stipulated two year period.
The Committee would like to be informed of the precise progress
made in the matter.
F. Press Council of India (PCI)
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
22. Stressing the need to provide Press Council of India with more
regulatory powers in view of the growing commercialisation of print
media, the Committee had recommended as follows:
“The Committee learn that the Press Council was established in
1978 under an Act of Parliament for the purpose of preserving the
freedom of the Press and maintaining and improving the standard
of Newspapers and News Agencies in the country. The Committee
are informed that the advisories issued by PCI carry only moral
force and are not enforceable in a Court of Law. The Committee
are of the opinion that with the growing commercialization of
print media, there may be greater violations of the Act in subjects

11
relating to surrogate advertisements, obscene pictures/materials,
etc. Advisories carrying only moral force may not be effective in
regulating violations Therefore, there is an urgent need to amend
the PCI Act, 1978 to provide PCI with more regulatory powers for
maintaining sound ethical and moral standards of journalism thus
protecting the freedom of Press. The Committee feel the need of
wider consultations among the interested parties to evolve
consensus on important issues relating to media to further
strengthen it.”
23. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
“The grant of additional powers to PCI requires amendment to
the Press Council Act, 1978. PCI has proposed certain amendments
to the Act. The proposed amendments to the Act and other
proposals for grant of additional powers to PCI are being examined
in the Ministry.”
24. The Committee, while expressing satisfaction over the fact
that the Ministry are presently examining various proposals for
Amendment to PCI Act, 1978, trust that the Ministry would hold
wider consultations with all stakeholders to evolve consensus among
them over the proposed amendments to the Act. In view of the
urgency involved in granting more regulatory powers to PCI for
maintaining sound ethical and moral standards and preserving
freedom of the Press, the Committee urge that amendments to the
PCI Act should be carried out without undue delay. The Committee
desire to be kept informed of the progress on this count.
G. Children’s Film Society of India (CFSI)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
25. Taking note of the poor performance in physical targets under
the CFSI’s “Film Production” scheme and consequent low utilization
of funds, the Committee had recommended as follows:
“The Committee note that expenditure under “Film Production”
scheme has been consistently low during this plan period. This
scheme had an allocation of Rs. 352.00 lakh out of Rs. 519.40 lakhs
for CFSI which is more than 60% of CFSI’s total Budget for the
year 2005-06. The target set for production of feature films was
five and two short films were completed in the year. Similarly in
the dubbing of films against a target of fourteen versions only
four versions were completed and out of three films that were to

12
be purchased only one was purchased. The Committee further note
that during the four years of the Xth Plan period 2002-2006,
whereas the target for production was five feature films per year
and two short films per year ten feature films and eight short
films were completed. The Committee are informed that the main
reason for underutilization has been on-receipt of suitable film
proposals/synopsis and scripts which consequently resulted in a
lesser number of films approved by the Script Committee. The
dubbing was less because of non-availability of Indu Sound Stock.
The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies to a similar
recommendation of this Committee while considering the Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) had stated that the Chairperson has appealed
to the Film Writers Association for providing necessary publicity
and support. The CFSI had also written to eminent film makers
and General Body of CFSI had also been requested to explore the
possibility of having films made especially in their regional
languages and forwarded to the Society. The Committee feel that
efforts of the Society in this direction are not enough and it has
not been able to attract good scripts. There is no dearth of talent
in the field of creative writing considering the talents available
within the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Society should give wide publicity to its requirements for scripts,
organize competition to attract budding talents, tie up with the
Universities/Institutes of excellence and provide scholarship in the
field of creative writing.”
26. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that they
have noted the recommendation for compliance.
27. The Committee take a very serious note of the casual reply
furnished by the Ministry on their recommendation relating to low
utilization of funds and poor performance in physical targets under
the CFSI’s “Film Production” Scheme. Children’s Film Society of
India is an important unit in the Films Division of the Ministry.
Considering the fact that CFSI was established with the noble
objective of providing children and young people with “value based”
entertainment through the medium of films, the declining trend in
the working of the organization causes serious concern to the
Committee. The Committee expect the Government to attach utmost
importance to the recommendations. While reiterating their earlier
recommendations, the Committee desire that the Ministry should
vigorously pursue the recommendations and also apprise them of
the status of their implementation.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
I. Budgetary Grants for 2006-2007
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee observe that as per Demand No. 58 for the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation for 2006-
2007 is for a total amount of Rs. 1716.04 crore wherein the Plan section
accounts for Rs. 538.00 crore and the Non-Plan section for Rs. 1178.04
crore. As against this, the Budgetary Support for the year 2005-2006
stood at Rs. 1603.03 crore (Plan Rs. 528 crore + Non-Plan Rs. 1075.03
crore) which was increased to Rs. 1637.04 crore at the Revised Estimates
stage to accommodate a higher Non-Plan expenditure of Rs. 1182.81
crore and a reduced Plan expenditure of Rs. 454.23 crore. The overall
Budget for the year 2006-2007 has, therefore, been increased by Rs. 79
crore over the budgetary provision for the year 2005-2006 which is an
increase of 4.8 per cent. Assuming a yearly inflation of around 10 per
cent, an increase of 4.8 per cent in the Budget is very minimal. The
Committee feel that this reflects poorly on the capacity of the Ministry
to execute their plans and utilize the allocated funds. The Committee’s
examination of the various activities of the Ministry as commented
upon in the subsequent paragraphs clearly reinforces these observations.
The Committee would, therefore, like to stress that the Ministry should
play a more active role particularly in fulfilling their targets in the
thrust areas thereby making maximum use of the budget available to
them. The Committee trust that the Ministry would be able to
effectively utilize, the allocated funds of Rs. 538 crore provided to
them in the grants for meeting the Plan expenditure during the year
2006-2007.
Action Taken by the Government
For the Annual Plan 2005-06 the Ministry had initially proposed
to the Planning Commission a DBS amount of Rs. 1386.64 Crores.
However, after discussions at various stages, the Planning Commission
finally allocated Rs. 528 crores as DBS for Annual Plan 2005-2006.
Similarly, for Annual Plan 2006-2007, the Ministry of I&B had proposed
a DBS outlay of Rs. 1467.83 Crores as against which, the Planning

14
Commission allocated Rs. 538 crores. This Ministry is making all
possible efforts to ensure that the Plan outlay is utilized to the optimum
level.
[Ministry of I&B OM No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
II. Achievements in the Tenth Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that the total Tenth Plan allocation to the
three sectors of the Ministry viz, Information sector, Film sector and
Broadcasting sector was Rs. 5130 crore. As against this, the actual
allocation made for the five Annual Plans 2002-2007 is Rs. 4381 crore
and the total expenditure upto December 2005 is Rs. 2104.33 crore,
Assuming that there is 100 per cent utilization of the plan outlay for
the year 2006-2007, the percentage of the total expenditure of all the
three sectors in respect of the total Tenth Plan outlay at the end of the
Tenth Plan period would be approximately 51.5 per cent of the original
outlay Sector-wise speaking, the utilization of the Plan expenditure is
30.6 per cent in respect of Information sector, 33.24 per cent in respect
of Film sector and 49.21 per cent in respect of the Broadcasting sector.
These figures clearly speak of the dismal performance of the Ministry
in achieving the plan target. This also casts doubts about the quality
of performance of the Ministry in discharging the assigned functions
in the socially sensitive and vital sectors. In the opinion of the
Committee, the Ministry should make vigorous efforts not only in
enhancing the utilization of the budget but also to improve the overall
strategy of the three sectors so that they are in a position to perform
the social functions to the nation effectively and give better results
during the XIth Plan. They, therefore, recommend that an independent
study should be carried out for each sector by experts in the field,
which may recommend measures for the overall improvement of all
the sectors of the Ministry.
Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been noted. For
finalization of the XIth Plan of the Ministry of I&B, Planning
Commission has set up a Working Group under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (I&B). The Committee comprises of senior government officials
and non-officials experts in the field. For making in-depth study of
the status and future programmes of various sectors of this Ministry,
four Sub-Groups have also been formed with outside experts. It is

15
expected that the Sub-Groups/Working Group would make appropriate
recommendations which will be placed before the Planning
Commission. Depending upon the approval of Planning Commission
and the budgetary support from the Government, the plans and
programmes of this Ministry in the XI Plan would be formulated and
implemented in an effective manner.
[Ministry of I & B, OM No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee learn that the Direct Budgetary Support to the
Ministry in each of the five years of the Tenth Plan has been Rs. 415
crore, Rs. 415 crore, Rs. 480 crore, Rs. 528 crore and Rs. 538 crore
respectively. The allocation of the Internal Extra Budgetary Resources
(IEBR) of Prasar Bharati has been Rs. 463 crore, Rs. 475 crore, Rs. 475
crore and Rs. 592 crore. There is no allocation of IEBR in the year
2006-2007. The Committee observe that the IEBR support to the
Ministry has been more than the DBS but, strikingly, the total
expenditure by the Ministry has been Rs. 693.2 crore in 2002-2003,
Rs. 524.23 crore in 2003-2004, Rs. 421.24 crore in 2004-2005 and
Rs. 465.67 crore (upto December 2005) in 2005-2006. In other words,
the expenditure had been met largely from DBS only. The Committee
learn that one of the main reasons for the low Plan expenditure has
been the delayed approvals and procedural formalities. The North-
East (NE) and the Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) packages involving the
investment of approximately Rs. 700 crore have been delayed for over
two years because of the delay in ‘in-principle’ approval by the
Planning Commission. The other reason was the Prasar Bharati was
not able to provide the kind of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources
(IEBR) for the Plan side that was projected by them at the time of
Tenth Plan projections as they had greater commitments on the Non-
Plan side. The Committee feel that, although these may be reasons
which are external to the Ministry and appear to be genuine, the
Ministry do not appear to have tried to look into the shortcomings
which were hampering utilization of funds in each of the sectors
through an internal assessment. The Committee while expressing their
anguish over the unsatisfactory performance of the Ministry,
recommend that they should make concrete plans for better utilization
of allocated funds by reformulating its policy and work culture in the
Ministry. The Committee trust that the Ministry will take immediate
positive steps in this direction and keep the Committee apprised of
the progress made.

16
Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been carefully
noted. The monitoring and review of Plan Schemes have been further
activated in the Media Units as well as in the Ministry. The performance
of all media units and sectors is being reviewed at the level of Secretary
(I&B) on a weekly basis, so as to ensure optimal implementation of
schemes and removal of bottlenecks. This Ministry is making all
possible efforts to reduce the shortfall in achievement of targets to the
barest minimum level.
[Ministry of I & B, OM No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee observe that some of the reasons for the low
utilization have been the various stages of approvals that have to be
obtained, legal and contractual obligations to be complied with, other
procedural formalities, shortage of manpower, reduction in IEBR
support to Capital Grant, problems in retendering and the ‘in principle’
approval by the Planning Commission. The most common reason for
delay relates to the ‘in principle’ approval given by the Planning
Commission. The North-East Special Package. (Phase-II), the J&K
package are glaring examples which the Ministry have repeatedly cited
as examples of delay for over two years which has results in under-
utilization of approximately Rs. 700 crore in the Tenth Plan. Although,
the Committee are in full agreement and acknowledge the exercise of
‘in principle’ approval as an opportunity to review the existing schemes
so as to avoid multiplicity, weed out old schemes which may no longer
be relevant, restrict spreading of scarce resources over a large number
of projects etc. The Committee are of the strong conviction that since
the Government had allocated additional funds and a special package
for the faster development of North East and J&K, there ought not
have been any further hindrances. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their concern as expressed in their Report on the Demands for Grants
for the year 2005-2006 for a relook on the procedure of ‘in-principle’
approval by the Planning Commission and recommend that the
procedure be streamlined in the interest of completion of schemes on
time within the available Plan Funds. This is all the more necessary
in the case of an organization like Prasar Bharati which has to complete
in the market for its very survival.

17
Action Taken by the Government
The Planning Commission has recently reviewed the procedure for
‘in principle’ approval and issued revised guidelines vide their U.O.
No. N11016/4/2006-PC dated 29.08.2006 (copy enclosed). It is expected
that the revised guidelines would help in speedier implementation of
the projects and schemes.
[Ministry of I & B, OM No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]

18
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
PLANNING COMMISSION
Yojana Bhavan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi-110 001.
Subject: Guidelines regarding inclusion of new Schemes in the Plan,
enhancement of Five Year Plan/Annual Plan outlays, major
changes in the scope and investment approval of the Plan
Schemes, for the Central Ministries/Departments.
I. Proposals are often received from the Ministries for inclusion of
new schemes in the Plan, enhancement of Five Year Plan/Annual Plan
outlays, major changes in scope of the schemes (including change in
objectives, criteria and pattern of assistance/subsidies etc.). In this
regard, inclusion of new schemes in the Plan requires ‘in principle’
approval of Planning Commission before they are submitted for
approval to competent authorities as per existing delegation of powers.
From the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the following procedure would be
adopted for inclusion of schemes/projects in the Plan.
(a) Schemes that would not require ‘In Principle’ approval:
Formulation of a Five Year Plan is a detailed exercise preceded by
extensive deliberations and consultations by the Working Groups and
Steering Committees. The existing schemes are examined by the
Working Groups/Steering Committees and revamping/modifications/
strengthening are suggested in many cases. The Steering Groups also
recommend initiation of new schemes to fulfil specific objectives after
taking into account the plan priorities and the availability of resources.
(i) In case of the existing schemes which need to be continued
in the next Plan, no ‘in principle’ approval would be required.
This does not, however, mean that schemes can be continued
from one Plan to another without going through a rigorous
Zero Based Budgeting exercise. In case a new component is
to be added to an existing scheme, this would be considered
by the Steering Committee and recommended for inclusion
in the Five Year Plan. In case the component to be added
is included in the Five Year Plan with adequate allocation
of resources, the additional component in existing Schemes
would not require ‘in principle’  approval.

19
(ii) The new schemes/projects which are proposed to be taken
up in the Plan have to be indicated in the Plan Document
and financial resources have to be fully provided for that
scheme/project. In such cases, ‘in principle’  approval of the
Planning Commission would not be required.
(iii) It may be noted that a more mention of a project/scheme/
additional component in an existing scheme without
adequate plan provision at the beginning of the Five Year
Plan period would not be exempted from the disciple of ‘in
principle’ approval procedure in brief, only the new schemes/
projects/additional components that have been included in
Five Year Plan with full provision of resources would not
require ‘in principle’ approval.
(b) Schemes that would require ‘in principle’  approval:
(i) Scheme/Project/additional component in an existing scheme
which could not be included in the Five Year Plan with
adequate provision would require ‘in principle’ approval of
the Planning Commission before the Ministries/Departments
seeks sanction of the appropriate authorities for taking up
the scheme/project.
(ii) For seeking ‘in principle’  approval, the Ministries/
Departments should submit a detailed note to the Planning
Commission on the justification for the new scheme/project
with a broad outline of the proposed scheme/project.
(iii) After obtaining ‘in principle’  approval, the Ministries/
Departments shall conduct an exercise to find resources for
the proposed scheme/project/additional component in an
existing scheme in consultation with Planning Commission.
This would require a detailed analysis of requirement and
availability of funds for the existing Schemes and Projects.
In case requirement of funds is higher than the availability,
the Ministries/Department should undertake a
reprioritization exercise in consultation with subject division
in Planning Commission and based on the result give details
of commitments on on-going schemes/projects along with
the requirement and availability of funds for the proposed
scheme/project additional component in an existing scheme
clearly spelling out the implications of the reprioritization
(in terms of re-phasing of on-going schemes and/or weeding
out of schemes together with its impact on physical output).

20
(iv) After obtaining ‘in principle’  approval of Planning
Commission (which would mean specific approval of
Secretary Planning Commission) and tying up financial
resources, the Ministry/Department would process the
scheme/project/additional component in an existing scheme
to obtain necessary approvals as per existing delegation of
powers through SFC/EFC/PIB, as the case may be.
II. Enhancement of Five Year Plan/Annual Plan outlays: The Five
Year Plans are generally indicative in nature. They are operationalized
through Annual Plans. As such outlays to be provided by the Planning
Commission for the Annual Plan will take into consideration such
adjustments and enhancement as may be necessary. After the Annual
Plans have been finalized and corresponding amounts provided in the
Budget of the Central Ministries, upward revision of more than 10%
of the Budget Estimate at the Revised Estimate stage, should be referred
by the concerned Ministry to the Planning Commission and it is only
after the Planning Commission concurs that these should be taken up
with the Ministry of Finance for Supplementary Grants.
III. Change in Scope: Major changes in the scope of the schemes
already included in the Plan, in terms of change in objectives, coverage
of population, criteria, pattern of subsidy, assistance, etc. should be
first referred to the Planning Commission for obtaining concurrence in
the same manner as a new scheme (item 1 above) before the revised
scheme is processed for sanction by the competent authority. In case
of continuing CSS, approval for change in scope etc., may be sought
as per the existing procedure and delegation of authority from the
Planning Commission, as in other Plan Schemes.
IV . Sanction of the Scheme: All continuing and new schemes
included in the Five Year Plan are to be sanctioned by the competent
authority (Board of Companies/Ministries/Ministry of Finance/CCEA)
after the recommendations of the respective body (DSC/SFC/EFC/
PIB, etc.) as the case may be, in accordance with the existing delegation
of financial powers. These approvals should be processed by the Central
Ministries only after necessary Plan provisions are available in the
Five Year Plan/Annual Plan. In case of new schemes, these should be
processed after the Planning Commission has concurred to their
inclusion in the Plan.
V. Procedure for Introduction of a new Centrally Sponsored
Scheme (CSS): Approval of full Planning Commission is necessary for
including a CSS in the Plan. For introduction of a new Centrally

21
Sponsored Scheme (CSS), which meets the criteria* laid down by the
Committee of National Development Council (NDC), the Ministries/
Departments should first obtain an ‘in principle’ approval of the
Planning Commission, (specific approval of Secretary, Planning
Commission) giving justification for introduction of the scheme and
indicating:
(i) Whether the existing Centrally Sponsored Schemes being
run by the Ministry/Department have been reviewed and
schemes identified for closure, weeding out and/or merger
with full details thereof;
(ii) Whether an exercise has been carried out for avoidance of
multiplicity of implementation machinery, and if so, results
thereof;
(iii) Scheme-wise details of number of posts sanctioned/created
at the Ministry/Department, Central State and District level;
(iv) Whether any rationalization exercise has been undertaken,
and if so, details thereof;
(v) Are there existing schemes with similar objectives in the
Ministry/Department of other Central Ministries/
Departments and/or schemes with similar objectives being
implemented by the State Governments, and if so, details
thereof and the justification for taking up the new scheme
instead of strengthening/modifying the existing schemes;
(vi) The reasons for not implementing the scheme under State
Plan with earmarked funds.
The receipt of this communication may kindly be acknowledged.
sd/-
(R. SRIDHARAN)
Joint Secretary (Administration)
Tel. No. 2309 6598
Secretaries of all Central Ministries/Departments.
[Planning Commission U.O. No. N-11016/4/2006-PC, dated 29.8.2006]
* Narasimha Rao Committee (Committee of NDC on CSS) in its first meeting held
on 1st November, 1986, approved the modified criteria for retention of existing and
initiation of new Centrally Sponsored Schemes as set out below:
— The fulfilment of an importance national objective such as poverty alleviation,
achievement of minimum standards in education, or;
— The programme has a regional or inter-State character or;
— The programme or scheme should be in the nature of a pace setter or
should relate to demonstration, survey or research

22
Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee are informed that around 80 per cent of the Plan
expenditure of the Ministry is utilised by Prasar Bharati and the balance
of 20 per cent, which may be around Rs. 100 crore worth of projects,
are utilised for the other units, in the Information and Film sectors.
From the figures furnished by Prasar Bharati, the Committee note that
out of a Direct Budgetary Support of Rs. 360 crore in 2002-2003,
Rs. 370 crore in 2003-2004, Rs. 422.1 crore in 2004-05, Rs. 445 crore in
2005-2006, Prasar Bharati has been able to spend Rs. 300.50 crore in
2003-2004, Rs. 189.86 crore in 2003-2004, Rs. 184.53 crore in 2004-2005
and Rs. 222.30 crore in 2005-2006. The Committee also observe that
the utilization of Plan funds by Prasar Bharati for the years 2003-2004,
2004-2005, 2005-2006 is quite low as compared to the allocation. Two
reasons were put forth by Prasar Bharati for the same. Firstly , large
projects have to obtain approval of the Ministry of Finance or the
Planning Commission for allocation of resources before they can start
and, secondly, because of a shortfall in the Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resources which is more than 50 per cent of the Plan outlay. The
Committee feel that large projects should necessarily be carefully-
planned, well in advance before they can be taken up for execution.
Similarly, a shortfall in the Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources in
Projects executed by Prasar Bharati is, undoubtedly , a management
problem. The Committee are of the firm opinion that Prasar Bharati
should evolve a sound system for making internal assessment and
taking timely corrective/remedial measures with a view to ensuring
achievement of targets and proper utilization of resources. The
Committee would like to be informed of the measures taken by Prasar
Bharati in the above context.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has stated that due to some innovative steps, it has
been able to augment its revenue earning from Rs. 717.02 crore (2004-
2005) to 1064.84 crore (2005-2006) which would ensure enhanced
allocation of IEBR for plan activities.
Besides, all the schemes are being reviewed on weekly and monthly
basis at Prasar Bharati and also by Secretary (I&B) to ensure maximum
utilisation of funds during annual Plan period. The schemes for the
North-East Special Package Phase-II have been approved by Cabinet
and schemes for the J&K Special package phase-II are also at the final
stage of approval.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]

23
Financial Independence
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Prasar Bharati Act envisages that Prasar Bharati shall
endeavour to augment its revenue earnings year after year, strengthen
its mechanism for resource mobilization and take effective steps for
optimally utilising the resources to progressively reduce dependence
on grants-in-aid from Central Government. The Committee’s
examination revealed that the net revenue earned by Prasar Bharati
during the years 2002-2006 was Rs. 587.25 crore, Rs. 567.95 crore,
Rs. 717.02 crore and Rs. 144.64 crore respectively whereas the grant-in-
aid received by Prasar Bharati for the years 2003-2006 amounted to
Rs. 1085.38 crore, Rs. 1096.71 crore and Rs. 1243.59 crore. The revenue
earnings of Prasar Bharati come from commercial activities relating to
advertisements, sports, films and new schemes floated for getting
programmes for Doordarshan National Network and from
miscellaneous activities relating to consultancy, leasing out infrastructure
and sale of CDs, VCDs etc. The Committee observe that the revenue
earnings of Prasar Bharati are approximately 50 per cent of the
Government funds given to Prasar Bharati in the form of grants-in-aid
therefore, they will have to earn an equal amount each year to be
independent of grant-in-aid from Central Government. The Committee
have been informed that out of the gross Rs. 1218.10 crore income of
Prasar Bharati for the year 2005-2006, the earnings from advertisements
in the market ranges somewhere between Rs. 600 to Rs. 700 crore out
of which Rs. 150-200 crore is earned from Government. The total
Television Advertisement Revenue in the country is of the range of
Rs. 5000 crore out of which Prasar Bharati has a share of 20 per cent
of the market. The Committee feel that having the infrastructure and
the sufficient skilled manpower which private channels do not possess,
Prasar Bharati can reasonably enhance their share in the advertisement
market from 20 per cent by adopting suitable marketing strategies.
They, therefore, urge upon Prasar Bharati to strive hard to take up the
challenge of being independent of Government resources and perform
for higher profits.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati Act emphasises on the Public Service Broadcaster
role of Prasar Bharati with the support of funds provided by the
Central Government after due appropriations made by Parliament.
The mandate given to Prasar Bharati as per Prasar Bharati Act is
to organize and conduct public broadcasting services to inform, educate
and entertain the public. As such the role of Prasar Bharati is different

24
from other private broadcasters and this organization cannot work
purely on commercial basis. The earning of commercial revenue is not
primary objective of the organization but is only incidental to its
activities. Besides, the social and public broadcasting role is higher in
comparison with it commercial activities.
However, it has been the endeavour of Prasar Bharati to augment
revenue earnings every year and reduce its dependence on the
Government support. In order to augment the commercial revenue
various steps which inter-alia includes the following are being taken:
1. Changing fixed point chart to include more popular
programme so as to attract more advertisement/commercial.
2. Devising new formats of programming as per the local needs
which have increased the listenership/viewership.
3. Revision and review of its rate card at regular intervals
keeping in view the competition existing in the market.
4. Exploring avenue for letting out its studios to private
producers and also educational broadcasters like universities
& colleges.
5. Review the rules for incorporating penal clause on
cancellation of sponsorship/spots to avoid loss of commercial
time & revenue.
6. Release of archival material in the market in the form of
Audio Cassettes/CDs and VCDs
These steps have resulted into quantum jump in revenue figures
for the year 2005-06. It is expected that Prasar Bharati would be able
to do away the Government assistance step by step.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Maintenance of Accounts
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee regrets to note that the Accounts of Prasar Bharati
are presently not being maintained in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by the Government for Central Autonomous Bodies. The
Committee recommends that Government procedures should be
followed and as assured by the Ministry during evidence, the accounts
should be maintained in the accrual system in a very short time. The
Committee desire that this should be implemented in the next Report
to be tabled in both the Houses.

25
Action Taken by the Government
The accounts of Prasar Bharati were being prepared in the approved
format for central Autonomous Bodies from 2000-01, but without
following the accrual system of accounting. From the year 2005-06, the
annual accounts have been prepared on accrual system of accounting.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
North-East Special Package-Doordarshan:
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee observed that the Phase-I of the NE Special Package
has utilized major component of the capital expenditure, however, the
Revenue (Software) component deserves much to be achieved. Out of
3756 episodes targeted for the year 2005-06, the Ministry has achieved
a total of 1123 episodes which is 30% of the total. The Committee
further observe that the Tenth Plan has an approved outlay of
Rs. 380.55 crore for the NE Special Package Phase-II which is yet to
be initiated because of the delay in approval from the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
Action Taken by the Government
Approval of Phase-II of NE Package in respect of All India Radio
at a cost of Rs. 143.32 crore has since been received in the last week
of May, 2006. AIR proposals approved under Ph-II include:
1. 19 new FM stations
2. Addl. channels with FM Tr. at Silchar (5 KW) & Gangtok
(10 KW)
3. DSNG/MSS terminals
4. Chinsura-1000 KW MW Tr. (Replacement)
5. Kavaratti-10 KW MW Tr. (Replacement of 1 KW)
6. 100 low power unmanned FM transmitters (100 W)
New sites are to be acquired for the 19 new FM stations & 10 KW
MW Transmitter proposed at Kavaratti with the help of the State
governments. Site surveys are being conducted and sites for some of
the locations like Bomdila, Changlang, Khonsa, Goalpara, Tuipang,
Chemphai, Udaipur & Nutan Bazar have been tentatively finalized &

26
demand notes for cost of sites are being got expedited from the State
governments.
Procurement of equipment has already been initiated &
specifications are under finalization for most of the equipment.
For the proposed 100 Watt FM transmitters, more than 100 locations
have been identified in consultation with the respective State
governments. Finalisation of locations is in progress.
Action Taken Note (Doordarshan)
The Budget under software special package for production of
programmes provided to all the Kendras of North-Eastern Region for
the financial year 2005-06 for commissioning of programmes and also
for in-house production and royalty has been fully utilized by the
Kendras.
Budget provided for the year 2006-07 under Software Special
Package is under the process of utilization by the Kendras of North-
Eastern Region.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
North-East Special Package-Doordarshan:
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee are of the opinion that a Special Package was
given to North-East to get faster results and achieve targets in a specific
time frame which in the normal course would have taken a much
longer period. But, after observing the pace of implementation of Phase-
I they feel that nothing special has been achieved through a special
package. The Committee are constrained to note that it has taken the
Ministry 4 years of the 10th Plan to get the approval for phase-II. The
Committee feel that the Ministry should be more sensitive to the
development of the North-East and project/schemes should be taken
up with greater zeal so as to complete them in time so that the
objectives set forth through special packages are fulfilled. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should see that
the Phase-II starts this very financial year and concrete results are
obtained by the year end.

27
Action Taken by the Government
Special Package (Ph.II) for improvement and expansion of
Doordarshan services in NE region and Island territories has been
approved by the Government in May, 2006. Hardware schemes for NE
region included in this package are under:
1. 2 NE channels (provision of uplinking facility)
2. 25000 DTH receive units with TV sets
3. HPT, Kokrajhar
4. Maint. Centres—2 no. (Passighat & Agartala)
5. DSNG units—4 no.
6. Aug. of OB & post production facilities
Action for implementation of the above schemes is in progress &
the package is expected to be fully implemented by 2008-09. Financial
sanction for all the schemes included in the package, including above
mentioned schemes, have been issued. Site for HPT, Kokrajhar has
been identified. Tenders for DTH receive units have been received &
are under technical evaluation. Tenders for 25000 TV sets and 4 DSNG
units have been invited.
Ph.-I of Special NE package was approved in Jan., 2002. All the
schemes, as under, approved as part of Ph.-I of Special package have
already been implemented:
(i) 160 Cable headends in uncovered villages of 8 NE States—
since completed.
(ii) Upgradation of 1 KW HPT’s (DD1) at Shillong, Imphal,
Aizawl, Itanagar & Kohima to 10 KW HPT’s—since
completed.
(iii) Earth stations at Shillong & Aizawl—since completed.
(iv) Satellite video phones—since completed.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Community Radio Stations—All India Radio
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The concept of Community Radio Stations has introduced as a
low power radio station in FM mode to be installed and run by local

28
communities and non-profit organizations such as universities, Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) for educational, cultural, and
economic development of the respective communities. The Committee
are of the opinion that a Community Radio Station could play an
important role in a community’s endeavour for its educational, cultural
and economic development thus ultimately improving the living
standard of that community. The growth and spread of Community
Radio Station in India is very limited and India is lagging far behind
as compared to other countries including many developing ones. The
growth of Community Radio Stations in India is restricted due to lack
of a comprehensive policy in this regard. The Committee are informed
that a proposal for allowing setting up of Community Radio Stations
by local Communities and non-profit organizations is under
consideration of a Group of Ministers (GoM) for quite some time now.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should make concerted
efforts to finalise a comprehensive policy regarding the spread of
Community Radio Stations in such a manner that the concept is
adopted by small and the larger communities all over India and the
masses are benefited by it. The Committee are also of the opinion that
the Government should consider extending financial and technical
assistance under this scheme to those communities which are situated
in backward and remote areas of the nation.
Action Taken by the Government
In so far as the Grant of Permission for Community radio
broadcasting to ‘Non Profit’ organizations like Universities, Registered
Societies of NGOs and other reputed civil society organizations is
concerned, the Group of Ministers (GoM) considered the proposal on
20th September 2006. The recommendations of the GoM have been
incorporated in the proposal submitted to the Cabinet and the Cabinet
has considered the proposal on 16th November 2006 and has approved
the proposal for the Grant of Permission for Community radio
broadcasting to ‘Non-profit’ organizations viz. Civil Society & Voluntary
organizations, State Agricultural Universities, Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutions, Krishi Vigyan Kendras,
Registered Societies and Autonomous bodies and Public Trusts
registered under Societies Act or any other such act relevant for the
purpose in addition to the educational institutions. The guidelines for
the same have been placed on Ministry’s website and are also annexed.
2. As far as the Committee’s opinion regarding the Government to
consider extending financial and technical assistance to those
communities that are situated in backward and remote areas of the

29
nation is concerned, it may be stated here that the Government does
not have such a proposal. The community radio stations will be purely
self financed and supported by the institutions/organizations desirous
to set up and operate these stations. The responsibility of the Ministry
of Information & Broadcasting shall be limited to grant of permission
to the eligible institutions/organizations for setting up community radio
stations.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Policy Guidelines for setting up Community
Radio Stations in India
Foreword
In December 2002, the Government of India approved a policy for
the grant of licenses for setting up of Community Radio Stations to
well established educational institutions including IITs/IIMs.
The matter has been reconsidered and the Government has now
decided to broad base the policy by bringing ‘Non-profit’ organisations
like civil society and voluntary organisations etc. under its ambit in
order jot allow greater participation by the civil society on issues
relating to development & social change. The detailed policy guidelines
in this regard is given below:
1. Basic Principles
An organisation desirous of operating a Community Radio Station
(CRS) must be able to satisfy and adhere to the following principles:
(a) It should be explicitly constituted as a ‘non-profit’
organisation and should have a proven record of at least
three years of service to the local community.
(b) The CRS to be operated by it should be designed to serve
a specific well-defined local community.
(c) It should have an ownership and management structure
that is reflective of the community that the CRS seeks to
serve.
(d) Programmes for broadcast should be relevant to the
educational, developmental, social and cultural needs of the
community.

30
(e) It must be a Legal Entity  i.e. it should be registered (under
the registration of Societies Act or any other such act
relevant to the purpose).
2. Eligibility Criteria
(i) The following types of organisations shall be eligible to
apply for Community Radio licences:
(a) Community based organisations, which satisfy the basic
principles listed at para 1 above. These would include
civil society and voluntary organisations, State
Agriculture Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutions, Krishi
Vigyan Kendras, Registered Societies and Autonomous
Bodies and Public Trusts registered under Societies Act
or any other such act relevant for the purpose.
Registration at the time of application should at least
be three years old.
(b) Educational institutions
(ii) The following shall not be eligible to run a CRS:
(a) Individuals;
(b) Political Parties and their affiliate organisations;
[including students, women’s, trade unions and such
other wings affiliated to these parties.]
(c) Organisations operating with a motive to earn profit;
(d) Organisations expressly banned by the Union and State
Governments.
3. Selection Process & Processing of the applications
(a) Applications shall be invited by the Ministry of I&B once
every year through a national advertisement for
establishment of Community Radio Stations. However,
eligible organisations and educational institutions can apply
during the intervening period between the two
advertisements also. The applicants shall be required to
apply in the prescribed application form along with a
processing fee of Rs. 2500/-and the applications shall be
processed in the following manner:
(i) Universities, Deemed Universities and Government run
educational institutions will have a single window
clearance by putting up cases before an inter-ministerial

31
committee chaired by Secretary (I&B) for approval. No
separate clearance from MHA & MHRD shall be
necessary. Once the WPC Wing of the Ministry of
Communication & IT earmarks a frequency at the place
requested by the institution, a Letter of Intent (LoI) shall
be issued.
(ii) In case of all other applicants, including private
educational institutions, LoI shall be issued subject to
receiving clearance from Ministries of Home Affairs,
Defence & HRD (in case of private educational
institutions) and frequency allocation by WPC wing of
Ministry of Communication & IT.
(b) A time schedule for obtaining clearances as below shall be
prescribed:
(i) Within one month of receipt of the application in the
prescribed from, the Ministry of I&B shall process the
application and either communicate to the applicant
deficiencies, if any, or will send the copies of the
application to the other Ministries for clearance as
prescribed in para 3(a)(i) and 3(a)(ii) above, as the case
may be.
(ii) The Ministries concerned shall communicate their
clearance within three months of receipt of the
application. However, in the event of the failure of the
concerned Ministry to grant the clearance within the
stipulated period of three months, the case shall be
referred to the Committee constituted under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (I&B) for a decision for issue
of LoI.
(iii) In the event of more than one applicant for a single
frequency at a given place, the successful applicant will
be selected for issue of LOI from amongst the applicants
by the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (I&B) on the basis of their standing in the
community , the commitment shown, the objectives
enunciated and resources likely to be mobilized by the
applicant organisation as well as its credentials and
number of years of community service rendered by the
organisation.
(iv) Within one month of the issue of the Letter of Intent
(LoI) the eligible applicant will be required to apply , in

32
the prescribed format and with the requisite fee, to the
WPC Wing of the Ministry of Communication & IT,
Sanchar Bhawan, New Delhi for frequency allocation &
SACFA clearance.
(v) A time frame of six months from the date of application
is prescribed for issue of SACFA clearance. In the event
of non-receipt of such clearance from the Ministry of
Communication & IT within the stipulated period of
six months, the case will be referred to the Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (I&B)
for a decision.
(vi) On receipt of SACFA clearance (a copy of which shall
be submitted by the applicant), the LoI holder shall
furnish a bank guarantee in the prescribed format for a
sum of Rs. 25,000/-. Thereupon, the LoI holder will be
invited to sign a Grant of Permission Agreement (GoPA)
by Ministry of I&B, which will enable him to seek
Wireless Operating License (WOL) from the WPC Wing
of the Ministry of Communication & IT. The Community
Radio Station can be made operational only after the
receipt of WOL from the Ministry of Communication &
IT.
(vii) Within three months of receipt of all clearances i.e.
signing of GOPA, the Permission Holder shall set up
the Community Radio Station and shall intimate the
date of commissioning of the Community Radio Station
to the Ministry of I&B.
(viii) Failure to comply with time schedule prescribed above
shall make the LoI-GoPA holder liable for cancellation
of its LoI/GoPA and forfeiture of the Bank Guarantee.
4. Grant of Permission—Agreement conditions
(i) The Grant of Permission Agreement period shall be for five
years.
(ii) The Grant of Permission Agreement and the Permission
letter will be non-transferable.
(iii) No permission fee shall be levied on the Permission Holder.
However, the Permission Holder will be required to pay
the spectrum usage fee to WPC wing of Ministry of
Communication & IT.

33
(iv) In case the Permission Holder does not commence his
broadcasting operations within three months of the receipt
of all clearances or shuts down broadcasting activity for
more than 3 months after commencement of operation, its
Permission is liable to be cancelled and the frequency
allotted to the next eligible applicant.
(v) An applicant/organisation shall not be granted more than
one Permission for CRS operation at one or more places.
(vi) The LOI Holder shall furnish a bank guarantee for a sum
of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees twenty five thousand) only to ensure
timely performance of the Permission Agreement.
(vii) If the Permission Holder fails to commission service within
the stipulated period, he shall forfeit the amount of bank
guarantee to the Government and the Government would
be free to cancel the Permission issued to him.
5. Content regulation & monitoring
(i) The programmes should be of immediate relevance to the
community. The emphasis should be on developmental,
agricultural, health, educational, environmental, social
welfare, community development and cultural programmes.
The programming should reflect the special interests and
needs of the local community.
(ii) At least 50% of content shall be generated with the
participation of the local community, for which the station
has been set up.
(iii) Programmes should preferably be in the local language and
dialect(s).
(iv) The Permission Holder shall have to adhere to the provisions
of the Programme and Advertising Code as prescribed for
All India Radio.
(v) The Permission Holder shall preserve all programmes
broadcast by the CRS for three months from the date of
broadcast.
(vi) The Permission Holder shall not broadcast any programmes,
which relate to news and current affairs and are otherwise
political in nature.
(vii) The Permission Holder shall ensure that nothing is included
in the programmes broadcast which:

34
a. Offends against goods taste or decency;
b. Contains criticism of friendly countries;
c. Contains attack on religions or communities or visuals
or words contemptuous of religious groups or which
either promote or result in promoting communal
discontent or disharmony;
d. Contains anything obscene, defamatory , deliberate, false
and suggestive innuendoes and half truths;
e. Is likely to encourage or incite violence or contains
anything against maintenance of law and order or which
promote-anti-national attitudes;
f. Contains anything amounting to contempt of court or
anything affecting the integrity of the Nation;
g. Contains aspersions against the dignity of the President/
Vice President and the Judiciary;
h. Criticises, maligns or slanders any individual in person
or certain groups, segments of social, public and moral
life of the country;
i. Encourages superstition or blind belief;
j. Denigrates women;
k. Denigrates children.
l. May present/depict/suggest as desirable the use of
drugs including alcohol, narcotics and tobacco or may
stereotype, incite, vilify or perpetuate hatred against or
attempt to demean any person or group on the basis of
ethnicity, nationality, race, gender, sexual preference,
religion, age or physical or mental disability.
(viii) The Permission Holder shall ensure that due care is taken
with respect to religious programmes with a view to avoid:
(a) Exploitation of religious susceptibilities; and
(b) Committing offence to the religious views and beliefs
of those belonging to a particular religion or religious
denomination.
6. Imposition of penalty/revocation of Permission Agreement
(i) In case there is any violation of conditions cited in 5(i) to
5(viii), Government may suo motto or on basis of complaints

35
take cognisance and place the matter before the Inter-
ministerial Committees on Programme and Advertising
Codes for recommending appropriate penalties. On the
recommendation of the Committee a decision to impose
penalties shall be taken. However, before the imposition of
a penalty the Permission Holder shall be given an
opportunity to represent its case.
(ii) The penalty shall comprise of:
(a) Temporary suspension of Permission for operating the
CRS for a period upto one month in the case of the
first violation.
(b) Temporary suspension of Permission for operating the
CRS for a period upto three months in the case of the
second violation depending on the gravity of violation.
(c) Revocation of the Permission for any subsequent
violation. Besides, the Permission Holder and its
principal members shall be liable for all actions under
IPC, CrPC and other laws.
(iii) In case of revocation of Permission, the Permission Holder
will not be eligible to apply directly or indirectly for a fresh
permission in future for a period of five years.
“Provided the penalty imposed as per above provision shall
be without prejudice to any penal action under applicable
laws including the Indian Telegraph Act 1885 and Indian
Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933, as modified from time to
time.”
(iv) In the event of suspension of permission as mentioned in
para 6 (ii) (a) & (b), the permission holder will continue to
discharge its obligations under the Grant of Permission
Agreement during the suspension period also.
7. Transmitter Power and Range
(i) CRS shall be expected to cover a range of 5-10 km. For
this, a transmitter having maximum Effective Radiated
Power (ERP) of 100 W would be adequate. However, in
case of a proven need where the applicant organisation is
able to establish that it needs to serve a larger area or the
terrain so warrants, higher transmitter wattage with
maximum ERP upto 250 Watts can be considered on a case-
to-case basis, subject to availability of frequency and such

36
other clearances as necessary from the Ministry of
Communication & IT. Requests for higher transmitter power
above 100 Watts and upto 250 Watts shall also be subject to
approval by the Committee constituted under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting.
(ii) The maximum height of antenna permitted above the
ground for the CRS shall not exceed 30 meters. However,
minimum height of Antenna above ground should be at
least 15 meters to prevent possibility of biological hazards
of RF radiation.
(iii) Universities, Deemed Universities and other educational
institutions shall be permitted to locate their transmitters
and antennae only within their main campuses
(iv) For NGOs and others, the transmitter and antenna shall be
located within the geographical area of the community they
seek to serve. The geographical area (including the names
of villages/institution etc.) should be clearly spelt out along
with the location of the transmitter and antenna in the
application form.
8. Funding & Sustenance
(i) Applicants will be eligible to seek funding from multilateral
aid agencies. Applicants seeking foreign funds for setting
up the CRS will have to obtain FCRA clearance under
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 1976.
(ii) T ransmission of sponsored programmes shall not be
permitted except programmes sponsored by Central & State
Governments and other organisations to broadcast public
interest information. In addition, limited advertising and
announcements relating to local events, local businesses and
services and employment opportunities shall be allowed.
The maximum duration of such limited advertising will be
restricted to 5 (Five) minutes per hour of broadcast.
(iii) Revenue generated from advertisement and announcements
as per Para 8 (ii) shall be utilized only for the operational
expenses and capital expenditure of the CRS. After meeting
the full financial needs of the CRS, surplus may, with prior
written permission of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting, be ploughed into the primary activity of the
organization i.e.  for education in case of educational
institutions and for furthering the primary objectives for
which the NGO concerned was established.

37
9. Other Terms & Conditions
(i) The basic objective of the Community Radio broadcasting
would be to serve the cause of the community in the service
area of the Permission Holder by involving members of the
community in the broadcast of their programmes. For this
purpose community shall mean people living in the zone
of the coverage of the broadcasting service of the Permission
Holder. Each applicant will have to specify the geographical
community or the community of interest it wants to cover.
The Permission Holder shall provide the services of his CRS
on free-to-air basis.
(ii) Tho ugh the Permission Holder will operate the service under
these guidelines and as per the terms and conditions of the
Grant of Permission Agreement signed, the permission shall
be subject to the condition that as and when any regulatory
authority to regulate and monitor the broadcast services in
the country is constituted, the Permission Holder will adhere
to the norms, rules and regulations prescribed by such
authority from time to time.
(iii) The Permission Holder shall provide such information to
the Government on such intervals, as may be required. In
this connection, the Permission Holder is required to
preserve recording of programmes broadcast during the
previous three months failing which Permission Agreement
is liable to be revoked.
(iv) The Government or its authorized representative shall have
the right to inspect the broadcast facilities of the Permission
Holder and collect such information as considered necessary
in public and community interest.
(v) The Government reserves the right to take over the entire
services and networks of the Permission Holder or revoke/
terminate/suspend the Permission in the interest of national
security or in the event of national emergency/war or low
intensity conflict or under similar type of situations.
(vi) All foreign personnel likely to be deployed by way of
appointment, contract, consultancy etc. by the Permission
Holder for installation, maintenance and operation of the
Permission Holder’s services shall be required to obtain prior
security clearance from Government of India.

38
(vii) The Government reserves the right to modify, at any time,
the terms and conditions if it is necessary to do so, in
public interest or for the proper conduct of broadcasting or
for security considerations.
(viii) Notwithstanding anything contained anywhere else in the
Grant of Permission Agreement, the Government shall have
the power to direct the Permission Holder to broadcast any
special message as may be considered desirable to meet
any contingency arising out of natural emergency, or public
interest or natural disaster and the like, and the Permission
Holder shall be obliged to comply with such directions.
(ix) The Permission Holder shall be required to submit their
audited annual accounts to the Government in respect of
the organization/division running the CRS. The accounts
shall clearly show the income and expenditure incurred and
the Assets and Liabilities in respect of the CRS.
(x) A Permission Agreement will be subject to such other
conditions as may be determined by the Government.
(xi) The Government shall make special arrangements for
monitoring and enforcement of the ceiling on advertisements,
particularly in those areas where private FM radio stations
have been granted licenses.
J&K Special Package
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee observe that in the examination of DFG for
2004-05 the Committee were informed that the Kargil 200 KW 14 MW
Tr. Project which was targeted to be completed in 2003-04 would be
completed in 2004-05. The Committee were also informed that five
technically ready projects with 1 KW MW transmitters at Diskit, Drass,
Nyoma, Radum and Tiesuru are awaiting commissioning for want of
operational and maintenance staff. In their reply on low utilisation of
funds under Revenue (Misc.) head 2005-06 the Ministry stated that the
Kargil project is technically ready but there is a delay in commissioning
of the project and hence there was no expenditure in the operation &
maintenance. The shortage of manpower, the Ministry stated, is there
because of a ban on recruitment against newly created posts. In fact,
the shortage of manpower is the principal reason for non-
commissioning of almost all of the technically ready projects of both
AIR and Doordarshan. The Committee are of the opinion that apart

39
from the sizeable amount of money that have been spent and are not
being put to use because of the non-commissioning of projects even
after 2-3 years of their being technically ready, not only is the very
purpose of providing a special package to AIR & Doordarshan for
J&K defeated but it is also making the equipment unserviceable and
obsolete with each passing year. In the opinion of the Committee, this
is a clear case of poor co-ordination among the two Ministries (Finance
& Personnel) of the Government of account of which the Ministry of
I&B is made to suffer. The Committee are of the view that if additional
allocation of funds can be given under a J&K Special (Plan), special
sanction for the execution and maintenance of the assets created from
these special funds by way of sanction of posts and allowing the
Ministry to recruit manpower should also be given simultaneously .
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make
special efforts to convince the Ministries of Finance and Personnel of
the urgency of removal of the ban on recruitment in J&K as a special
case. In the meantime, Prasar Bharati may explore the idea of hiring
defence personnel on deputation and deploying them alongwith
redeployed staff of Prasar Bharati on attractive deputation terms
exclusive to J&K so that the projects may be operationalised at the
earliest for the benefit of local people.
Action Taken by the Government (All India Radio)
Approval of the Ministry for continuation of posts sanctioned for
operation & maintenance of Projects under J&K Special Package upto
February, 2007 has been conveyed to AIR.
However, matter regarding manpower requirements of Prasar
Bharati is under consideration of GoM, whose recommendations are
awaited.
In the meantime the 200 KW MW Transmitter at Kargil and 1 KW
MW Transmitters at Drass at Tiesuru have been partially and
provisionally commissioned w.e.f. 1st September, 2006 by arranging staff
on tour and transfer. In this way 9 out of 12 projects included in J&K
Special package have since been operationalised at
1. Kathua - 10 KW FM TR. (Replacement of 6 KW)
2. Srinagar - 300 KW MW Tr. (Replacement of 200 KW)
3. Khalsi - 1 KW MW Tr. (Relay)
4. Kupwara - 20 KW MW Tr. (Relay)

40
5. Naushera - 20 KW MW Tr. (Relay)
6. Rajauri - 10 KW FM Tr. (Relay)
7. Drass - 1 KW MW Tr. (Relay)
8. Tiesuru - KW MW Tr. (Relay)
9. Kargil - 200 KW MW Tr.
Three projects namely, Relay centres with 1 KW MW Trs. at Diskit,
Nyoma and Paduma are technically ready.
Action Taken Note (Doordarshan)
362 (356+6) posts were sanctioned for operation & maintenance of
projects approved under J&K Special Plan. All the projects under J&K
Special Plan have since been commissioned. Scheme of Rajouri Studio
was approved later, Installation of Rajouri Studio has been completed
and is technically ready.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph Nos. 10 & 11 of Chapter-I
New Technologies like Internet Radio Broadcasting, Digital
Broadcasting
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee are informed that ‘in-principle approval’ of Planning
Commission for new technologies like Internet Radio Broadcasting,
Digital Broadcasting etc. of 10th Plan is yet to be received by the
Ministry and hence the schemes have not yet started. The Committee
are of the opinion that these technologies may be advantageous to the
listeners of AIR as they provide multiple options for tuning into AIR
programmes alongwith many other add-on services which seem
promising. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
may take up the matter with Planning Commission for an early
approval for this scheme.
Action Taken Report (All India Radio)
Planning Commission is insisting for tying up of funds for ‘in-
principle approval’. Since no fund has been earmarked in either DBS

41
or IEBR of 2006-07, the AIR Schemes like Digital Broadcasting, etc. are
proposed to be deferred to 11th Five Year Plan.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter-I
Satellite Radio Service by AIR
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
Various digital broadcast technologies have been developed across
the world for satellite broadcasting. The Committee have been informed
that introduction of this technology will give convergence benefits
including mobile listeners with multiple, multi-media, choice. The
Committee are of the opinion that a ‘Satellite Radio Service’ of AIR
will make available all Channels of AIR from a single platform, more
effectively and with enhanced quality alternative to its listeners. Further,
the reach of such service could be made global to provide one more
option for AIR to reach out to immigrant Indians population overseas.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should consider
this suggestion and if found feasible, after examining all implications
including security aspects, launch such service at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
All India Radio has already launch 20 Radio Channels in different
regional languages from various State capitals which are available
countrywide through the Ku band DTH platform (DD Direct +) of
Prasar Bharati, benefiting the listeners all over India. Besides, an
Experimental Satellite Digital Multimedia Broadcasting is proposed in
the 11th Five Year Plan, which is under finalisation.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
(iii) Implementation of Conditional Access System (CAS)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee had in the past expressed their dissatisfaction over
the manner of implementation of the Conditional Access System (CAS)
in the country. The regret to observe that CAS has now been introduced

42
in Chennai only and its implementation in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata
has been pending due to various reasons. The matter is also presently
pending in the Delhi high Court. The Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting have admitted that CAS still has relevance in terms of
affordability of consumers in spite of the fact that other alternative
technological modes such as DTH, IPTV , Broadband and web-casting
etc. are available as choices to the consumers in the broadcasting sector.
According to them, CAS would remain economically viable for larger
sections of consumers in comparison to other technological modes.
Considering these facts, the Committee are of the opinion that the
Ministry should come out with a clear-cut-policy on the issue so that
the customers are not denied of this viable broadcasting option. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry should undertake a study of
the functioning of CAS in developed South-East Asian Countries and
suitably use the feedback in evolving the policy. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding Conditional Access System (CAS), it may be mentioned
that after intensive consultation with stakeholders and examination of
the TRAI’s recommendations and in pursuance of Hon’ble High Court
of Delhi order dated 20.7.2007, the Government has issued a notification
on 31.7.2006 for implementing CAS in the areas notified vide notification
dated 10.7.2003. The Government has also framed rules for smooth
implementation of CAS, which have also been notified on 31.7.2006.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Indian Institute of Mass Communication
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee are informed that the faculty of the Indian Institute
of Mass Communication (IIMC) consists of academicians, researchers
and practicing media professionals who have done significant work in
their fields of specialization. It undertakes joint research projects and
organizes short-term courses to meet specific needs of the Industry,
Government & Public Sector organizations. The Committee are further
informed that due to the limited manpower availability owing to
vacancies in Research Department, the IIMC is pre-occupied with
sponsored projects (work) which generates more income and resources
with the result that the Institutes’ own projects are delayed. Further,
it has been submitted that a post of Professor in the Research

43
Department is lying vacant and a proposal has been referred to the
Ministry under Annual Direct Recruitment Plan (ADRP), 2004 for
approval of the Screening Committee. Considering the fact that the
IIMC is a centre of excellence in the field of communication, teaching,
training and research and it aims to be a world class institute, the
Committee are of the considered opinion that the Institute must be
provided with the necessary infrastructure to carry out their assigned
jobs in an effective manner.
Action Taken by the Government
The Screening Committee for Group ‘A’ posts has approved one
post each of Professor and Associate Professor in IIMC for filling up
under ADRP 2004. IIMC has been asked by the Ministry to take
appropriate action for filling up the posts. Apart from this, action for
filling up the post of Director, IIMC has already been initiated. The
post has been advertised and is likely to be filled shortly.
In an effort to improve the infrastructure at IIMC, a residence for
the Director, IIMC, and additional hostels for girls have been
constructed during 10th Plan, under the scheme “Building & Housing
Project”.
Under the scheme ‘Modernisation and expansion of facilities for
electronic/print/radio & TV Journalism’ the Institute upgraded its
existing facilities and procured latest computer/equipment necessary
for training purposes, during the 10th Plan. IIMC started its own FM
Radio Station ‘Apna Radio’ to impart specialized training. A Digital
Van is also being procured to give practical experience to the students
in the field.
In its 11th Plan proposal the Institute has proposed to convert its
PG Diploma programmes into a Master’s Degree programme in
Journalism and Advertising & Public Relations. Since media education
needs comprehensive and continuous updating with the rapid changes
in the print and electronic media industries, IIMC plans to update its
labs, studios, audio/video facilities, equipment etc. and to continue
persuasion of collaboration for increasing coverage in mass
communication education. Besides, infrastructure like additional
classrooms, additional library facilities and also hostel facilities are to
be developed further. For this, Institute has proposed an outlay of
Rs. 1300 lakhs.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]

44
Press Council of India (PCI)
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee learn that the Press Council was established in
1978 under an Act of Parliament for the purpose of preserving the
freedom of the Press and maintaining and improving the standard of
Newspapers and News Agencies in the country. The Committee are
informed that the advisories issued by PCI carry only moral force and
are not enforceable in a Court of Law. The Committee are of the
opinion that with the growing commercialization of print media, there
may be greater violations of the Act in subjects relating to surrogate
advertisements, obscene pictures/materials, etc. Advisories carrying only
moral force may not be effective in regulating violations Therefore,
there is an urgent need to amend the PCI Act, 1978 to provide PCI
with more regulatory powers for maintaining sound ethical and moral
standards of journalism thus protecting the freedom of Press. The
Committee feel the need of wider consultations among the interested
parties to evolve consensus on important issues relating to media to
further strengthen it.
Action Taken by the Government
The grant of additional powers to PCI requires amendment to the
Press Council Act, 1978. PCI has proposed certain amendments to the
Act. The proposed amendments to the Act and other proposals for
grant of additional powers to PCI are being examined in the Ministry.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I
Setting up of MOMI
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee note with dismay that there has been consistently
negligible expenditure under this scheme during first four years of
tenth plan, as a result of which the MOMI is still on papers and an
agreement is yet to be signed between the Films Division and the
National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) for the construction
of MOMI. The Ministry have submitted that the vetting of draft

45
agreement by the Ministry of Law took considerable time. However,
the Committee are not satisfied with the progress made by the Ministry
in this project so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should take up this project with priority and complete it at
the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between FD and
NBCC. NBCC has been awarded contract for preparing Detailed Project
Report (DPR) for this project. In this connection it has submitted a
concept paper which has been prepared on the basis of discussion
held under the chairmanship of Secretary, (I&B). NBCC will be
submitting the DPR within 90 days of the concept paper being
approved and the first installment of the DPR fees is released to them.
Thus there has been progress in the implementation of MOMI.
The recommendation of the Committee has also been noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]

46
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
-Nil-

47
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Historic speeches of prominent leaders, memorable contributions
of great musicians, singers etc. have immense value. The Committee’s
examination has, however, revealed that due to paucity of funds, the
digitalisation of these archival records is not taking place in the place
it is desired. The Committee strongly feel that such valuable possessions
should be digitalized without any further delay and the Ministry should
make the funds available for its speedy digitalisation. The Committee
would like to be kept informed of the progress made on this count.
Action Taken by the Government
Digitalisation of the holdings in Doordarshan has already been
started from 2004, but it is not being carried out at the optimum pace.
Required funds have been projected in the 11th Plan. However, it may
take three years for the funds to reach the Archives for procuring
necessary equipments for establishing professional and digitised
Archives.
All India Radio has achieved a major goal by digitising its analog
archives of 43,000 tapes collected up to November, 2001 and the project
was over on 31 January, 2005. All the recordings have been converted
into digital format with proper data entry. However, approximately
10,000 tapes collected in the archives from November, 200 till date are
yet to be digitised. For this purpose a project has already been
approved by CEO/Director General, All India Radio and allocation of
funds is under examination.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I

48
Expansion of FM Services
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that out of a total outlay of Rs. 328 crore for
expansion of FM Services of All India Radio (AIR) and total allocation
of Rs. 154.51 crore from 2002-03 to 2005-06, only an amount of
Rs. 22.12 crore had been spent. The Committee are informed that out
of 51 Nos. of FM transmitters targeted for 2005-06 ( viz. 33 Nos. 10 KW
FM, 6 Nos. 20 KW FM, 4 Nos. 5 KW and 8 Nos. of 1 KW FM
transmitters) 8 Nos. of 1 KW FM transmitters have been operationalised
and rest will be shifted to next year ( i.e. 2006-07). On a closer
examination of the date provided by the Ministry during 2003-04 and
2005-06 the Committee find that some these transmitters ( i.e. Banswara,
Alwar, Chittorgarh, Kurukshetra, Surat, Kochi & Jorhat) were on the
original physical target list for 2003-04 ( see Annexure-IV) and some
(i.e. Nagpur, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Sholapur, Vijayawada, Jalandhar,
Patna, Bikaner, Ranchi & Trinulveli ( see Annexures-V and VI) were on
the original physical target list for 2004-05. Targets are shifted repeatedly
over the years. The expenditure in 2002-03 has been 7.27%, in 2003-04
was 14.26%, in 2004-05, 15.2% and in 2005-06, 13.69%. The Ministry
owe an explanation on these perceptible shortcomings resulting not
only in low expenditure ratio under this scheme but also denying the
benefits to the people. The Committee’s examination further revealed
that in several cases, where approvals and the funds had been available,
the implementation process was slow. All these, clearly show the totally
unsatisfactory progress in the expansion of FM services of AIR which
is a matter of great concern to the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should thoroughly look into
the reasons for the delay and fix responsibility for the same.
Action Taken by the Government (All India Radio)
Targets which have been shifted from the previous years are mainly
10 KW FM Transmitter projects. This has resulted due to the delay in
procurement of these transmitters. After finalizing the tenders, the
purchase proposal for procurement of 33 Nos. of 10 KW FM
Transmitters was sent to the Ministry for clearance in September, 2005.
After detailed examination procurement of 28 transmitters out of
33 has been approved by the Ministry on 09.10.2006.
6 Nos. of 20 KW FM Transmitter projects included as targets during
2005-06 were shifted to 2006-07 due to delay in procurement of these
transmitters. The purchase order for these transmitters was placed on

49
M/s Nautel in September, 2005 after receiving DG’s approval. The
Delivery period was due upto 15.01.06, the firm offered their transmitter
for inspection at their works in Nova Scotia, Canada in November,
2005. The factory acceptance test was an essential condition for the
acceptance of Transmitters. Factory inspection test of 20 KW FM
Transmitters has been conducted from 23.08.2006 to 2.09.2006 and the
transmitter consignments are expected to arrive by November, 2006.
Further 4 Nos. of 5 KW FM Transmitters have since been procured.
3 are already installed at Kurseong, Baripada & Hyderabad and the
remaining one will be installed at Oras after building is ready in the
ongoing financial year.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter-I
National Press Centre (NPC)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) had expressed concern over the delay in the setting up of
the National Press Centre having state of the art facilities at New
Delhi. On an assurance by the representatives of the Ministry during
evidence to the effect that the project would be commissioned on time,
the Committee had desired that the funds earmarked for the year be
utilized for the Press Centre. While considering the Action Taken by
the Ministry, the committee were not satisfied with the progress and
therefore, impressed upon the Department to complete the project with
utmost urgency. The Committee have now been informed that an MoU
has been signed with NBCC on 16th February 2006 for the construction
of the National Media Centre at New Delhi stating that the project
should be executed in a time bound manner, and that the building
handed over duly furnished in “Ready to occupy conditions” to PIB
within 24 months which shall start from the date of approval of design/
drawings from statutory authorities, release of initial deposit and
handing over of land for construction. The Committee are further
informed that the approval of designs/drawings from statutory
authorities is still pending. The Committee’s examination has, in fact,
revealed that the work is still going on at a snail’s pace. They desired
that necessary steps should be taken with a view to ensuring
completion of the project within the stipulated two years.

50
Action Taken by the Government
The work on the project has not taken off for want of necessary
clearances from Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC), New Delhi
Municipal Council (NDMC) and Ministry of Urban Development
(MoUD). Secretary, I&B, has written to Secretary, Urban Development,
on 18th April, 2006 and again on 2nd August, 2006 requesting him to
instruct the CPWD to present the revised urban form proposal at the
earliest to DUAC, so that DUAC can clear the same and Ministry of
I&B can then request the NDMC to pass the building plan proposal
which is already with them. However despite follow up, the response
of the MoUD is still awaited.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph Nos. 20 & 21 of Chapter-I
Children’s Film Society of India
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that expenditure under “Film Production”
scheme has been consistently low during this plan period. This scheme
had an allocation of Rs. 352.00 lakh out of Rs. 519.40 lakhs for CFSI
which is more than 60% of CFSI’s total Budget for the year 2005-06.
The target set for production of feature films was five and two for
short films  in this year (2005-06). As against this, two feature films
and two short films were completed in the year. Similarly in the
dubbing of films against a target of fourteen versions only four versions
were completed and out of three films that were to be purchased only
one was purchased. The Committee further note that during the four
years of the Xth Plan period 2002-2006, whereas the target for
production was five feature films per year and two short films per
year only ten feature films and eight short films were completed. The
Committee are informed that the main reason for under utilization
has been on-receipt of suitable film proposals/synopsis and scripts
which consequently resulted in a lesser number of films approved by
the Script Committee. The dubbing was less because of non-availability
of Indu Sound Stock. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies to a
similar recommendation of this Committee while considering the
Demands for Grants (2005-06) had stated that the Chairperson has
appealed to the Film Writers Association for providing necessary

51
publicity and support. The CFSI had also written to eminent film
makers and General Body of CFSI had also been requested to explore
the possibility of having films made especially in their regional
languages and forwarded to the Society. The Committee feel that efforts
of the Society in this direction are not enough and it has not been
able to attract good scripts. There is no dearth of talent in the field of
creative writing considering the talents available within the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Society should give
wide publicity to its requirements for scripts, organize competition to
attract budding talents, tie up with the Universities/Institutes of
excellence and provide scholarship in the field of creative writing.
Action Taken by the Government
Recommendation has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 27 of Chapter-I

52
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Restructuring of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee have been informed that Prasar Bharati has
liabilities to the tune of Rs. 2978 crore as on 1st April, 2006 with an
annual accruing interest on these liabilities. The liabilities of Prasar
Bharati have come through loans taken by Prasar Bharati, Space
Segment Charges and Spectrum Charges. The Committee are informed
that Prasar Bharati cannot go into joint venture and also cannot borrow
from the market to pay off these loans. The earnings of Prasar Bharati
are so meagre that projects suffer due to insufficient funds. The only
way to get rid of the liabilities could be through a write off these
loans by Central Government or through enhanced earnings. The
Committee feel that capital restructuring is step in the right direction.
In this connection, the Committee are informed that a Committee
constituted by Government on the subject has submitted their Report
which is presently stated to be under consideration of the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to consider
the report of the Committee on restructuring of Prasar Bharati and
take necessary follow-up measures with a view to enabling Prasar
Bharati to meet their twin objectives of social obligation as well as
financial independence in an effective manner in the prevailing
competitive market environment.
Action Taken by the Government
The report of the Committee is currently before the Group of
Ministers constituted to look into the problems of Prasar Bharati.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee desire that while undertaking the restructuring
exercise of Prasar Bharati, the career prospects of its employees, who
have been serving the creative urge of the country over several decades
should be duly taken care of. The Committee would like to be informed
of the action taken in the matter.

53
Action Taken by the Government
A GOM (Group of Ministers) has been constituted to consider
various issues pertaining to functioning of the Prasar Bharati including
service conditions and financial package for the employees for joining
Prasar Bharati. This also covers the proposals for formulating service
conditions with higher financial incentives to all the employees or
consider the suggestions of the Prasar Bharati that the pay, service/
allowances and other service conditions of the employees of Prasar
Bharati may be considered on the pattern of Central PSUs like MTNL,
BSNL or any other comparable organizations.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Digitalisation of Archives
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee are aware that Doordarshan as well as All India
Radio have huge amount of records of archival value which form a
part of our national heritage. Their attention has been drawn to reports
of pilferage of this valuable possession thereby making it a permanent
loss to Prasar Bharati and also to the nation. The Committee cannot
but express their serious concern over this. They , therefore, recommend
that such cases should be thoroughly investigated and action taken
against the culprits. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
There is no case of pilferage from Central Archives, Doordarshan.
Adequate measures have been already taken to protect the holding
and only authorized persons are allowed to have access and work on
the holdings within the premises of the Archives. A close watch and
vigil is being kept on the work flow.
All India Radio is having its Central Archives in Delhi consisting
of 47,000 audio tapes, which form a part of our national heritage. All
India Radio is ensuring all steps to preserve these valuable recordings
for posterity and all the tapes are kept in 24 hours air conditioned
library with norms at par with international specifications. As far as
the reported loss of recordings in which one valuable recording was
found missing in November, 2004, the Vigilance Section of DG: AIR
has initiated an enquiry into it and the matter is progressing.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]

54
Restoration of Section 22 of PB Act:
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that Section 22 of the Prasar Bharati Act,
1990 gave it immunity from taxes and duties. This exemption has
been withdrawn w.e.f. 1st April, 2003 and now Prasar Bharati has to
bear the burden of all taxes. However, on the advice of the Ministry
of Finance, Prasar Bharati registered itself as a charitable institution
engaged in the pursuit of general public utility under section 12A
read with section 12AA (1) (b) of the Income Tax Act and thus the tax
exemption from payment of IT withdrawn by the Finance Act, 2002
has been restored w.e.f. 1.4.2003. However, presently, Prasar Bharati is
made to pay service tax and the annual liability of which stands to be
around Rs. 70-72 crore. State Governments are also coming up with
bills for the payment of surcharge on electricity, property tax, motor
vehicle tax and a huge amount towards property tax. Prasar Bharati
has pleaded for restoration of Section 22 of the Act on the ground that
it is a public broadcaster and also in view of the fact that such a
provision existed before April, 2003. The Committee learn that this
issue is also included in the terms of references on the financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati of a Group of Ministers (GOM) on
Prasar Bharati. The Committee trust that the points made by Prasar
Bharati would be looked into in all its implications with a view to
extending all possible help to Prasar Bharati so as to enable it to play
its public broadcasting role more effectively. The Committee would
like to be kept apprised of the decision taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
As rightly observed by the Committee, this item is under
consideration of Group of Ministers. The Committee would be informed
of the decision taken in the matter.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
(ii) The Broadcasting Bill
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee learn that the Ministry has issued a large number
of notices to different channels for violation of programme and
advertising codes prescribed under the Cable Television Networks
Rules, 1994 advising them to be more careful in future. The Committee

55
are informed that the Ministry are in process of introducing a Bill to
set up a Broadcasting Regulatory Authority of India to receive and
dispose of complaints on content telecast by TV channels and to deal
with other regulatory issues in the Broadcasting sector. The said Bill
was expected to be introduced in Parliament during the monsoon
session, 2005. The Committee are of the opinion that there is an urgent
need to put in place a regulatory mechanism for the Broadcasting
sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
make earnest efforts to introduce the said Bill to Parliament at earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The broadcasting Services Regulation Bill 2006 has been posted on
the website of the Ministry inviting comments of the stakeholders/
general public. The Comments received from the Stakeholders/general
public are being examined for finalizing the draft Bill.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
(iv) Winding up of Song & Drama Division and the Directorate of
Field Publicity
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee are informed that the Song and Drama Division
and the Directorate of Field Publicity are two very important units of
the Information Wing of the Ministry . The artists in the Song and
Drama Division possess exemplary local talent and are engaged as per
need without being a burden on the Ministry . Similarly the field
publicity units fulfil the need of communication, publicity and extension
work in remote and far-flung areas. Both these units play a vital role
in educating the masses through various kinds of awareness campaigns
and inter-personal exchanges. The Committee are further informed that
the Expenditure Reform Commission (ERC) in its Second Report has
amongst other findings recommended that the Films Division, Photo
Division, Song and Drama Division (S&DD), Directorate of Field
Publicity (DFP) and Publications Division may be wound up. Keeping
in view the importance of the Song and Drama Division and the DFP ,
the Ministry did not accept the recommendation of the ERC. The
Ministry approached the Committee of Secretaries (COS) but the
Committee of Secretaries (COS) also reiterated for closure of S&DD
and DFP . The Committee recognize the importance of these units and
their contribution in the field, particularly in the remote and far-flung
areas. They are of the firm opinion that these traditional media units
are of immense help in reaching the masses for communication,
publicity and awareness campaigns etc. These media units are also

56
playing a crucial role promoting local talent by providing them a
platform. The Committee are, therefore, of the strong conviction that
winding up of these units will be a great loss to the nation and to the
national talent. They definitely need to be encouraged. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should leave no stone unturned
and put up a strong case again before the Committee of Secretaries
(COS) for reconsideration of their decision. The would like to be
informed of the position.
Action Taken by the Government
The matter was referred to Cabinet Secretariat vide this Ministry’s
Letter No. 17/1/2006-Admn. IV dated 21.07.2006 for placing the matter
before the Committee of Secretaries (COS) for reconsideration. However,
the Cabinet Secretariat vide their U.O. No. 331/21/2006-CA. IV
dated 22.08.2006 has informed that all the matters of differences
between the Ministry and recommendations of Expenditure Reforms
Commission (ERC) will be dealt by Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, the matter has been referred vide
this Ministry’s Letter No. 17/1/2006-Admn. IV dated 04.09.2006 to the
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for reconsideration.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
Piracy in Film  and Music Sectors
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
One of the thrust areas in the Tenth Five Year Plan is imposition
of stringent curbs on film piracy in order to boost the revenues of the
industry. The Committee are, however, deeply concerned about the
wide-spread complaints of the rising incidence of piracy in the film
and music sector. The Committee are informed that the legal provisions
regarding copyright in Cinematography Films & Music are covered
under the Copyright Act 1957, which falls under the purview of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting have stated that they have made suggestions for
restricting incidence of piracy in the film and music sector while
considering the ongoing amendments to the Copyright Act. The
Committee are further informed that the Ministry are also examining
the need to enact on Optical Disc Law to counter piracy in the
entertainment sector in consultation with the stakeholders. The
Committee are of the view that piracy is not only detrimental to the
growth of film industry but also discourages creativity and innovation
in various fields of film making. The Committee, therefore, are of the
considered opinion that there is an imperative need to enact suitable

57
laws followed up with effective implementation in the over all interest
of the film industry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should expedite the initiatives stated to have been taken by
them in this direction to their logical conclusions. The Committee would
like to be informed of the precise action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The Copyright Act, 1957, which falls under the purview of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development contains, inter alia , legal
provisions regarding copyright in cinematograph films and music. The
Act is amended from time to time to keep in consonance with
International Copyright Law. This Ministry has also made suggestions
for restricting incidence of piracy in the film and music sector while
considering the ongoing amendments to the Copyright.
2. This Ministry in consultation with the Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and other stakeholders,
is examining the need to enact on Optical Disc Law to counter piracy
in the entertainment sector. FICCI has set up a Working Group on
Optical Disc Law, which has prepared a draft law in this regard. The
draft law has been circulated by FICCI amongst the Working Group
for soliciting comments and aims to cover the procedural and other
requirements in the sphere of optical discs ( i.e. relating to CDs, VCD’s
etc). The final draft is expected to be submitted to this Ministry shortly.
3. In pursuance of the decision taken by the Hon’ble Minister of
Information and Broadcasting during the meeting with Film Industry
representatives recently, a Core Group on Piracy , the Exhibition Sector
including Multiplex and Issues of Certification has been set up under
the Chairpersonship of Smt. Shabana Azmi on 29.9.06. It has been
requested to submit its report by 30.11.06. The recommendations of
this Core Group will be for the future course of action considered
necessary of combat the menace of piracy from the Film and Music
Sector.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/10/2006-B&A,
dated 15.12.2006]
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
20 March, 2007 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

58
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th March, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
4. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
7. Shri Motiur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Ahluwalia — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***

59
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Thirty-Second Report on “Demands for Grants (2005-
06)” relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalize and
present the Reports to the House on a day convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

60
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos: 1-6, 11, 13-16, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24
& 27
Total: 17
Percentage: 60/71%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Para No: Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Para Nos: 10, 17, 22 & 26
Total:  4
Percentage: 14.28%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are of interim nature:
Para Nos: 7-9, 12, 20, 25 & 28
Total: 7
Percentage:  25%