15
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
FIFTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)
FIFTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21.4.2005


C.I.T. No. 136
Price : Rs. 18.00
© 2004 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
PART I
I. Introductory ................................................................................
II. Tenth Plan Allocation ..............................................................
III. Budgetary Allocations for the year 2005-06 ......................
IV . Utilisation of Funds during the year 2004-05...................
V. National Action Plan on e-Governnace (NEGAP) ...........
VI. Community Information Centres (CICs) .............................
VII. National Informatics Centre (NIC) .......................................
VIII. Media Lab Asia (MLA) ...........................................................
IX. Electronics & Computer Software Promotion Council
(ESC) ............................................................................................
X. Society for Applied Microawave Electronic Engineering
and Research (SAMEER) .........................................................
XI. Research & Development ........................................................
XII. Manpower Development .........................................................
XIII. Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses
(DOEACC) Society ....................................................................
XIV . Nanotechnology .........................................................................
XV . National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy
XVI. Digital DNA Park .....................................................................
XVII. Intellectual Property Rights Promotion Program (IPRPP)
XVIII. Information Society...................................................................
PART-II
Recommendations/Observations ........................................................

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur#
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
5. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
*Nominated w.e.f. 24.3.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report on ‘Demands for
Grants (2005-06) relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2004-2005)
was constituted on 5 August, 2004. One of the functions of the Standing
Committee, as laid down in Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, is to consider Demands for Grants
of the concerned Ministry/Department and make a Report on the same
to the House.
3. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining
to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Information Technology) for the current year i.e. 2005-
2006, which were laid on the Table the House on 17 March, 2005. The
Committee took evidence of the rperesentatives of the Department of
Information Technology on 29 March, 2005.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11 April, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of
the Department of Information Technology for appearing before them
as well as for furnishing the information that the Committee desired
in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the obsevations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 April, 2005 Chairman,
10 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
The Department of Information Technology (DIT) which forms part
of the Ministry of Communications and Information technology is inter-
alia responsible for formulation, implementation and review of National
Policies in the field of Information Technology, Silicon facility, Computer
based information technology and processing including hardware and
software, standardisation of procedures and matters relating to
international bodies, promotion of knowledge based enterprises,
internet, e-commerce and information technology education and all
matters relating to development of electronics and coordination amongst
its various users.
2. The various schemes/programmes of Department of Information
Technology are stated to be implemented both in house as well as
through its PSUs/Societies and also through various programmes being
funded under R & D. National Informatics Centre (NIC) provides
computer support to Central/State Government Departments and
District Administrations. The Major Schemes/Projects taken up by DIT
are E-Governance, Media Lab Asia(MLA), Community Information
Centres(CICs), Indian Computer Emergency Response Team(CERT),
Indian Language Technologies, Digital Library, Centre for Development
of Advanced Computing(C-DAC), Megafab, Nanotechnology, Cyber
Security, Special Manpower Development for VLSI Design, Electronics
in Healthcare, Braille in Indian Languages, Telemedicine, Task Force
on Human Resource Development in IT, Educational and Research
Network(ERNET), Vidya Vahini and Gyan Vahini. All these schemes
are covered under the Plan funds whereas Non-Plan allocation is
towards Secretariat expenditure of DIT, its attached offices namely
Standardisation Testing & Quality Certifications(STQC) Directorate and
its registered societies.
3. The Department of Information Technology presented Demand
for Grants under Demand No.16 to Parliament on 17.03.2005. The
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Department of
Information Technology(DIT) on 29th March, 2005 on the issues arising
out of the Demands for Grants of the DIT for the year 2005-06.

2
Tenth Plan Allocation
4. The Committee drew the attention of the DIT towards the
budgetary support of Rs. 2714 crore approved by the Planning
Commission. If expenditure of the Department in first three years of
the Tenth Plan i.e. Rs. 465.35 crore, Rs.494.63 crore, Rs.645
crore(tentative) in the year 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively
are taken into account and assuming that plan allocation of Rs. 929.30
crore for 2005-06 would be fully utilized, the total expenditure would
be Rs. 2390.61 and therefore the Department would be left with a
budgetary support of only Rs. 179.72 crore for the last year of the
Tenth Plan. In this context, the Committee desired to know the steps
taken by the Department to get the sufficient budgetary allocations for
the year 2006-07. In reply, it has been stated that Planning Commission
has been apprised in the Mid-Term Appraisal of Tenth Plan document
that Tenth Plan allocations for DIT needs to be substantially augmented.
5. When asked about the salient features of the mid-term appraisal
of the Tenth Plan document, the Committee were informed that the
document highlighted that DIT would require a minimum Budgetary
Support in the range of Rs. 2,500 crore for the last 2 years of the
Tenth Plan i.e. for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 to run its various
programmes viz. e-Governance, Community Information Centres(CICs)
and Vidya Vahini Programme, Nanotechnology, Special Manpower
Development for VLSI Design, Information Security Education and
Awareness Programme, C-DAC and National Informatics Centre(NIC).
Budgetary Allocation for the year 2005-06
6. Demand No. 16 pertaining to the DIT contains figures of
Revenue as well as Capital Expenditure under the Plan and Non-Plan
Section as under:-
(Rs. in crore)
2005-2006 Plan Non-Plan Total
Revenue  838.30 36.00 874.30
Capital  91.00 —-  91.00
Total 929.30 36.00 965.30

3
7. Comparative figures of Budget Estimates (BE) for the year 2004-
05 & 2005-06 are given as under:-
(Rs. in Crore)
S.No. Programme / Scheme BE BE
2004-05 2005-06
1 R&D Programme 189.50 192.00
2. Infrastructure Development 296.20 424.50
3. Human Resource Development 25.00 43.00
4. Other Programme 10.80 9.70
5. Public Sector Undertakings 10.00 0.10
6. ESC 8.50 0.00
7. National Informatics Centre 210.00 260.00
Total 750.00 929.30
8. The actual expenditure incurred in 2003-04, BE/RE of 2004-05
and BE for the year 2005-06 are given below: -
 (Rs. in Crore)
Actual BE RE BE
2003-04 2004-05 2004-05 2005-06
Plan 492.87 750.00 650.00 929.30
Non-Plan 35.25 36.00 35.00 36.00
Total 528.12 786.00 685.00 965.30
9.  The Committee were informed that Department had proposed
a plan allocation of Rs. 1400.67 crore for its various schemes viz. R &
D, infrastructure Development, Human Resource Development, PSUs,
NIC, Electronics & Computer Software Export promotion Council (ESC)
& Export Market Development and other miscellaneous programmes,
but the Planning Commission approved only Rs. 929.30 crore which

4
was around 65 percent of the initial projection. The details of the
reduced allocations for various Schemes are given as under:
 (Rs. crore)
Sl.No. Scheme Projected Allocation Difference
1. e-Governance 632.00 300.00 332.00
2. Media Lab Asia 65.00  1.00  64.00
3. SCL 45.67  0.10  45.57
4. C-DAC 87.00  60.00  27.00
5. ESC 10.00  -  10.00
5. STPI & EHTP 10.00  4.00  6.00
6. Electronics in Health 18.00  14.00  4.00
7. IT for Masses (Telemedicine) 12.00 8.00 4.00
8. IT Act / Certification & Network
Security 9.70 7.00 2.70
9. Convergence, Comm &
Strategic Electronics 8.00 6.00 2.00
10. Digital DNA Parks 12.00 10.00 2.00
11. SAMEER 21.00 20.00 1.00
10.  It has been stated that e-Governance programme would be
curtailed to a large extent in view of allocation that has been reduced
to Rs. 300 crore for 2005-06, against projected budgetary support of
Rs. 632 crore.
11. However about the reasons for allocation of funds in different
heads at a level lower than the proposed allocation by the Department,
the Committee were informed that the Planning Commission had stated
that keeping in view the importance of e-Governance and other IT
projects being implemented by the DIT, they had given special
consideration to DIT’s Plan allocation and increased budgetary support
from Rs.650 crore (RE) in 2004-05 to Rs.929.30 crore for the year
2005-06.

5
Utilisation of Funds during 2004-05
12. The following table indicates the RE and actual expenditure
by the Department from the year 2002-03 onwards:-
(Rs. in Crore)
Year Revised Estimate Actual Expenditure
2002-03 470.00 465.35
2003-04 495.00 492.88
2004-05 650.00 501.33
(anticipated)
Rs.645
(revised)
13. To a specific query regarding the allocations made and utilized
by the Department during the year 2004-05, it was stated that out of
the Annual Plan allocation of Rs. 750 crore which was revised to Rs.
650 crore during the year, the likely expenditure incurred would be
Rs. 501.33 crore. As regards the reasons for underutilization of funds
even when the allocation was reduced by Rs. 100 crore at RE stage,
it was stated that the gap was because of the slow and under utilization
of funds on account of e-Governance, Media Lab Asia (MLA) and
Semi-Conductor Complex Ltd. (SCL). The Department however
subsequently informed the Committee in Post Evidence Infomation
that the likely expenditure would now be Rs. 645 crore.
14. When asked about the measures proposed to be taken by the
Department to ensure optimum utilization of the budgetary allocation
of Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06, the Committee were informed
that the Department would be taking following measures:
(i) The review of the on-going projects will be done by the
Programme Review and Steering Group (PRSG) on quarterly
basis so that the progress of the projects are monitored on
regular basis and timely recommendation for release of the
fund is made.
(ii) In respect of new projects, the meetings of the Standing
Finance Committee (SFC) and the Expenditure Finance

6
Committee (EFC) will be held on monthly basis from the
beginning of the next financial year.
(iii) The Plan achievements will be reviewed by the Secretary
on quarterly basis.
National Action Plan on e-Governance (NEGAP)
15. As informed to the Committee, the Government of India
accords high priority to the area of e-Governance and realizes its
potential in facilitating the process of achieving good governance. It is
proposed to promote e-Governance on a massive scale. Keeping this
in view, a National E-Governance Action Plan (NEGAP) has been
drawn for implementation during 2003-07. The NEGAP plan seeks to
implement a number of Mission Mode Projects(MMPs) at the Centre,
State and integrated service levels so as to create a citizen-centric and
business-centric environment for governance, create the right
governance and institutional mechanisms, set up core infrastructure,
formulate key policies and channelise private sector technical and
financial resources into the national e-Governance efforts. Under
NEGAP , it is planned to address following 10 components: -
i) Core Projects
ii) Core Infrastructure
iii) Integrated Services Projects
iv) Support Infrastructure
v) Core Policies
iv)  Human Resource Development/Training
v)  Technical Assistance
vi)  Awareness & Assessment
vii)  Organisation Structures
viii)  R&D
16. For the implementation of the National e-Governance Action
Plan, various Government Ministries/ Departments would be involved.
Line Ministries/ Departments/ State Governments would be responsible

7
for the implementation of the assigned Mission Mode Projects as given
below: -
Sl.No. Mission Mode Projects Line Ministries/Departments
12 3
      Central Government
01 Income Tax MoF /CBDT
02 Passport Visa & Immigration Project MoEA/MoHA
03 DCA1 DCA
04 Insurance DoBanking
05 National Citizen Database MoHA/RGI
06 Central Excise Revenue/CBEC
07 Pension DOPPW & Exp.
08 Banking Do Banking
State Government (Tentative List)
01 Land Records MoRD
02 Road Transport MoRT&H
03 Property Registration MoRD
04 Agriculture Deptt. of Agriculture
05 Treasuries MoF
06 Municipalities Mo UD
07 Gram Panchayats Mo RD
08 Commercial Taxes MoF
09 Police (UTs initially) MoHA
10 Employment Exchanges* Ministry of Labour &
Employment
Integrated Services
01 EDI (E-Commerce) MoC & I

8
12 3
02 E-Biz DoIPP/ DIT
03 Common Service Centres DIT
04 India Portal DIT and DAR&PG
05 EG Gateway DIT
06 E- Procurement * Ministry of Commerce &
Supply/DIT
07 E-Courts * Ministry of Justice/
MoHA
17. The Information submitted to the Committee indicated that
the DIT would need to undertake a number of activities envisaged in
the National E-Governance Action Plan such as Creation of common
and support ICT infrastructure including wide area networks (NICNET
and State Wide Area Networks), Data Centres, Common Service
Delivery Centres; evolving suitable policy framework and guidelines
on various aspects of implementation, establishment of National
standards, building of R&D capabilities and undertaking relevant R&D,
Human Resource Development and Training, Assessment of projects,
Technical Assistance etc. DAR&PG on its part would be complementing
DIT’s role and would be responsible for part of Human Resource
Development and Training and Awareness building with reference to
generic process re-engineering and Change Management issues. An
Apex Committee for the National e-Governance Action Plan has been
constituted under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with Secretary,
DIT as Member Convener. The Apex Committee oversees and provides
Policy directions for the implementation of National e-Governance
Action Plan and will ensure inter-ministerial coordination. DIT’s Budget
provision for e-Governance for the year 2004-05 and 2005-06 would be
utilized towards creation of State Wide Area Networks (SWAN), State
Data Centres and Common Service Delivery Centres.
18. As further informed to the Committee, the State Wide Area
Network would be covered upto the block level which would be the
last level in terms of point of presence of the network. The Committee
Policy Guidelines have been issued to provide support to State
Governments to establish State Wide Area Networks (SWANs) from

9
the State Headquarters up to the Block level with a minimum
bandwidth capacity of 2 Mbps. These network would be connected to
NICNET through appropriate interfaces. Further, the NIC has already
set up a Data Centre at Delhi and various State Data Centres have
been identified to cater to the requirements of the States to enable the
aggregation of the fragmented data in the States and also to facilitate
service delivery from centralised data center. It is proposed to create
data repositories/data centers in various states so that a common
secured data storage could be maintained to serve host of e-governance
applications.
19. With regards to Common Service Centre, it was stated that a
suitable scheme had been drafted for the same and was being given
a final shape. The Department of IT is further evolving policy
framework to provide funding support to establish Common Service
Centres across the country by the year 2007. This initiative is intended
to create an enabling environment for delivering Government and other
need based private services to rural citizen.
20. Explaining the concept of e-Governance, the representative of
the Department stated during evidence:
“So, the vision here is basically that all Government services would
be made accessible to the common man. It includes various kinds
of services which he needs throughout his life at a single stop or
what is called one stop shop. This would be at a place which is
conveniently located and near to him in the village or locality and
enabling efficiency, transparency and reliability so as to meet his
basic needs.
XX XX XX
“These are some underlying policies and philosophies involved
like having a centralized initiative but leaving a lot of flexibility in
implementation and having a much more decentralized model for
implementation.”
21. Asked to elaborate more on decentralization, the witness stated:
“The decentralisaion is closely related to the administration units.
For example, if you take a thing like income tax, then no
decentralization is possible. It is a department of the Central
Government which is run by the Department from Delhi. If it is

10
a State level think like land records or police or something like
that, then the powers rest with the State Government so the
decentralization is to the State level. If you take a think like Gram
Panchayat or Urban Local Bodies, then the centralization is to that
tier. So wherever the constitutional authority vests, that is the level
at which the mandate is pushed down.”
22. To a pointed question as to what is the topical information
that a common man is looking for at the district level, the witness
replied during evidence as under:
“the approach is that a certain things have been identified by the
Central Government for the State level saying that these are the
ten major areas where the interface with the citizens exist. We feel
that these ten things the States should do. However, the State has
the flexibility to add two or three other priority areas which they
feel are important or the point of view.”
XX XX XX
“there were 10 projects which were identified. This covers land
records, registration, transport – which includes vehicle licensing
and driver licensing are – municipalities, the Gram Panchayats,
the police, commercial taxes, agriculture and employment
exchanges.”
23. As per presentation before the Committee during evidence,
direct responsibility of the DIT in regard to NEGAP are as under:-
i. SWAN – 2 Mbps connectivity up to Block level with facility
for extension to Village level through Technology like Wi-
Max
ii. Establish National Data Centre/State Data Centres to enable
aggregation of fragmented data & facilitate Service Delivery
iii. Establishment of Common Service Centres to deliver Govt.
Services Formulation of Core Policy & Standards to enable
inter-operability of e-Governance applications across different
departments.
iv. Capacity Building
v. Specialised training for CIOs and Policy Makers

11
vi. Awareness & Assessment
vii. India Portal – a single window interface for all the Govt.
Services to the citizens at National & State levels
viii. National e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway – to enable
Standards based Communication linkages between the back
end applications with the Services Access Providers.
ix. Replication of Successful e-Governance Projects on pilot basis
– Land Records, Registration, Transport, Municipalities Gram
Panchayats & Integrated citizen Services (from ends like e-
Seva, Friends etc.)
x. External Aided Project “ICT for Development” through
UNDP – approved at a total outlay of US$5 Million over a
period of 4 years and being implemented by NISG.
xi. Integrated Citizen Services
xii. Enhancing Livelihood
xiii. Transforming Rural Governance
xiv. Woman Empowerment
24. The Committee desired to know the efforts made by the
Department to identify the kind of services they were going to provide.
The Department responded that work was being done in this area and
they were trying to focus on the objective of each project like in regard
to land record, the end result should be that a copy of the same
should be made available to the farmer within fixed time. One of the
major areas where their efforts were required was stated to be building
a lot of capacity within the Department to implement the projects as
they are not familiar with either IT or with the project management
or the induction of technology related issues. The technical support
would therefore be required from outside.
25. As regards the strategy adopted by the Department in this
direction, the witness informed that an Advisory Group had been
constituted under the chairmanship of the Minister with experts to
advise the various decision-making bodies on policy and strategy issues.
A small e-Governance Group to actually discharge these functions was
stated to be a part of the mandate of the Department.

12
 26. It was added that the Department was looking for the
formulation of a core policy and standards for inter-operability and
capacity building etc. They had been working on specialized training
programmes for CIOs and for the policy makers at the State level as
well as for individual Ministries. It was also proposed to work on
programmes for building up awareness for what was happening
elsewhere in similar organisations or in other States and for
independent assessment of projects so that they could make the
correctives in the on-going projects and improve the service delivery
and outcome of the programmes. It was further stated that the IT
Departments in the States had to build the programme implementation
capability and detailed guideline in this respect had been issued to all
the States.
27. The Committee pointed out that despite initial proposal for
higher allocation of funds to the extent of Rs. 630 crore for the year
2004-05, the Department was not even able to fully utilize the
substantially reduced allocation of Rs. 197 crore upto March, 2004. In
a written information to the Committee, the Department stated that
the utilization was slow because of long and lengthy consultations
which was done with the different Ministries and State Governments
to evolve consensus on framing the guidelines. This was considered
necessary so that the actual implementation of the e-Governance was
smooth and speedy. After the guidelines in respect of State Wide Area
Network (SWAN) had been issued, proposals were received from the
different State Governments. The proposal for SWAN project which
would entail an expenditure of Rs.2005 crore by the Centre over a
period of 5 years duly approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) was submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) for their approval and got its approval on 29.3.2004.
28. In this context, the witness clarified during evidence that the
utilisation of funds was slow as e-Governance was a new project and
it was the first time they were going for funding in the Budget, in-
principle approval etc. and again it took long time explaining things
to other agencies. Now once the basic principle had been accepted
and broad parameters had been accepted by all the people, the future
approvals would be faster.
29. As regards the projects to be undertaken during 2005-06 for e-
Governance, the Committee were informed that in addition to various
ongoing activities under NEGAP , the Department had proposed to

13
take other initiatives such as replication of successful e-Governance
Projects, development of GIS/GPS, Languages Interfaces, Security,
setting up of Programme Management Structure, support for the Centre
for e-Governance, website Management etc.
30. The Committee have observed that DIT had proposed to the
Planning Commission an allocation of Rs. 632 crore to carry e-
Governance programmes for the year 2005-06 but the actual allocation
approved by Planning Commission is Rs. 300 only. The Committee
enquired about the schemes which would be affected due to reduced
allocation under this head and also how the Department would re-
prioritise the various e-Governance projects. In reply, DIT replied that
they would be required to scale down its various activities under the
National e-Governance Plan in line with the reduced allocation as
under:
 (Rs. in crores)
Item Earlier Projected Allocation now
Allocation 05-06 being proposed
(including North-
East Components)
(2005-06)
State Wide Area Network 500 225
State Data Centres 30 20
Integrated service Delivery Centres 30 20
Horizontal transfer of successful e-Gov Applications 10 10
E-Portal/ Service Delivery Gateway 15 2
Awareness & Assessments 10 2
Human Resource Development 10 2
Technical Support 10 5
UNDP 7 7
Others (include e-Readiness formulation for
Core Policies and Standards etc. Web-sites,
Office automation CEG , application
development, Programme Management etc.) 10 7
Total 632 300

14
31. The Committee were informed that a discussion was held on
22.12.2004 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Planning Commission
to discuss the Annual Plan 2005-06 proposal of the Department of
Information Technology (DIT). The summary of discussion on e-
governance are reproduced below:
“It was brought out that a major provision of Rs. 500 crore has
been kept for SWAN project in states out of the total proposed
outlay of Rs. 632 crore for E-Governance programme. Nine
proposals have been received from states and 10 more were in
pipeline. Creation of State wide Area Networks(SWANs), State Data
Centres and Common Service Delivery Centres would be the major
focus area of work during 2005-06. Chairman observed that DIT
should at the earliest formulate the project report on the National
Action Plan on E-Governance(NEGAP) and get the “In Principle”
approval of Planning Commission. NEGAP would be a central
scheme in which the contribution of states would be operationalised
through State Plans as Additional Central Assistance(ACA).
Secretary, Planning Commission further mentioned that as in E-
Governance, still re-engineering of processes were not taking place,
hence the NEGAP document would require to spell out all those
processes that could be projected. He explained that NEGAP should
clearly indicate how the plan would link-up transfer of 2-3% of
plan funds allocated to line Ministries for E-Governance and IT
related activities and how the 2-3 % would come from Ministries
where there is no plan funding like M/O Finance and how would
they be accommodated in the NEGAP . Only after ascertaining clear
cut funding pattern and process re-engineering methods
appropriately incorporated in NEGAP , the DIT could go for
approval. Subject to DIT taking up these actions promptly, an
allocation of Rs,. 300 crore was recommended. Chairman requested
DIT to make a presentation on NEGAP before full Planning
Commission. He fir up business re-engineering processes for
NEGAP”
32. The Committee desired to know the steps taken by the
Department of IT in view of the observation made by the Secretary,
Planning Commission during discussion of the Annual Plan for the
year 2005-06 and also the progress made so far in this regard. The
Department stated as under:-
 “ For the implementation of the Mission Mode Projects under the
NEGAP , the concerned line Ministries/Departments expected to

15
formulate detailed project proposals including funding and process
re-engineering and obtain necessary approvals. Some of the projects
like Income Tax Excise, Commercial Taxes, DCA21 etc. are being
supported under the Non-Plan provision. DIT on its part would
be extending support towards technical assistance and for
establishing Common Care Infrastructure”.
33. In this context, the representative of DIT during evidence
informed the Committee that the Planning Commission had issued
some instructions to everybody and it had been indicated that their IT
plans should be communicated to DIT also. DIT would function as
advisors to the Planning Commission to help realize 2-3 percent target
that has been fixed. The Planning Commission had advised to all the
Ministries and had also written to them that their IT component should
be communicated to DIT. Therefore the Planning Commission which
will really have to see that this has actually been implemented.
Community Information Centres(CICs)
34. The Community Information Centre (CIC) project is an interface
between the Government and the citizen. The Department of
Information Technology had taken up an initiative to set up CICs in
the hilly, far-flung and rural areas of the country to bring the benefits
of ICT for socio-economic development of these areas by providing
broadband connectivity. The project was tried in the eight North-Eastern
States. It was the largest project ever implemented in the North-eastern
region and also the largest project of the Department in which a sum
of Rs.141.62 crore have been spent in the last five years. As per the
information supplied to the Committee 487 CICs have been set up so
far in North-Eastern States.
35. When asked about the achievements in the year 2004-05, the
Committee have been informed that based on the experience in CICs
in North-Eastern State, it was decided to set up 135 CICs in the block
headquarters of J&K. It was a replication of the North East model. In
the first phase of the scheme 60 CICs have been made operational by
October, 2004 and remaining 75 CICs will be operationalised in the
second phase by October, 2005.
36. As regards the future projections, it has been stated that the
Department intend to set-up 328 CICs (95 at block level and 233 CICs
at village level) in an entrepreneurship mode in Uttaranchal. To a

16
specific query, it has been informed that the concept of entrepreneurs
have been effected based on the experiences in the North East to
address the sustainability issue. The Govt. of Uttaranchal have proposed
to link the project with a sustained revenue stream by partnering with
various investors through appropriate agreements for specified periods.
The State Govt. will identify entrepreneurs who will run the CICs on
a pay and use model. The revenue generated is likely to offset the
recurring expenditure for smooth functioning of CICs.
37. On being asked about the status of progress in respect of setting
up of CICs in Uttaranchal, the Committee were informed that
Uttaranchal proposal had been formulated and the EFC Memo of the
project was under review by Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance.
38. Regarding sustainability of CICs, the Committee were apprised
that the major source of income was training programmes. They have
also tied up with IGNOU and CICs offer with IGNOU, a hands-on
component of the training programme of IGNOU. So it was done
through CICs. Apart from that, DOEACC was also offering courses
through CICs. This coupled with NIC’s E-Suvidha and other e-
Governance applications, attracts the citizens to avail more services
from the CICs and also use some of the revenue generating services.
National Informatics Centre(NIC):
39. National Informatics Centre (NIC) under the aegis of
Department of Information Technology is the premier S&T organization
in the Government, to provide computer based informatics services,
for decision support to Government offices/bodies at National, State,
District and Block levels. It is a Network Infrastructure Facility Provider,
Network Service Provider, Application Service Provider and Content
ASP . It offers network services over Ku-band Time Division
Multiplexing Access (TDMA), Frequency Time Division Multiplexing
Access (FTDMA), I.P . Advantage(IPA) & Single Channel Per
Carrier(SCPC VSATs), Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks (MANs)
and Local Area Networks (LANs) with NICNET gateway for internet
resources, facilitating informatics services for decentralized planning,
improvement in government services, and wider transparency of
national and local governments. NIC implements Information
Technology Projects, in collaboration with Central and Central sector
schemes, (B) State sector and State sponsored projects, (C) District

17
Administration sponsored projects. NIC spans the length and breadth
of the country with NIC State Centres in all States, Union Territories
and District Informatics Centres in the districts, all connected through
NICNET. NIC has set up Community Information Centres (CICs) in
487 blocks of North Eastern States. It has set up CICs in the State of
Jammu & Kashmir also.
 40.The NIC had to set up 10 NIC district centers in newly created
districts during 2004-2005. However, only two NIC districts centers
could be set up during the year. As regards the reasons for the shortfall,
it has been stated that the remaining district centers would be set up
when sites would be available in 2005-06.
41. The Committee asked as to how targets were fixed without
the availability of sites. The Department replied that the targets were
fixed anticipating that sufficient space would be provided by the district
administration of these newly created districts. NIC pursued the matter
with District Collectors for setting up of NIC District Centres but due
to non-allocation of space 8 districts could not be covered. Majority of
these districts are in North Eastern States and in a few cases
Collectorate buildings have not come up and there was space problem.
NIC has stated to have been pursuing the matter with State
Governments for early allocation of sufficient space in newly created
districts.
42. The Committee have observed that some of NIC projects
targeted to be completed in 2004-05 could not be accomplished during
the year. The details are given as under:
“(i) Establishment of offsite Disaster Recovery site for NIC
Certifying Authority.
 The selection of DR Site for Certifying Authority is a critical
issue involving Geographical location (seismic zone), physical and
logical security, infrastructure, technicalities (Connectivity , Hardware
& Software) and other logistics, in compliance with the IT Act
2000, as amended from time to time. After due consideration of
all these factors, the site for DR Site has been finalised at NIC,
Hyderabad and the DR will be setup during 2005-06. The estimated
expenditure of the proposal was Rs. 98 lakh.

18
(ii) Establishment of Key Archiving facilities for archival of
encryption keys.
 Establishment of a key archiving facility is basically meant
for archival of the private key of the encryption key pair. As of
now IT Act is silent about encryption. It is expected that the issue
will be taken up and addressed in the proposed revision of IT
Act. However, NICCA is in the process of development of a scaled
down version of Key Escrowing system for encryption of private
key in PFX format for the encryption keys issued from enterprise
CA. The project involved an expenditure of Rs.10 lakh.
(iii) Detailed Study, Procurement of systems and Data Entry
for Smart Island Project
Pilot site selection for site preparation and systems installation
was scheduled to be carried out during Jan-March 2005. Due to
emergency works related to Tsunami and the priorities assigned
thereafter, the scheduled travel and works were not taken up during
this period. The same will be taken up and completed during
May-July 2005. The project involved an expenditure of Rs. 10 lakh.
(iv) Set up usability Lab for India Image.
 Usability Lab involves building of a special setup like
construction of sound proof rooms with special purpose
infrastructure. Due to introduction of some new services, NIC is
presently involved with the restructuring in NIC premises to render
these services in an effective manner. As a first step, NIC is setting
up GIS lab, which is at an advanced stage of completion. Setting
up of usability Lab has been planned as a part of this restructuring.
The activity involved an estimated expenditure of Rs. 20 lakh.
(v) Procurement & Set Up Hierarchy of storage solutions to
cater to the varying demands of Govt. Depts.
 Over the last couple of years, a lot of research & development
has taken place in the area of storage technologies as well as
storage networking. As a result lot of new storage technologies as
well as products were introduced in the market. NIC has been
working out to get latest and proven technologies at a cost effective
price. Lot of time was spend in understanding these technologies
as well products based on these technologies as well their scalability

19
& interoperability. The process for procurement of Heirarchical
storage setup has already been initiated and part of the solution
is in the advance stage of procurement. For the rest of the solution
specifications and requirements are being worked out. An
expenditure of Rs. 50 lakh was estimated during 2004-05.”
43. When asked about the budget provisions for these projects in
the subsequent year, it has been informed that the necessary budget
provision have been made to complete the above activities.
Media Lab Asia (MLA)
44. Media Lab Asia was incorporated as a non profit making
company under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 in September
2001 as an initiative to facilitate research in advanced technology areas
and use it for the benefit of common man. Towards this, Media Lab
Asia has supported several research projects at five IITs and other
institutions in the country. Based on the recommendations of the
Technology Advisory Board, new research projects are being initiated
on the use of ICT for Education, Health, and for persons with
disabilities.
45. The information furnished to the Committee indicated that the
Planning Commission had approved for the Tenth Plan a Gross
Budgetary Support(GBS) of Rs. 300 crore for Media Lab Asia. Further
the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 80 crore and
Rs. 65 crore during 200203, 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively but the
Planning Commission approved Rs. 1 crore, Rs. 10 lakh and Rs. 65
crore. However, the expenditure remained nil during all these years.
During 2005-06 also, the Department had proposed an outlay of Rs.
65 crore but the Planning Commission approved only Rs. 1 crore.
46. As regards the reasons for non-utilization of funds during last
three years, it was stated that MLA was released Rs. 65 crore during
2001-02 which were utilized for the purpose of supporting Research &
Development at different institutions. The fund utilization was based
on the actual fund requirements of the projects. As the funds were
available with MLA, additional funds were not released.
47.  When asked about the intention of the Department for
continued earmarking of funds under this Head despite nil utilization
of funds year after year, the Department informed that the funds were

20
earmarked based on the approved outlays and estimated requirements.
Asked to elaborate on the future planning of the Department to make
the Media Lab Programme effective, the Secretary, DIT stated during
evidence:
“We are trying to define some kind of activity areas for Media
Lab Asia so that they do not duplicate what is being done by
other Companies.”
In a subsequent reply, it was stated that the board of MLA had
been constituted and also an Expert Sub Committee to go into this
matter. Report of the Committee is expected shortly. The efforts of
MLA are expected to have more positive results in the coming years
by concentrating its activities in certain areas.
Electronics & Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC)
48. Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion Council
(ESC), is India’s national premier trade promotion organization under
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology, Government of India, mandated to
promote India’s electronics and information technology exports to global
markets. Headquartered at Delhi, the Council has regional offices at
Bangalore, Chennai and Kolkata as well as a representative office in
Dubai. Currently , it has a membership of around 2300, large medium
and small – scale IT companies, which are capable of providing total
solutions across the world including consumer electronics, electronic
components, instrumentation, telecommunication, computer hardware,
compute software and information technology enabled services.
49.  During evidence, a representative of DIT informed the
Committee that Export Promotion Council was set up in 1988 and
with the constitution of Ministry of Information Technology was
transferred to the Ministry in 1999. They are stated to be a largest
industry association representing 2200 exporting companies from the
field of electronics and computer software/services sector. They have
been providing wide area of services to their members in terms of
brand buildings, business interface etc. Basically it is related to
participation in trade shows, exhibitions, match making and also
interface with policy makers. They have a committee which is largely
represented by the industry. Twenty two members are from the industry
and four nominees from the Government.

21
50.  It was elaborated that they have been promoting exporters
and India is a very dominant player in the area of IT. A need was
realized to build a brand of India. While there have been very
specialised shows in the area of handicrafts, and leadership etc. there
was no export show in the area of IT. Therefore a show viz.
‘INDIASOFT’ was conceived in the year 2000. As regards their future
planning, it was stated that they have planned to co-locate this show
in various exhibitions abroad and they have also been doing Annual
events. But for the first time this year they took ‘INDIASOFT’ outside
New Delhi. It was held in Chennai. There were 88 SMEs (small and
medium enterprises) showcasing their profiles in IT. About 100 buyers
were invited which came from about 40 countries. Over the years they
have been successful in establishing it as a major event out of India
and they would continue to maintain it.
51. The Committee have been informed that in the area of
traditional export of IT and software services to US and UK, it has
been realized that compared to Japan, which is the second largest IT
market in the world, India’s share of software export is only to the
extent of about 3.5 percent. One of the reasons for this is stated to be
primarily language barrier. Therefore to prepare IT professionals in
developing alternative market like Japanese and German IT market,
one of the mechanisms that they intend to do is through language
programme. The Japanese language programmes are already operational
for the last two years. The German language programme which started
only a year back is also going well. This exercise will give a new
impetus to Indian exporters for diversification of export into Japanese
and German IT market.
52. It was further informed that the small and medium companies
face a severe handicap in terms of market access. When it comes to
established markets like US or UK, these companies are not able to
access those markets primarily because of their size. They, therefore,
as a Council have been starting Private and Public Partnership(PPP)
where they intend to set up a an export facilitation and business
support centre in the US. This will provide a platform to Indian small
and medium companies to tap US market and would also enable
them with networking facilities to identify customers. This programme
they intend to take up this year. To a specific query, it was stated that
they also interact with the components manufacturers and hardware
manufacturers and they intend to set up something on the lines of
“INDIASOFT” in the hardware area also.

22
53.  As per information, the Department had proposed an outlay
of Rs. 10 crore to carry out its various programmes but the Planning
Commission did not allocat any money for the scheme. The ESC had
utilized Rs. 8 crore and Rs. 9.96 crore against the allocation of Rs. 4
crore and Rs. 9.96 crore for 2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively and are
likely to spend fully the allocation of Rs. 8.50 crore for the year 2004-
05.
Society for Applied Microwave Electronic Engineering and
Research(SAMEER)
 54.SAMEER, premier Microwave Laboratory set up by Department
of Electronics in 1985, is an offshoot of Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Mumbai. The expertise in microwaves has grown into the
areas of Medical Linear Accelerators (LINAC), Atmospheric
Instrumentation, Communication Areas, Marine Navigational Aids
Systems and Industrial Applications. SAMEER has emerged as premier
Research and Development institution with its strength in handling
design, development and delivery of hardware to meet stringent
specifications of user agencies in its expert areas of high power RF
amplifiers, RF communication systems, Atmospheric instrumentation,
Linear accelerators, electromagnetic interference/compatibility, thermal
engineering of electronic hardware, RF/microwave/millimeter wave
antennas, Photonic devices, microwave components, and industrial RF/
microwave application products.
55. The Committee were further informed that  basically SAMEER
had two sectors, one was civilian sector and another was the family
sector. In the civilian area with their core competence in atmospheric
instrumentation, they have been doing several projects for the Indian
Meteorological Department. In the communication level they have been
doing for Director General of Lighthouse and Lightships. They were
doing automation of lighthouses in the coastal area of Gujarat. They
have got communication programmes for Airports Authority of India.
They also transferred technology to L & T and data broadband point
to multi-point communication units.
56. It was added that in the strategic area they have many
sponsored programmes from DRDO, Space and DAE, which is a
continuous exercise. One of the major projects that SAMEER has been
doing is in the area of Electronics in Health. The population of cancer
patients is stated to be increasing at the rate of 3 lakh every year.

23
Taking the population size of India into account, India would be
needing 1000 LINAC Machines because it is the most preferred one
for the treatment of cancer. Unfortunately as on date India has only
40-50 LINAC machines. These machines are very expensive because
they are imported. It is also very difficult to maintain these machines.
So, the Department has initiated a programme with SAMEER as the
main agency. It is under a consortium of SAMEER, CSIA, Chandigarh
and a private entrepreneur to develop 6 MV LINAC which is a state
of the art machine. Under phase I of this project two machines are
being developed. The first machine is going under final evaluation
and clearance for being shifted to MGIMS, Wardha. It will be installed
there. The second machine is also stated to be in the final stages of
assembly.
 57. The witness added that next year SAMEER would start Phase-
II, in which four more machines would be fabricated. Thereafter, since
the demand is likely to pick up, they have been taking advance action
to initiate a programme to set up fabrication facilities for the most
critical components of this, which only SAMEER can do. A lot of
money is going to be spent on a large project that SAMEER is going
to launch next year i.e. setting up of the facility for fabrication of the
LINAC, and also on technology. The cost of imported machine is stated
to be Rs. 5 crore whereas SAMEER expects to sell it for about Rs. 2
crore to Rs. 2.5 crore in India. It has further been informed that
SAMMER is also making an effort to pass the technology to private
entrepreneurs.
58. To a specific query regarding patenting the LINAC machine, it
was stated that there are certain components of the machine like the
high power RF window, which is actually a vacuum tube and Electronic
interface which passes x-ray and at the same time allows vacuum to
be there, that can go for patent. To a suggestion of the Committee to
patent these components before SAMEER passes them to the private
entrepreneurs, the director, SAMEER responded in affirmative.
59. The Committee were informed that SAMEER had utilized Rs.
11.60 crore, Re. 14.70 crore against the allocation of Rs. 12.00 crore, Rs.
14.70 crore for 2002-03, 2003-04 and are likelty to spend full utilization
of allocation of the year 2004-05.
Research and Development
60.  The Committee enquired about the new initiatives proposed
to be taken by DIT during 2005-06 in their R & D programmes. In

24
response, it has been stated that some of the initiatives which are in
the advanced stage of formulation or have resulted into actual projects
for implementation during 2005-06 include major thrust in Nano-
technology, Main National Grid Computing initiative, wireless sensors
and RFID related technologies, Free/open Source Software related
capabilities, consolidation of language Computing programme, Research,
Development and deployment of ICT technologies for common man
etc.
 61.The Committee were intimated that DIT had projected Rs.
293.30 crore for R & D programmes for the year 2005-06, while the
Planning Commission approved only Rs. 192 crore. Asked about the
schemes/projects which will have to be sacrificed as a result of reduced
allocation, it has been stated that the major reduction has been in the
allocation of C-DAC from Rs. 87 crore to Rs. 60 crore and for Media
Lab Asia from Rs. 65 crore to Rs. 1 crore. It has been added that in
view of the lesser allocation for C-DAC, the following activities will
find lower priority or will be taken in the 2nd half of the year based
on the provision of additional funds in RE during the year 2005-06:
• Commencement of main Garuda Grid Project.
• 10 GBPS Grid Fabric.
• Research and Technology Development Projects.
• Setting up of Linux HPC Technology Excellence Centre.
• VLSI, MEMS Labs
• New R&D initiatives in Science and Engineering Computing:
Earthquake Engineering, Systems Biology, Air Quality
Management, Content Based Image Retrieval and
Visualisation, Multiscale Modeling and Simulation.
•T echnology for Adhoc Wireless Networks and Wimax
(802.16) Networks
• Development of additional tools in e-Governance and e-
Learning.
• Sensors for smell and taste to support Agro-processing
industry.
• National Initiative on Low cost PC design including chipsets.

25
62. In case of projects of MLA, it has been stated that if the
allocations are not enhanced, the number of new research projects to
be supported by MLA would get reduced. Also, the level of field
testing & pilot deployment to test and showcase the impact of the
technology will be done on a very small scale. It was further added
that initiatives in the area of Nanotechnology, Electronics for Health,
Broadband technologies, E-commerce and Infosecurity R & D may
require more funds than those allocated in 2005-06.
Manpower Development
63.  The Committee desired to know about the problem of attrition
faced by the Department of IT. In response, the representative of STQC
stated that the attrition rate was not very high in STQC. However the
main issue was stated to be that they had to induct more people in
the upcoming areas as quite a few areas had emerged, especially the
role in standards and testing in IT area and that was the reason they
needed more people. The Secretary, DIT supplemented that though
there was no manpower shortage as such but there were certain skills
in which manpower was not available. It was expected that by the
year 2009 or so there might be certain amount of shortfalls. There
were also high-end services where a new demand was about to come
where knowledge was not available.
64. It has further been stated that the information security
education and awareness as a concept and as a subject is very
important from the point of view of trusted services in both IT and
IT enabled services in future. In order to build a manpower that will
service these requirements, a model of capacity building was designed
in which institutional capacity building would require manpower
development as well as would require laboratory setting up and the
content, that is, curriculum design. The working group was assigned
this task and it recommended some of the courses or develop masters
courses including existing courses and place these courses in
educational institutions, in engineering colleges and train their teachers.
Emphasis is therefore on training of trainers. So the strategy adopted
is to set up Resource Centres(RCs). Nine RCs which would be assigned
for the participating engineering college institutions or laboratories or
societies which are imparting education would mentor these institutions.
They have also identified IITs, Indian Institute of Science, TIFR, Mumbai
to offer training of trainers and serve established laboratories in each
of these centers. It has been added that as the software for information

26
security is very expensive and the development of that software will
be the major component of their programmes.
65. The witness informed during evidence that they had also been
supporting in this project the PhD programmes. They are offering
attractive stipend to students so that they can develop this. The first
training which will start this year would involve training of trainers
in the TIFR, Mumbai. For this program, they have tied up with two
renowned institutions in the world; one in USA and other France.
They would be sending 20 persons to the USA university . They will
become master trainers to train IT professionals desirous of developing
computer security professional skills. There is also stated to be an
awareness programme where they are envisaging that the general public
should be made aware of the fact that everyone must be secured in
his network operations. In this way they would be producing about
15,000 professionals in five years, although total national requirement
would be about five times of that. It was mentioned that the efforts
would yield limited results because of low budgetary support.
66. When asked as to whether the programme has the interaction
with the industry personnel because there they could get the actual
feed-back which would strengthen their training programme, the
witness stated that the working Group had representations from the
industry but now it has been decided to create an interactive industry
interface either mid-course or during one of sessions with NASSCOM-
HRD summit where they would be getting feedback from them. To a
suggestion of the Committee to tie up the Resource Centres with the
industry also besides the institutes, the witness reacted in the
affirmative.
67. During a recent study visit of the Committee to SAMEER,
Chennai, the Committee were apprised that they had been facing the
problem of attrition for long. It was submitted that good manpower
had always been in shortage. As per the directives of the Ministry of
Finance, they were having gap for the last 4 to 5 years. They have
tried to work on some methodologies to meet this gap. They have
been doing campus recruitment on contract basis in the month of
January-February. Now, they were trying to make up with having more
number of stand-by people. They have been trying to adjust them. At
the same time, it would be creating a gap when the leadership comes
up at a certain period of time. It was desired that certain exemptions
should be given to SAMEER also was being given to DRDO. They

27
strongly desired that the gap in the manpower should be addressed
to. Otherwise after a certain period of time there would be a big
vacuum.
68. In this context, in a written reply to a specific query furnished
to the Committee, it was stated that considering the strength of Indian
ITES and its potential to place India as global and contract research,
a Task Force on Human Resource Development in IT was constituted
with the objective to analyse the present manpower delivery mechanism
in terms of quantity and quality as well as skilled set vis-a-vis global
ITES requirement during the 10th and 11th Plan period. The said Task
Force submitted its Report in December, 2003. The Report has 26
recommendations. These recommendations are stated to be meant to
create an environment which would help generating the relevant
manpower quantity as well as in skill sets.
69. When asked about the Department’s planning to implement
these recommendation, it has been stated that they were formulating
strategy for the implementation of Task Force recommendations through
analysis of manpower and skill set gaps, ITES certification, promoting
changes in curriculum for skill set inculcation.
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer courses (DOEACC)
Society
70. The DOEACC Society, an Autonomous Body of the Department
of Information Technology Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology, was established in November, 1994, for the implementation
of DOEACC Scheme, a joint scheme of Department of Information
Technology and the All India Council for Technical education (AICTE).
The objective of the scheme is to harness the infrastructure and the
facilities available in the computer training institutions in the non-
formal sector to generate qualified manpower. In December 2002, three
Societies namely RCC Chandigarh, RCC Kolkata & CEDTI under the
administrative control of Department of Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology were merged
with DOEACC Society. The mandate of the Society has since been
enhanced and is to carryout HR Development and related activities in

28
the area of Information, Electronics and Communication Technology
(IECT). Under the scheme, following four levels of courses are offered:
LEVEL EQUIVALENCY
‘O’ Level Equivalent to Foundation level course
‘A’ Level Equivalent to Advanced Diploma in Computer
applications
‘B’ Level Equivalent to MCA level course
‘C’ Level Equivalent to M.Tech. level course
71.  It may be seen that during 2003-04, for conduct of O, A, B &
C level courses, 75,000 student applied for various courses, out of
which only 49,391 were registered. Also during 2004-05 out of a target
of 82,500 students to be registered only 42,275 students were registered.
Similarly, during 2003-04, 1,50,000 candidates appeared for various levels
of exam, out of which only 1,30,051 candidates were admitted. During
2004-2005 out of 1,65,000 students appeared, 1,04,000 students were
admitted. It was observed that comparatively lower targets have been
kept for the year 2005-2006 to register 50,000 students and to admit
1,00,000 candidates for O, A, B and C level courses.
72. When asked about the reasons for substantial gap between the
targets and achievements during the last three years, it has been
clarified that the reason for substantial gap between the targets and
achievements during the last three years include the availability of
large number of courses being offered by Universities/ deemed to be
Universities/ Affiliated Colleges who are approving Institutes in the
private sector and offering formal degree programmes. As such, the
choice available to the students to opt for computer courses from
various IT educational Institutes is widening, thereby affecting the
DOEACC Courses. Further, DOEACC is maintaining high standards
in respect of its Syllabus as well as Conduct of Examinations. Another
reason for the gap is stated to be the absence of academic recognition
of DOEACC Courses. The Society has made progress in the matter of
academic recognition of DOEACC B Level course with All India Council
of Technical Education (AICTE) through Distance Education Council,
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU). Academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course is expected to increase the
intake of DOEACC courses amongst students.

29
73. To a specific query regarding strategy, if any, formulated by
DOEACC to meet the increasing demand of IT professionals, it has
been informed that the strategy of the Society to meet the increasing
demand of IT professionals is to interact with industry associations
such as NASSCOM to review/redesign the DOEACC courses with
regard to their appropriateness and employability, besides launching
new courses in emerging areas including IT Enabled Services (ITES) –
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). The Society has already launched
Bioinformatics courses at ‘O’ and ‘A’ Level at DOEACC Centres. ITES-
BPO courses have been launched in North-Eastern Region with financial
assistance of Department of Development of North-Eastern Region
(DONER), besides Jammu and Srinagar. The Society has planned to
launch DOEACC Hardware courses during the financial year 2005-06.
Nanotechnology
74. Nanotechnology is stated to be an emerging, interdisciplinary
field involving development of nano-materials, devices and systems
and finding revolutionary applications in almost all fields of science
and engineering. Nanotechnology is being regarded as the next
technological revolution has attracted the attention of scientists,
researchers and technologists all over the world and is likely to have
profound affect on almost all industry sectors and application areas.
75. During evidence, the representative of the Department stated
that enormous funding had been going on in this area for the last
seven to eight years and the level in the United States this year was
about 700 to 800 million dollars. USA had already approved a budget
of over 3.5 billion dollars for the next four years or so. There is
enormous funding in Europe, China, Japan and so on. It has been
planned to make a beginning this year through initiation of some
competence building projects. There are already seven on-going projects
essentially in the area of nano-materials at some of our laboratories at
IIT, Chennai and so on.
76. As regards the projects to be taken up during 2005-05, it has
been informed that they are taking three major projects ; one at CSI,
Chandigarh, which will essentially be in the areas of carbon nano-
tubes for targeted drug deliver. The other project is at National Physical
Laboratory which is on meteorology. The third biggest project for which
already the AFCI papers have been moved and the Planning
Commission is examining those papers, is setting up nano-electronic

30
centers at IIC, Bangalore and at IIT, Mumbai. There is MoU between
IIT and IIC which is the first of its kind in IIT history between the
two institutions for a collaborative effort. This is close to Rs. 100 crore
project. The documents are already under circulation and the final
decision on the same is expected soon. It may be seen that for the
year the Planning Commission has given a budgetary support of Rs.
40 crore for programmes under Nanotechnology.
National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy
77. The Department of Information Technology has stated to have
prepared a paper on “National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing
Policy”. The strategy paper addresses issues on Tariff policy, Exim
Policy, Hardware Manufacturing Cluster Parks, supporting R&D,
marketing Made in India, inviting large Electronics Manufacturing
Service Companies to set-up Indian operations, development of
semiconductor industry, labour laws, patenting etc. The Tariff and EXIM
Policy matters have been taken up with the concerned departments.
The draft paper has been referred to the National Manufacturing
Competitive Council (NMCC) set up to promote the manufacturing in
India.
78. When asked about the progress made so far in this regard, the
Department informed the Committee as under:-
“The following major fiscal measures have been taken by the
Government for rationalisation of tariff structure for the Hardware
sector:
Customs duty is zero% on specified raw materials/inputs used for
manufacture of electronic components/optical fibres/cables and on
specified capital goods used for manufacture of electronic goods.
Central Excise duty is zero% on Computers, Microprocessors, Hard
Disc Drives, Floppy Disc Drives and CD ROM Drives. In the
Budget 2005-06, customs duty on ITA-1 items (217 items) has been
abolished w.e.f. 1.3.2005. All goods required in the manufacture of
ITA-1 items have been exempted from customs duty subject to
Actual user condition. Customs duty on specified electronic
components has also been exempted.”
79. The Committee were further informed that DIT had taken up
the proposal for modification of the Electronics Hardware Technology

31
Park (EHTP) Scheme with the Department of Commerce. Further the
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) has
constituted a Sub-group on IT Hardware sector. Secretary, Department
of Information Technology is a member of the Sub-group. The Sub-
group on IT Hardware sector is having discussions with the
stakeholders as part of the on-going exercise for energizing and
sustaining the growth of manufacturing industry in general, including
IT hardware.
Digital DNA Park
80.  The Committee learnt that in order to foster the growth of
bio-informatics/biotechnology sector in the country, the Department of
IT had decided to create specialized infrastructure for the
biotechnology/bio-tech sector in the country. With this objective a
meeting was held under the chairmanship of the Secretary, DIT to
chalk out a plan for setting up of Digital DNA(Bio-IT Park) in the
country.
81. In view of nil utilization of funds of Rs. 3.50 crore and Rs. 5
crore allocated during 2003-04 and 2004-05 for the project, the
Committee wanted to know the reasons for the same. The Department
in a written reply have furnished the details of the progress made in
the scheme so far. It has been informed that as the biotechnology/bio-
tech sector is also dealt by Department of Biotechnology (DBT),
discussions were held with Secretary DBT and they endorsed the
project. STPI has been appointed as a nodal agency on behalf of DIT
and DBT in the implementation of the project. In May, 2003 STPI
invited proposals from leading consultancy firms. A committee
consisting of representatives of DIT, DBT and STPI selected M/s Ernst
& Young for the assignment. The work was entrusted to them in
February, 2004. STPI along with M/s Ernst & Young held stakeholder
consultation workshops at six locations in the country in April 2004.
M/s Ernst & Young submitted the feasibility Report in August, 2004
for setting up the Bio-IT Park. Six locations have been short-listed in
the Feasibility Report. This Report was submitted to the Planning
Commission which accorded the approval on 13.10.2004.
82. It has further been stated that the Bio-IT Par is proposed to be
set up in the form of Public-Private Partnership(PPP) model. In order
to select a suitable private promoter STPI invited Request for
Qualification(RFQ) in December 2004. 17 bidders have been shortlisted

32
after the evaluation process. The Secretary , DIT have also written to
the Chief Secretaries of the States having the short listed locations.
Encouraging response has been received from the State Governments.
Intellectual Property Rights Promotion Program((IPRPP)
83. According to the Department of Information Technology,
Intellectual Property Right(IPR) culture in India, at present is inadequate
and calls for a focused efforts or increasing IPR awareness, training,
facilitation for obtaining technological ownership and market
exploitations. The Committee have been informed that the Department
of Information Technology has been making concerted efforts to
enhance the awareness of national and international IPR developments
in the ICT sector. The focused areas are stated to be :
(i) to create awareness and impart training
(ii) to provide promotional and facilitator support for enhancing
IPR portfolio of the country
(iii) to develop tools, augment knowledge databases and
expertise to provide value-added Technology Alert based
on Patent Search System(TAPS), so as to assist technology
assessment; development/acquisition and to arrive at
investment decisions; and
(iv) to respond to IPR needs of the digital era.
Information-Security
84. STQC is stated to have established Information Security
Management System certification framework under which a number
of Major IT industries and organizations have been certified as per BS
7799 Standard. In association with the Institute for Development and
research in Banking Technology, STQC has also developed guidelines
for Banking & Financial sector for implementation of Information
Security Management System and has also taken the lead in certifying
Banks for Information Security Management System.
85 With regard to the security aspect in the area of e-Governance,
the DG, STQC during evidence stated that they had evolved a quality
assurance framework in which the first part would be testing of
products. The main emphasis was given to functional aspects which
were documentation, security and usability and all these issues would

33
be tested and they had also tested a dozen of NIC products. At present,
the municipal products were stated to be under testing. The next phase
was stated to be of the security aspect and they would start using all
these products. It was added that the key issue for any citizen would
be that how much he was secured and how much he could trust on
the networks. This would mean a secured environment in which people
would be sending their critical information or their financial information
which is being processed, out-sourced in our country and that must
be secured.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
General
1. The Committee recognize the tremendous contribution of the
Information Technology sector in branding India globally as an
economic powerhouse and a service economy. In order to meet the
targets/expectations of the IT sector for the future years, the
Committee are resolved to facilitating growth of the IT sector through
their recommendations made from time to time on policy matters,
manpower development and removal of duty barriers.
Tenth Plan Allocation
2. The Committee observe that the Planning Commission has
approved a total budgetary support of Rs. 2714 crore to the
Department of Information Technology (DIT) for the Tenth Five Year
Plan period and the Department incurred an expenditure of Rs.
1604.98 crore in the first three year of the Plan. Assuming that the
proposed BE of Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06, which is the
fourth year of the Plan, is fully utilized, the Department will be left
with a budgetary support of only Rs. 179.72 crore for the last year
of the Tenth Plan. The Committee further note that the IT industry
is, admittedly, one of the fastest growing sectors of the Indian
economy and the thrust of the DIT’s projects/schemes is to prepare
a strong base for vibrant growth of this sector through its various
activities and therefore the Department needs sufficient budgetary
provisions. As the Department has itself, in the Mid-term appraisal,
highlighted their requirement of budgetary support of Rs. 2500 crore
for the last two years of the Tenth Plan, the unutilised portion of
the earlier approved plan outlay being Rs. 179.72 crore, would not
be able to meet the requirements of the Department in undertaking
its various important projects upto the desired level. Some of these
projects are e-Governance, Community Information Centres(CICs) and
Vidya Vahini Programme, Nanotechnology, Special Manpower
Development for VLSI Design, Information Security Education and
Awareness Programme, C-DAC and National Informatics Centre(NIC).
The Planning Commission ought to have taken note of the vital
importance of the schemes in the development of the IT Sector in

35
the country. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend
the Department to take up the matter with the Planning Commission
at an appropriate level for enhancing suitably the Tenth Plan
allocation to provide adequate budgetary support for different
projects being undertaken by the DIT. The Government should
extend all its legislative support to ensure that the Information
Technology sector meets its projections in the Software, ITES, BPO
and the Hardware Sectors.
Budgetary Allocations for the year 2005-06
3. The Committee are concerned to note that though the
Department of Information Technology had proposed to the Planning
Commission a plan allocation of Rs. 1400.67 crore for the year 2005-
06 for its various schemes, yet the Planning Commission approved
allocation of only Rs. 929.30 crore. As per the Planning Commission
the allocation of DIT has been increased from Rs.650 crore (RE) in
2004-05 to Rs.929.30 crore for the year 2005-06 as a special
consideration keeping in view the importance of e-Governance and
other IT projects being implemented by the DIT. The Committee
are not at all convinced with the plea of the Planning Commission
in this regard, due weightage appears to have not been given to e-
Governance or IT projects as is evident from the fact that proposed
allocation of Rs. 632 crore for e-Governance itself has been reduced
by Rs. 332 crore to the level Rs. 300 crore. In the Committee’s opinion,
such reductions would have an adverse impact on the programmes
of the Department of Information Technology. They, therefore,
strongly desire that the Department should take up the issue of
enhancement of allocations for the year 2005-06 with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.
Utilisation of Funds during the year 2004-05
4. The Committee are happy to note that during the year 2004-
05, the Department of IT would be able to utilise around Rs. 645
crore(tentative) out of the allocation of Rs. 650 crore. In the previous
years also the Department had optimally utilized the funds allocated
to them as out of the allocation of Rs. 470 crore and Rs. 495 crore
during the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 utilization was Rs. 465.35 crore
and Rs. 492.88 crore respectively. The Committee appreciate various
measures being taken by the Department to ensure optimum
utilization of the budgetary allocation of Rs. 929.30 crore for the

36
year 2005-06 also. Some of these measures are review of the on-
going projects by the Programme Review and Steering Group (PRSG)
on quarterly basis for monitoring the progress on regular basis and
for timely recommendation for release of the fund, proposal for
holding meetings of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) and the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on monthly basis in respect
of new projects and review of plan achievements by the Secretary(IT)
on quarterly basis. The Committee consider that these steps are in
the right direction, which would ensure not only optimum utilization
of funds but also give an opportunity to the Department to have a
close and regular monitoring of flow of expenditure under different
heads.
National Action Plan on e-Governance (NEGAP)
5. The Committee observe that the vision behind the e-
Governance is to make all the Government services and relevant
information accessible to the common man. To promote e-Governance
on a massive scale, a National Action Plan on e-Governance (NEGAP)
has been drawn for implementation during 2003-07. It is a centralised
initiative having a much more decentralised model for
implementation. Various Government Ministries/Departments are
responsible for implementation of the Mission Mode Projects(MMPs)
assigned to them with regard to NEGAP . The direct responsibility
of the Department of Information Technology pertains to the areas
of Creation of State Wide Area Network(SWAN), Establishment of
National Data Centre/State Data Centres, Establishment of Common
Service Centres, Horizontal transfer of successful e-Governance
applications, E-Portal/Service Delivery Gateway, Awareness and
assessment of similar projects, HRD, Technical support, UNDP and
other related activities like e-readiness formulation for Core Policies
and Standards etc. Web-sites, Office automation Centre for e-
Governance(CEG), application development, Programmes management
etc. The Committee realise that sincere efforts are required to be
made by the Department to effectively implement the e-Governance
programmes throughout the country. They, therefore, recommened
that the Department should accord top priority to the implementation
of all these projects in a systematic and organised manner. There is
also a need for effective co-ordination among the various participants
like the NIC, National Institute of Smart Governance(NISG), NICSI,
Line Ministries/Departments/State Governments etc. with a view to
providing a more focussed attention to the implementation of e-

37
Governance programme. The Committee would further like to caution
the implementing bodies to focus on the effective delivery of the
solutions to the common man rather than get overwhelmed by the
hardware and technology aspects of the Projects.
6. The Committee note that DIT are taking several steps to
implement the e-Governance programme. One of these are issue of
Policy Guidelines to provide support to State Governments to
establish State Wide Area Networks (SWANs) from the State
Headquarters up to the Block level with a minimum bandwidth
capacity of 2 Mbps. NIC has already set up a Data Centre at Delhi
and have identified various State Data Centres to cater to the
requirements of the States to enable the aggregation of the
fragmented data in the States and also to facilitate service delivery
from centralised data centre. Also a scheme to establish Common
Service Centre has been drafted and is being given a final shape. A
policy framework is also evolved to provide funding support to
establish Common Service Centres across the country by the year
2007 and initiatives are proposed to be taken to create an enabling
environment for delivering Government and other need based private
services to rural citizens. In view of the submission of Department
of Information Technology that Budget provision for e-Governance
for the year 2004-05 and 2005-06 is being utilized towards creation
of State Wide Area Networks (SWAN), State Data Centres and
Common Service Delivery Centres, the Committee would like to be
assured that the funds allocated would be fully utilised vis-à-vis
achievements of physical targets. The Committee would further desire
the Department to examine the possibility of setting up of SWAN,
National Data Centre/State Data Centres and Common Service
Centres in an integrated manner.
7. The Committee learn that the DIT is also making efforts to
address the issues of standardization, interoperability, implementation
of pilot projects, infrastructural requirements, augmentation of
capacity and those relating to technical support for effective
implementation of the e-Governance programme. An Advisory Group
has also been constituted to advise the various decision making
bodies on policy and strategy issues. The Department have been
working on specialised training programmes for Chief Information
Officers(CIOs) and for the policy makers at the State level as well
as for individual Ministries. Steps are also being taken to improve
the service delivery and outcome of the programmes. The Committee

38
observe that these functions to be undertaken by the DIT are of
utmost importance and therefore they desire that the Department
should do comprehensive planning in all areas particularly in the
area of building the capacity in the States so that by the time
Common Service Centres are set up, the citizens could at once start
utilising their services.
8. The Committee note that the Department of IT, in addition to
various ongoing activities under National Plan on e-Governance
(NEGAP), has proposed to take other initiatives such as replication
of successful e-Governance projects, development of Geographical
Information Service(GIS)/ Geographical Positioning Service (GPS),
Languages Interfaces, Security, setting up of Programme Management
Structure, support for the Centre for e-Governance, website
Management etc. However, the Committee are very much concerned
to note that in view of the reduced allocation, DIT would be required
to scale down its various activities under the NEGAP . In their
opinion, such reductions would have an adverse impact in the
nation’s attempt at bridging the digital divide with rural India and
the Indian masses. They would, therefore, like to recommend that
as and when the implementation of the projects are on track
successfully, the DIT should plead for more resources for similar
implementations, may be at the RE stage.
9. The Committee find that during discussion of Annual Plan
on e-Governance on 22.12.2004, the Planning Commission had
observed that NEGAP should clearly indicate how the plan would
link-up transfer of 2-3% of Plan funds allocated to Line Ministries
for e-Governance and IT related activities and how the 2-3% would
come from Ministries where there was no plan funding like Ministry
of Finance and how they would be accommodated in the NEGAP .
The Planning Commission had, therefore, advised that only after
ascertaining clear cut funding pattern and process re-engineering
methods appropriately in NEGAP , the DIT could go for approval.
The Planning Commission had approved an allocation of Rs. 300
crore subject to DIT taking up these actions promptly. The DIT was
also asked to make a presentation of NEGAP before full Planning
Commission and also to firm up business re-engineering process for
NEGAP in the next six months time.
10.  The Committee, however, observe that the Department have
stated that the concerned line Ministries/Departments are expected

39
to formulate detailed project proposals including funding and process
re-engineering and obtain necessary approvals as far as
implementation of the Mission Mode Projects under the NEGAP is
concerned. The Department also stated that they on their part would
be extending support towards technical assistance and for establishing
common core infrastructure. It has also been submitted that the
Planning Commission have advised all the Ministries and also
written to them that their IT component should be communicated to
DIT and therefore it is the Planning Commission which will really
have to see that this has actually been implemented. The Committee
thus feel that the DIT should take seriously the suggestions of the
Planning Commission to co-ordinate with the line Ministries/
Departments. They are of the firm opinion that being the nodal
Department in the matter and also being specifically advised by the
Planning Commission it is the primary responsibility of the
Department to ensure that all activities under e-Governance are
undertaken effectively in the time bound manner. There is also an
imperative need to impress upon the line Ministries/Departments/
State Governments to take initiative in this regard.
Community Information Centres(CICs)
11. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the
Department of Information Technology in setting up of Community
Information Centres (CIC) project which is reportedly proving to be
an effective interface between the Government and the general
public. They also note with satisfaction that the Department
successfully set up 487 CICs in eight North-Eastern States and 60
CICs in J & K also on replications basis to bring the benefits of
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) for socio-
economic development of these areas by providing broadband
connectivity. The Committee trust that the remaining 75 CICs to be
set up by October, 2005 will be operationalised within the fixed
time frame.
12. The Committee further note that the proposal for setting up
CICs in Uttaranchal has been formulated and the EFC Memo of the
project is under review by Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance. The Committee desire that matter should be pursued with
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance so that the people of
Uttaranchal may soon get the benefits of CICs. They strongly
advocates the replication of CIC model in remote and under-
developed regions of India.

40
National Informatics Centre(NIC)
13. The Committee recognize the strategically important role of
NIC in creating the infrastructure backbone for delivering
Government services across the nation. However, they regret to note
that out of the target of setting up of 10 NIC district centres in
newly created districts during 2004-2005, NIC could set up only two
NIC districts centres. The non-availability of the sites is stated to be
the reason for the shortfall in target. They feel that such a situation
could have been effectively met by proper advance planning. The
Committee trust that NIC would in future anticipate such
implementation problems and fix the targets keeping in view the
basic requirement for their projects i.e. availability of sites. The
Committee feel that DIT should take up the matter with the
concerned State Governments. The onus for identifying the sites
and making them available lies with the State Governments also.
14. The Committee are constrained to note that some of the NIC
activities though targeted to be completed in 2004-05, remained
incomplete and will now be taken up for completion during 2005-
06. These activities are Establishment of offsite Disaster Recovery
site for NIC Certifying Authority, Establishment of Key Archiving
facilities for archival of encryption keys, Detailed Study, procurement
of systems and data entry for Smart Island Project, Setting up
usability Lab for India Image and procurement & setting up hierarchy
of storage solutions to cater to the varying demands of Government
Departments. The Committee observe that failure to successfully
execute these activities within the year will obviously affect the
achievement of activities targeted for the year 2005-06. The
Committee, therefore, express their concern over such delays and
recommend that the reasons for the same should be identified and
corrected for timely implementation of these critical projects.
Responsibility should also be fixed for the delay in implementation
of all such projects. As a body that understands very well the
requirements of Government’s/Departments, NIC should strengthen
itself to play a pivotal and co-ordinating role in identification,
development and implementation of e-Governance programme in
close co-ordination with DIT and NISG.
Media Lab Asia (MLA)
15. The Committee are dismayed to note the slow pace in the
implementation of activities of Media Lab Asia(MLA). Though the

41
Planning Commission had approved a Gross Budgetary Support(GBS)
of Rs. 300 crore for Media Lab Asia for the Tenth Plan period, but
surprisingly no money was spent on the project in first three years
of the Tenth Plan. Although, the Department had proposed an outlay
of Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 65 crore during the years 2002-
03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively but no serious thought appears
to have been given to the implementation of the project thus denying
the benefits to the masses. Despite the passage of considerable time,
no clear picture of R & D activities to be conducted by MLA or its
benefits has emerged. The Committee would, therefore, like to be
kept apprised of the details of the various activities undertaken by
MLA so far.
16. The Committee learn that the board of MLA has been
constituted and also an Expert Sub Committee appointed to go into
this matter. The Report of the said Committee is expected shortly.
The Committee had, however earlier been informed during
examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 that
Technical Advisory Board had been constituted in December, 2003
but nothing concrete has been reported so far to enable the MLA
programme to take off and thus the Board constituted earlier for the
purpose appears to have failed to yield any results. The Committee
trust that DIT would expedite the submission of Expert Sub-
Committee report to initiate proposed activities of MLA at the
earliest.
17. The Committee find that of late, the Department is trying to
define and concentrate on some kind of activity areas for MLA which
are not being done by other Companies so as to avoid duplication.
The Committee strongly desire that the bottlenecks in the
implementation process of the MLA project should be identified
and removed immediately. They trust that the fresh efforts being
made in this regard would yield positive results.
Electronics & Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC)
18. The Committee observe that Electronics & Computer Software
Export Promotion Council (ESC) is one of the largest industry
association representing 2200 exporting companies from the field of
electronics and computer software/services sector. It has a committee
having twenty two members from the industry and four members
as Government nominees. It is basically engaged in arranging trade

42
shows, exhibitions, match making and also interface with policy
makers. The Committee are happy to note the efforts made so far
by ESC in organising the export shows in the area of IT like
“INDIASOFT”. The Committee also note that as compared to Japan,
which is the second largest IT market in the world, India’s share of
software export is only to the extent of about 3.5 percent at present.
According to the DIT, one of the reasons for such a low share of
software exports is the language barrier. The Committee feel that
the ESC effort in organising Japanese and German languages
programmes will help preparing IT professional in developing
alternative market like Japanese and German IT market.
19. The Committee further learn that ESC intends to set up an
export facilitation and business support centre in the US in the
current year, which will provide a platform to Indian small and
medium companies to tap US market and would also enable them
with networking facilities to identify customers. ESC is also planning
to set up something on the lines of INDIASOFT for the promotion
and growth of hardware sector also. The Committee would like to
be kept apprised of the results achieved in those areas.
20. The Committee are happy to learn that ESC has been able to
fully utilise the allocation made during the last three years. Out of
an allocation of Rs. 4 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore and Rs. 8.50 crore during
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05, ESC has utilised Rs. 8 crore, Rs. 9.96
crore and Rs. 8.50 crore respectively. However, the Committee are
disappointed to find that for the current year i.e. 2005-06, the Planning
Commission has not allocated any amount for ESC, though an outlay
of Rs. 10 crore was proposed by the Department to carry out its
various programmes.
21. The Committee observe that ESC has been playing a
significant and crucial role in increasing the software and hardware
export in the world market as per the present need and therefore
the Committee would strongly recommend that efforts should be
made to get suitable allocation for ESC at the RE stage so that it
could effectively perform its various programmes planned during
the current year for the benefit of exporters of IT products.
Society for Applied Microwave Electronic Engineering and
Research(SAMEER)
22. The Committee recognize the invaluable contribution
SAMEER is making in the field of high power RF amplifiers, RF

43
communications systems, linear accelerators, atmospheric
instrumentations and industrial RF/microwave based applications etc.
They further note that one of the major projects that SAMEER has
been doing in the area of Electronics in Health (e-Health). There is
an availability of only 40-50 LINAC machines in India though the
need is for 1000 LINAC machines as the number of cancer patients
in India is increasing at the rate of 3 lakh per year. The Department
has initiated a programme with SAMEER to develop 6 MV LINAC,
which is a state of the art machine. Under phase I of this project
two machines are being developed and the next year SAMEER would
start Phase-II, in which four more machines will be fabricated. It is
also planned to take advance action to initiate a programme to set
up fabrication facilities for the most critical components of LINAC
machine, which only SAMEER can do. The Committee hope that
implementation of the project would be undertaken by SAMEER
with all the seriousness it deserves and also in a larger scale by
augmenting the capacity if necessary. Emphasising R & D in IT
Sector, the Committee feel that focus should be encouraged instead
of diluting its activities. R& D spend is very-very critical for
sustaining the growth rate for strengthening the economy.
23. The Committee observe that SAMEER has been able to utilize
Rs. 11.60 crore, Rs. 14.70 crore and Rs. 18 crore against the allocation
of Rs. 12.00 crore, Rs. 14.70 crore and Rs. 18.00 crore during 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively which indicate almost full utilization
of funds. The Committee hope that likewise SAMEER would be
able to optimally utilise the allocation of Rs. 20 crore made for the
year 2005-06.
24. The Committee further note that the SAMEER is making an
effort to pass the technology for manufacturing the LINAC machine
to private entrepreneurs also. The Committee in this context earnestly
desire that action should be initiated to get patented the components
of the LINAC Machine being developed by SAMEER like the high
power RF window, which is actually a vacuum tube and Electronic
interface which passes x-ray and at the same time allows vacuum
etc. The Committee also desire that the Department should take care
that the patent right is first obtained before the technology is passed
on to the private sector.
Research and Development
 25. Focused Research and Development is a sine-qua-non for
the growth of the technology sector. In fact, the focus on R & D

44
should actively be nurtured and encouraged adequately. Indeed, the
Committee’s impression after visiting some of the organizations
engaged in R & D activities like SAMEER at Chennai, ERTL at
Tiruvananthapuram, C-DAC at Bangalore and C-MET at Hyderabad
has been encouraging and it rather re-enforced their expectations
about country’s capabilities. The Committee note that during 2005-
06, R & D programmes include major thrust in Nano-technology,
Main National Grid Computing initiative, wireless sensors and RFID
related technologies, Free/open Source Software related capabilities,
consolidation of language Computing programme, Research,
Development and deployment of Information and Communication
Technology for common man etc. The Committee are however
constrained to observe that through for implementation of these R
& D programmes, DIT had projected Rs. 293.30 crore for the year
2005-06, the Planning Commission approved the allocation of Rs.
192 crore only. Keeping in view the rising importance of R&D in IT
sector, the Committee do not find the budget allocation as adequate
and the reduction will undoubtedly result in tardy implementation
of R & D programmes as many schemes/projects would be sacrificed
as a result of reduced allocation. In their opinion, expenditure on R
& D is very critical for sustaining the growth rate for an emerging
economy and, therefore, there is an imperative need for provision of
the required funds for R & D.
26. The Committee further note that with the major reduction in
the allocation of C-DAC from Rs. 87 crore to Rs. 60 crore many
activities of C-DAC would be given lower priority or may be taken
up only in the 2nd half of the year, if additional funds at RE stage
are allocated during the year 2005-06. Some of the activities which
may be adversely affected are commencement of main Garuda Grid
Project (10 GBPS Grid Fabric and Research and Technology
Development Projects); Setting up of Linux HPC Technology
Excellence Centre; VLSI, MEMS Labs; New R&D initiatives in
Science and Engineering Computing: Earthquake Engineering,
Systems Biology, Air Quality Management, Content Based Image
Retrieval and Visualisation, Multi-scale Modeling and Simulation;
Technology for Adhoc Wireless Networks and Wimax (802.16)
Networks; Development of additional tools in e-Governance and e-
Learning; Sensors for smell and taste to support Agro-processing
industry and National Initiative on Low cost PC design including
chip sets . The C-DAC has been fully utilising the allocations in the
past as against the allocation of Rs. 10 crore, Rs. 26.35 crore and Rs.

45
40 crore in the previous three years, C-DAC has utilised the
allocations optimally and in such a situation downsizing the proposed
plan allocation for C-DAC will have serious consequences on its
various schemes. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the position may be explained with all its ramifications to the
Planning Commission for suitable enhancement of allocations for C-
DAC probably at the RE stage.
Manpower Development
27. The Committee feel that like R & D, a major thrust is
required to be given by the Government on the Manpower
Development. They are given to understand that there is shortage of
quality manpower in IT industry, especially scarcity of trained
personnel in the high-end skill areas of IT and design including
standards and testing. There are also certain skills and high-end
services where higher demand is likely to come but suitable qualified
and knowledgeable personnel are not available. Consequently, unless
adequate measures are taken for increasing the skilled base, a
shortage of manpower is expected by the year 2009.
28. The Committee further note that the Task Force on Human
Resource Development in IT constituted with the objective to analyse
the present manpower delivery mechanism in terms of quantity and
quality as well as skilled set vis-a-vis global ITES requirement during
the 10th and 11th Plan period submitted its Report in December,
2003. The Report has 26 recommendations which are meant to create
an environment, generating the relevant manpower quantity as well
as in skill sets. The Committee observe that more than one year has
passed but the Department is yet to formulate the strategy with
regard to implementation of the recommendations given by the Task
Force on Human Resource Development in IT. While expressing their
dissatisfaction over the slow pace with which the matter is being
processed, the Committee desire that necessary steps be taken
urgently to formulate the strategy so that the recommendation can
be implemented urgently and problem of shortage of manpower
specialised in certain skills which the IT Industry has been facing
can be solved.
29. The Committee learn that the information security education
and awareness is very important from the point of view of trusted
services in both IT and IT enabled services in future. In order to

46
build a manpower that will service these requirements, a model of
capacity building was designed in which institutional capacity
building would require manpower development as well as laboratory
setting up and the content, that is, curriculum design. The working
group recommended some of the courses and also strategy to design
new courses or develop masters courses including existing courses
and place these courses in educational institutions, in engineering
colleges and train their teachers. Emphasis is, therefore, on training
of trainers. Nine RCs which would be assigned for the participating
engineering institutions or laboratories or societies which are
imparting education would mentor these institutions. IITs, Indian
Institute of Science, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR),
Mumbai have also been identified for offering training of trainers
and serve established laboratories in each of these centers. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that these Resource Centres should
explore the feasibility of having a tie up with the industry as this
is the place where one can get the actual feed back regarding
emerging needs of the time and thus the training programmes can
be strengthened and regularly updated.
30. The Committee are concerned to note the problem of attrition
that SAMEER has been facing for long. They further learn that
SAMEER has been doing campus recruitment on contract basis and
also are trying to fill up this gap by having more number of stand-
by people. SAMEER has expressed its apprehension that such steps
might create a gap when the leadership question comes up at a
certain period of time. The Committee endorse the suggestion of
SAMEER that the Ministry of Finance should look into the possibility
of allowing certain exemptions to SAMEER like it is being given to
DRDO so that it can function with full vigour to yield the desirous
results. The Department should also examine the desirability of
providing suitable initiatives to minimize the rate of attrition of
technical personnel.
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer courses (DOEACC)
Society
31. The Committee are distressed to note that DOEACC has not
been able to register and admit as many students as the target fixed
for the last two years. During 2003-04 and 2004-05, against the target
of 75,000 and 82,500 students to be registered for conduct of O, A,
B & C level courses, only 49,391 and 42,275 students respectively

47
were registered. Similarly, again during 2003-04 and 2004-2005 against
the target of admitting 1,50,000 and 1,65,000 students candidates, only
1,30,051 and 1,04,000 students candidates respectively were admitted.
The reasons for shortfall in achievement of targets are stated to be
the availability of large number of courses being offered by
Universities/deemed Universities/ Affiliated Colleges who are
approved Institutes in the private sector and offering formal degree
programmes and as such, the choice available to the students to opt
for computer courses from various IT educational Institutes is
widening, thereby affecting the DOEACC Courses. Other reasons
are stated to be the high standards of DOEACC courses in respect
of its Syllabus as well as Conduct of Examinations and also the
absence of academic recognition of DOEACC Courses.
32. The Committee learn that the matter regarding academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level course with All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) through Distance Education Council,
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) has made some
progress. Academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course is
expected to increase the intake of DOEACC courses amongst students.
The Committee desire that the matter may be pursued vigorously to
get these courses recognized so that large number of candidates are
attracted towards them.
33. The Committee are satisfied to note that looking at the
increasing demand of IT professionals, the Society has adopted a
strategy to interact with industry associations such as NASSCOM to
review/redesign the DOEACC courses with regard to their
appropriateness and employability, besides launching new courses
in emerging areas including IT Enabled Services (ITES) – Business
Process Outsourcing (BPO). The Society has already launched
Bioinformatics courses at ‘O’ and ‘A’ Level at DOEACC Centres.
ITES-BPO courses have been launched in North-Eastern Region with
financial assistance of Department of Development of North-Eastern
Region (DONER), besides Jammu and Srinagar. The Society has
planned to launch DOEACC Hardware courses during the financial
year 2005-06. The Committee welcome the steps taken by DOEACC
which are in consonance with the present day requirement of the IT
professionals. They desire that greater importance should also be
attached to contents of these courses in consonance with the market
demand by framing a forward looking curriculum. The Committee
would like be apprised of the academic recognition of these courses
launched/proposed by DOEACC.

48
Nanotechnology
34. The Committee observe that Nanotechnology as an emerging,
interdisciplinary field involving development of nanomaterials,
devices and systems and finding revolutionary applications in almost
all fields of science and engineering. It is being regarded as the
next technological revolution. It has attracted the attention of
scientists, researchers and technologists all over the world and is
likely to have profound effect on almost all industry sectors and
application areas.
35. The Committee note that seven projects in the area of nano-
materials are on-going at some laboratories at IIT, Chennai. They
further note that some of the projects to be taken up during 2005-
06 are: one in the areas of carbon nano-tubes for targeted drug deliver
at CSI, Chandigarh, second is at National Physical Laboratory which
is on meterology and the third biggest project is setting up of
nonoelectronic centers at IIC, Bangalore and at IIT, Mumbai, for
which the AFCI papers are being examined by the Planning
Commission. The project estimate is stated to be close to Rs. 100
crore. The documents are already under circulation and final decision
on the same is expected soon. Keeping in view the importance of
nanotechnology in almost all fields of science and engineering and
also that there has been enoromous funding being done in Europe,
China, Japan etc. on developing Nanotechnology, the Committee
recommend that adequate funding should be done for research and
development in this area. With this end in view, the Committee
trust that allocation of Rs. 40 crore made during the year 2005-06 for
programmes under Nanotechnology will be fully utilised.
36. While applauding the R & D initiatives on Nano-technology,
the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should take
a clear view and initiative for framing policy to facilitate the creation
of fabrication units in the country.
National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy
37. The Committee were informed during the examination of the
Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 that the Department of
Information Technology had referred the draft paper on “National
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy” to the National
Manufacturing Competitive Council (NMCC) to promote

49
manufacturing in India. The Committee conclude from the reply to
a query regarding the present status with regard to the above said
policy that the “National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing
Policy” has not been finalized as yet.
38. The Committee observe that major fiscal measures have been
taken by the Government for rationalisation of tariff structure for
the Hardware sector like customs duty being zero% on specified
raw materials/inputs used for manufacture of electronic components/
optical fibres/cables and on specified capital goods used for
manufacture of electronic goods. Central Excise duty is zero% on
Computers, Microprocessors, Hard Disc Drives, Floppy Disc Drives
and CD ROM Drives. In the Budget 2005-06, customs duty on ITA-
1 items (217 items) has been abolished w.e.f. 1.3.2005. All goods
required in the manufacture of ITA-1 items have been exempted
from customs duty subject to Actual user condition and customs
duty on specified electronic components has also been exempted.
39. The Committee further observe that the DIT has taken up
the proposal for modification of the Electronics Hardware Technology
Park (EHTP) Scheme with the Department of Commerce. The
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) has
constituted a Sub-group on IT Hardware sector. The Secretary,
Department of Information Technology is a member of the Sub-
group. The Sub-group on IT Hardware sector is having discussions
with the stakeholders as part of the on-going exercise for energizing
and sustaining the growth of manufacturing industry in general,
including IT hardware.
40. The Committee understand that while the software industry
has shown a very impressive growth, the hardware industry has not
grown to the same extent. As the above said policy would address
issues on Tariff policy, Exim Policy, Hardware Manufacturing Cluster
Parks, supporting R&D, marketing Made in India, inviting large
Electronics Manufacturing Service Companies to set-up Indian
operations, development of semiconductor industry, labour laws,
patenting etc., the Committee recommend that all the formalities
should be completed expeditiously and the said policy be finalised
soon. They hope that once the policy will be in place, electronics
and hardware manufacturing sector would be energized and register
further growth. India can leverage its core competence in the Software
field many times over if coupled with a strong Hardware Policy.

50
With reasonable competence in the manufacturing of high end
hardware like ICs and ASICs, tremendous value addition to these
products can be made with the nation’s proven strength in Software
skills.
Digital DNA Park
41. The Committee observe that the Department of IT decided
to create specialized infrastructure for the biotechnology/bio-tech
sector in the country in order to foster the growth of bio-informatics/
biotechnology sector. However, they are concerned to note that the
Department has not utilized the allocation of Rs. 3.50 crore and Rs.
5 crore during 2003-04 and 2004-05 for the project.
42. The Committee find that STPI, which is the nodal agency
on behalf of DIT and Department of Biotechnology (DBT) in the
implementation of the project invited proposals from leading
consultancy firms in May, 2003. Thereafter, the work was entrusted
to M/s Ernst & Young in February, 2004. STPI alongwith them held
stakeholder consultation workshops at six locations in the country
in April 2004. M/s Ernst & Young submitted the feasibility Report
in August, 2004 for setting up the Bio-IT Park. Six locations have
been short-listed in the Feasibility Report. This Report was submitted
to the Planning Commission which accorded the approval on
13.10.2004. The Bio-IT Park is proposed to be set up in the form of
Public-Private Partnership(PPP) model. In order to select a suitable
private promoter STPI invited Request for Qualification(RFQ) in
December 2004. 17 bidders have been short listed after the evaluation
process. The DIT have also written to the Chief Secretaries of the
States having the short listed locations and the encouraging response
has been received from the State Governments.
43. The Committee observe that when so many formalities were
anticipated in the process involving years together, the allocations
under this head should not have been made earlier. The Committee,
however, now hope that implementation of the project would start
soon and Rs.10 crore allocated for the scheme would be fully utilized
for creating specialized infrastructure for the biotechnology/biotech
sector in the country to foster the growth of bio-informatics/
biotechnology sector.

51
Intellectual Property Rights Promotion Programme(IPRPP)
44. The Committee understand that a great amount of design
and development work is being done by multinationals and Indian
Corporates in India. The Committee attach a very high priority to
the protection of Intellectual Property Rights(IPRs) in the country.
They urge the Government to take all measures to reaffirm the
commitment of the country to safeguard the IPRs.
Information Security
45. The Committee attach a lot of importance to cyber security
and matters relating to protection of data bases. They urge the
Government to take all measures towards branding India globally
as a secure nation for strengthening security aspects of IT and to
create the confidence.
46. In this connection, the Committee note that Standardisation
Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate has established
Information Security Management System certification framework and
are certifying their client Companies. The Committee are of the view
that Information Security would be equally important in the
implementation of e-Governance programme. The Committee trust
that STQC would strengthen its Information Security Management
System programme.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 April, 2005 Chairman,
10 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 29 March, 2005 from 1100 hours to
1400 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
8. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Balbir K. Punj
11. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
12. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
13. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
52

53
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Information T echnology
1. Shri Brijesh Kumar Secretary
2. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ajeer Vidya JS & FA
4. Shri R. Chandrasekhar Joint Secretary
5. Shri Pankaj Agrawala Joint Secretary
6. Dr. U.P . Phadke Advisor
7. Dr. S.L. Sarnot DG, STQC
8. Dr. N. Vijayaditya DG, NIC
9. Shri K.R. Kini Director, Sameer
10. Dr. M.J. Zarabi CMD, SCL
11. Shri D.K. Sareen ED (ESC)
12. Dr. K.S.K. Sai Sr. Director, DIT
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Information Technology to the sitting of the Committee.
2. Thereafter, the Secretary , Department of Information Technology
highlighted the salient features of the Demands for Grants (2005-06),
which was followed by a brief presentation on the same.
3. The Members sought certain clarifications on the issues relating
related to Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of
Information Technology. The representatives responded to the same.
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing valuable information, in onnection with the
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Information
Technology.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept separately.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 11 Aprril, 2005 from 1100 hours to
1430 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri P .C. Thomas
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Balbir K. Punj
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
54

55
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up the following Draft
Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2005-06)‘ relating to
Department of Informattion Technology.
(ii) *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft Reports with
some amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, autthorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above-mentioned Reports tot he House int he light of the
factual verification received from the concerned Ministry/Department
on a day convenient to him.
5. The Committee also desired to undertake an on-the-spot study
visit during the last week of May and the first fortnight of the June
2005.
The Committee, then, adjourned.