47
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
THE ROLE OF PRASAR BHARATI AND
ITS FUTURE STATUS
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
June, 2007/Jyaistha, 1929 (Saka)


FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
THE ROLE OF PRASAR BHARATI AND
ITS FUTURE STATUS
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 12.06.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on ...........................
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ...........................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
June, 2007/Jyaistha, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 169
Price : Rs. 81.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory .............................................................................. 1
II. Functions and Objectives ...................................................... 2
III. Organisational Structure ........................................................ 2
IV . Autonomy of Prasar Bharati ................................................ 6
V. The Role of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service
Broadcaster ................................................................................ 10
VI. Financing and Funding Pattern .......................................... 14
VII. Capital and Financial Restructuring................................... 24
VIII. Digitalisation of Terrestrial Network ................................. 30
IX. New Technologies ................................................................... 33
X. Programme Content and Production ................................. 36
XI. Marketing .................................................................................. 38
XII. Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of
Employees ................................................................................. 40
XIII. Human Resource Development ........................................... 45
XIV . Future Status of Prasar Bharati........................................... 46
PART II
Recommendations/Observations .......................................... 48
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee
held on 4th October, 2006 ....................................... 63

II. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee
held on 8th November, 2006 .................................. 66
III. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee
held on 5th January, 2007 ........................................ 67
IV . Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee
held on 22nd January, 2007..................................... 69
V. Minutes of the Twenty-First Sitting of the
Committee held on 22nd May, 2007 ..................... 71
VI. Modification/Amendments carried out by the
Committee in the draft Report on “the Role of
Prasar Bharati and its Future Status” .................. 73
P
AGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda*
19. Shri Narahari Mahato**
20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
#
21. Vacant
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006.
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
# Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February , 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Vacant##
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajagopalan M. Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
##Vacated dated 15th December, 2006.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Forty-Seventh Report on “The Role
of Prasar Bharati and its Future Status” relating to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on 4th October, 2006,
5th January, 2007 and 22nd January, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 22nd May, 2007.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the information in connection with the
examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
11 June, 2007 Chairman,
21 Jyaistha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

REPORT
I. Introductory
1. Prasar Bharati as a Public Service Broadcaster came into existence
on 23rd November, 1997 following the enactment of Prasar Bharati
(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 with a mandate to
organize and conduct Public Broadcasting services in India. With this
Akashvani (AIR) and Doordarshan (DD), which came into existence as
Government Departments were brought under one roof.
2. Akashvani (AIR) which came into existence in 1923 has 225
Broadcasting Centres, 146 Medium Frequency Transmitters, 54
High Frequency Transmitters and 161 FM Transmitters. As part of its
domestic coverage it broadcasts programmes in 24 languages and 146
dialects and the external services cover 27 languages—17 national and
10 foreign languages-extending to more than 100 countries.
3. Doordarshan is one of the largest television networks in the
world. It started its service on 15th September, 1959 at Delhi with the
transmission of educational and development programmes on an
experimental basis. The Second Television Centre was started at Bombay
in 1972 and later Doordarshan’s Television service was expanded to
other places. The rapid expansion started in 1984 when almost every
day a transmitter was installed in the country and today Doordarshan
has 25 channels including 5 National Channels, 11 Regional Language
Satellite Channels, 8 State Network Services and 1 International
Channel. Besides this, Doordarshan has recently introduced Direct to
Home service (DTH) called DD Direct + ensuring 100% coverage to
the area and population of the country.
4. It was meant to confer autonomy on AIR and DD so that they
may function in a fair, objective and creative manner. It was intended
that the Corporation would function as a genuinely autonomous body,
innovative, dynamic and flexible with a degree of credibility. It would
function in a democratic manner which enriches our democratic
traditions and institutions, being responsible to the people and
Parliament and keeping in mind the variegated traditions, languages
and cultures of the country.

2
II. Functions and Objectives
5. The functions and objectives of Prasar Bharati are mentioned in
Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act. The salient features of this Section
are as under:—
•O rganize and conduct public broadcasting services;
•P resent a fair and balanced flow of information;
• Special attention to the fields of education and spread of
literacy, agriculture, rural development, environment, health
and family welfare and science and technology;
• Adequate coverage of the diverse cultures and languages of
the various regions of the country;
•P rovide adequate coverage to sports, games and needs of
youth;
• Special attention to the upliftment of women;
•P romote social justice and combat exploitation;
• Safeguard the rights of the working classes;
• Serve the rural and weaker sections of the people and those
residing in border regions, backward or remote areas; and
•P rogrammes for needs of minorities and tribal communities.
6. On being enquired whether the above objectives have been
achieved by Prasar Bharati, the Ministry replied that Prasar Bharati
has been able to achieve these objectives by and large at a time when
private electronic media have pursued only commercial aims.
III. Organisational Structure
7. The Prasar Bharati Board was constituted on 23rd November,
1997, the day on which Prasar Bharati was established. The Prasar
Bharati Board has been vested with the power of general
superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the
Corporation. The Board may exercise all such powers and do all such
acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under
the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990. The Board consists of the following
Members:
Sl.No. Member No. of Members
12 3
1. Chairman One
2. Part-time Members Six

3
3. Whole-time Members: Three
Executive Member - One
Member (Personnel) - One
Member (Finance) - One
4. Ex-Officio Members: Two
Director General, Doordarshan - One
Director General, All India Ratio - One
5. Representative of Ministry of I&B One
6. Representatives of the Employees of the Two
Corporation, one each from the Engineering
Staff and the other employees.
8. Composition of the Prasar Bharati Board as on 4th December,
2006 was as under:
Sl.No. Name Post Tenure up to Remarks
12 345
1. Shri M.V . Kamath Chairman 22.11.2009
2. Ms. Chitra Mudgal Part-time Member 21.11.2007
3. Shri M.L. Mehta Part-time Member 21.11.2007
4. Shri R.N. Bisaria Part-time Member 22.11.2009
5. Vacant Part-time Member 22.11.2009 Due to completion
of tenure by Shri
B.G. V erghese on
22.11.03
6. Vacant Part-time Member 22.11.2011 Due to completion
of tenure by Shri
Bupen Hazarika on
22.11.05
7. Vacant Part-time Member 22.11.2011 Due to resignation
of Shri V .N. Mishra
and then comple-
tion of tenure on
22.11.05
12 3

4
12 345
8. Vacant Executive Member — w.e.f. 1.7.2006 after
retirement of Shri
K.S. Sarma on
30.06.2006. DG, All
India Radio has
been given
additional charge
of the post.
9. Vacant Member (Personel) — V acant since
4.3.2006 after
retirement of Shri
D.P .S. Lamba
10. Vacant Member (Finance) — V acant since
1.5.2005 after
resignation of Smt.
A.L. Ganapati on
30.4.2005
11.V acant, Ex-officio — Current Duty
Director General, Member Charge of the post
Doordarshan DG, Doordarshan
has been given to
the senior officer of
Doordarshan w.e.f.
30.08.2006
12. Sh. Brijeshwar Ex-officio 12.04.2007
Singh, Member
Director General,
All India Radio
13. Shri Pradeep Representative NA
Singh, Additional of Ministry of
Secretary, Min. of I&B I&B
14. Vacant Two representatives Election to the
of employees of repr esentatives of
Prasar Bharati employees could
not be held as the
services of the
existing employees
are yet to be
transferred to
Prasar Bharati
under Section 11 of
Prasar Bharati Act,
1990.

5
Shri B.S. Lalli joined as CEO, Prasar Bharati w.e.f. 2nd January,
2007. The CEO, Prasar Bharati is supported by DG, AIR and DG, DD
for conducting day to day operations.
9. The Committee enquired about the reasons for several positions
on the Board remaining vacant for considerably long time and the
steps taken to fill up the vacant positions. In reply, the Ministry gave
the following explanation:—
(i) The post of Elected Members of the Board could not be
filled up since inception of the Prasar Bharati Board as the
services of the existing employees on the date of creation
of the Prasar Bharati are yet to be transferred to the Prasar
Bharati under Section 11 of Prasar Bharati Act. It may be
worth mentioning that to look into the service conditions
of Prasar Bharati employees and other matters of Prasar
Bharati, a Group of Ministers (GoM) has been constituted.
(ii) At pr esent three vacancies of Part-time Members are
available. The first vacancy had occurred due to the
completion of term of Shri B.G. Verghese on 22.11.2003.
Other two vacancies have occurred due to completion of
the term of Shri Bhupen Hazarika on 22.11.2005 and
resignation of Prof. Vidya Niwas Mishra in November, 2003.
Shri Mishra’s term was also up to 22.11.2005. It is laid down
in Section 6(3) of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 that the term of
office of Part-time Members shall be six years, but one-
third of such members shall retire on expiration of every
second year. To maintain this sanctity, the term of one of
the new Part-time Member to be appointed will be up to
22.11.2009 and the other two Members up to 22.11.2011. The
vacancies of the Part-time Members, which occurred on
account of the expiry of the term of Shri B.G. Verghese and
after resignation of Shri V .N. Mishra were intimated to the
Vice President’s Secretariat and recommendation of panel is
awaited. Ministry has received some references for filling
up the post of Part-time Members of Prasar Bharati Board
from some Members of Parliament which are being sent to
the Vice President’s Secretariat for consideration of the
Selection Committee.
(iii) The posts of three Whole-time Members of the Board are
also lying vacant since the dates specified in the Table above.
The Vice-President’s Secretariat has been requested to
arrange the Selection Committee Meeting to fill up the post
of Member (Personnel) and Member (Finance).

6
(iv) As per Section 9 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990,
Prasar Bharati is to fill up the post of Director General,
Doordarshan in accordance with the recruitment regulations
of the post. The Prasar Bharati has already initiated the
process of filling up the post.
IV . Autonomy of Prasar Bharati
10. On being enquired about the level of autonomy being enjoyed
by Prasar Bharati, the Ministry stated as follows:—
“Prasar Bharati, a Public Service Broadcaster in India, is an
autonomous body. Prasar Bharati is free to make its own
operational and tactical decisions. However, in financial matters
Prasar Bharati is dependent on the Grants/Loan from the
Government. A key principle of a Public Service Broadcaster is
that it must be completely independent. Its structure, financing
and personnel policies should be such that it must not be amenable
to pressure from the Government of the day.”
11. Conceding that Prasar Bharati is a very important organisation
that should enjoy autonomy, the Secretary, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting stated:
“This is the largest undertaking in the Ministry with a slight
difference from other PSUs that while the public sector
undertakings are Government Corporations or statutory
corporations, Prasar Bharati although is a statutory corporation
according to its statute is an autonomous organisation. It is
supposed to be almost independent even of the Government. Only
our Additional Secretary is one of the members of the Board of
Prasar Bharati. Otherwise, Prasar Bharati is expected to act
independently of the Government.”
12. Section 32 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 provides as follows:—
“Power to make rules—(1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service in
respect of leave, pension (if any), provident fund and other
matters in relation to the Whole-time Members under sub-
section (7) of section 6;

7
(b) the allowances payable to the Chairman and Part-time
Members under sub-section (8) of section 6;
(c) the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the
Corporation may appoint officers and other employees under
sub-section (1) of section 9;
(d) the manner in which and the conditions and restrictions
subject to which a Recruitment Board may be established
under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) the qualifications and other conditions of service of the
members of a Recruitment Board and their period of office
under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(f) the terms and conditions in accordance with which the
deputation may be regulated under sub-section (2) of section
11;
(g) the salary and allowances and conditions of service in
respect of leave, pension (of any), provident fund and other
matters in relation to the President of the Broadcasting
Council under sub-section (5) of section 14;
(h) the allowances payable to other members of the Broadcasting
Council and the members of the Regional Councils, under
sub-section (6) of section 14;
(i) the manner in which the Corporation may invest its moneys
under section 19;
(j) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of
accounts shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section
21;
(k) the form in which, and the time within which the
Corporation and the Broadcasting Council shall prepare their
annual report under section 31;
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed.”
13. The Committee wanted to know why Section 32 of the Prasar
Bharati Act should delegate powers to the Central Government in
certain matters. In reply, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated as follows:—
“Sir, the reason why this approval of the Central Government is
required is not something unique to Prasar Bharati although the
nature of functioning of Prasar Bharati is supposed to be

8
autonomous of Government unlike other PSUs. This provision of
approval of the Central Government has been kept for two things.
They are financial issues and for staff issues because staff issue
ultimately reflect themselves into financial support. The overall
expenditure of Prasar Bharati in a given year has been, in the last
two or three years, roughly Rs. 2,000 crores every year. Their own
internal accruals, this year it has been Rs. 950 crores, but normally
it is Rs. 600 to Rs. 650 crores. The balance amount of Rs. 1,400 crores
comes from the Central Government of which roughly Rs. 1,000 crores
comes as a non-Plan grant for staff and other non-Plan recruitment.
Another Rs. 300 to Rs. 400 crores come to them under Plan for
various Capital and Revenue Expenditure. Because of this skewed
pattern of funding by the Government, which is to the tune of
70 per cent of their Budget, the Government has kept this clause
of approval. If they were autonomous financially, as is the case
with ONGC, GAIL and others, who are given the Navratna status,
so they do not come to the Government for any of their
requirement, then the situation would have been entirely different.
But since seventy per cent of their funding is provided by the
Government today, these two provisions still remain valid.”
14. Commenting further on the concept of financial autonomy of
Prasar Bharati, the witness stated:
“This is one of the points that we have placed before the Group
of Ministers (GoMs) that Prasar Bharati will never be able to
achieve programme and editorial autonomy as long as they depend
financially on Government. Therefore, we have made this
suggestion. There was a Capital Restructuring Committee which I
headed. We had a number of people from Finance, Planning
Commission, etc. where we made this recommendation. Apart from
cleaning up their balance sheet for the past liabilities which have
been given to them as loans, for future we have said that they
should be able to finance their programmes through a licence fee
on every television set sold in the country and also other private
channels, if they do certain public service broadcasting programmes,
then they should pay a fee for that. We have made two or three
suggestions on Public Service Broadcasting fund which can finance
the Revenue Expenditure of Prasar Bharati and licence fee which
can take care of most of their expenditure. Now, this subject is
certainly before the GoMs to provide financial autonomy. If that
autonomy is given that you can recruit any number of staff, pay
them anything and the bill is forwarded to the Ministry, no Ministry
of Finance, anywhere in the world, would accept that situation.

9
That is why, approval of the Central Government for pay scales,
recruitment and sanction of posts is required because financial
implications have been kept under the Central Government’s prior
approval. But if it is given that autonomy, as in the case of BBC,
then the situation can certainly undergo a rapid change and radical
change in the structure.”
15. The Committee wanted a comparative analysis of the
functioning of Prasar Bharati and BBC in respect of resource base,
social obligation, editorial autonomy, networking, accountability, etc.
In reply, the Ministry informed that presently the BBC Royal Charter
is also under review on account of the following reasons:—
• There are calls from the public and broadcasters for reform
of the arrangements for governance and regulation.
Particular concerns are raised over the appointment, makeup,
skills and experience of the Governors; the precise remits of
the BBC’s services; and the regulation of the commercial
services.
• The public would like the BBC to become more accountable
to license fee payers.
•A  variety of proposals for greater public accountability were
put forward—including some developing the concept of the
licence fee payer as “shareholder”.
• People think that the BBC should be more independent of
the Government and Parliament for what it delivers.
• There are calls for greater financial accountability and
transparency.
16. Suggesting that BBC model of autonomy is best suited for a
Public Service Broadcaster, the CEO, Prasar Bharati stated as under:—
“Sir, as I look at it, there is a need at, perhaps, all levels at arrive
at a more mature understanding of what a Public Broadcaster is
to be like. If I were to be given a totally independent stake in the
matter, I would like to opt for the BBC model. I do not visualize
Prasar Bharati with the kind of mandate that the Parliament of
India has given it to deviate much from the BBC model. That is
the classical Public Service Broadcaster. Linked with that, obviously,
is the question of autonomy because a Public Broadcaster cannot
denigrate itself to just become a moral police of the Government
of the day. A Public Broadcaster’s accountability in real terms stays
with the Parliament, which leads the people, and also the citizens

10
at large. These are questions and issues with great conceptual
connotations. Perhaps, we will need to debate it and then see
what the Government can do to fulfil this mandate.”
17. Pointing towards the need for an amendment in the Act in
order to ensure full autonomy to the Corporation, the Acting CEO,
Prasar Bharati stated:
“As the Act stands, it would probably require an amendment to
the Act. There are powers to make rules and regulations vested
with the Corporation, but they are not absolute powers in the case
of financial and service matters. Certain powers to make rules and
regulations are vested with the Corporation but in financial and
matters of human resource development, that is employment
matters, rules and regulations which are framed by the Corporation
require prior approval of the Government.”
V. The Role of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service Broadcaster (PSB)
18. Public Service Broadcasting, as distinct from commercial
broadcasting, necessarily has some of the following characteristics:—
(a) It should be accessible to all without any exception.
(b) It should strive to inform and educate besides entertaining
the public.
(c) Its content and programme schedule should be diverse
enough to cover the tastes and cultural interests of all
including the minorities.
(d) It should strengthen the democratic process by providing
information, promoting debates and discussions on all vital
issues.
(e) It should provide a platform for interaction between the
common man and the policy makers.
19. The Committee were informed that the Sen Gupta Committee
(1995) and the Review Committee on the Working of Prasar Bharati
(Narayan Murthy Committee) (1999) both of which were set up to
review the working of Prasar Bharati had dealt exhaustively on the
mandate and role of Public Service Broadcasting. The need for a Public
Service Broadcaster like Prasar Bharati was strongly brought out in

11
both the Reports. With regard to the role of Prasar Bharati in Public
Service Broadcasting, the Review Committee (1999) made the following
observations:—
“Public Service Broadcasting is essential in India, and must be
seen as a right of all citizens. It must provide a platform for free
discourse and debate, while its content must empower people. In
the present, it is essential to have Prasar Bharati in the role of a
Public Service Broadcaster in India.”
20. The following is a gist of some of the important observations
in the Reports highlighting the relevance of Public Service Broadcasting
in a country like India:—
(a) Left to the market forces, purely Commercial Broadcasting
will not meet the full needs of public Broadcasting as the
Commercial Broadcasting regards the audience as consumers,
not as citizens.
(b) In a developing country like India, since the market power/
purchase power of a large segment of population is small,
information and education needs of this segment of
population will not be met by the Commercial Broadcasters.
(c) Market forces may not be interested to protect the character
of the Nation by providing information, promoting debate
and education on all the vital areas to strengthen the
democratic process and provide a platform for interaction
between the common man and the policy makers.
(d) In a country with diverse cultures, multiple religious and
ethnic diversities, Broadcasting strongly influences society
on its value systems, social norms; inter personal behaviour
and cultural identity in many ways. In case Broadcasting is
done purely on a commercial basis the above may not be
covered possibly resulting in adversely affecting of culture,
values and integrity of the country.
(e) It is also essential for Prasar Bharati as Public Broadcaster
to set high programming norms and standards and play a
strong dominant role for providing leadership and
influencing the programme content and quality of the
industry as a whole.
21. In the above background, the role of Public Service Broadcasting
is well defined in almost all the countries of the world and the Public

12
Broadcaster is given a clear cut mandate with definite resources. In
this context, both the committees were of the view that Prasar Bharati
carry on Public Broadcasting functions efficiently at optimum cost, but
at the same time achieving maximum profitability from its commercial
broadcasting operations.
22. Commenting on the role of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service
Broadcaster, the CEO, Prasar Bharati stated as under:—
“Broadcasting of public service and public issues in a democracy
is at the very heart of the matter. Encouraging and sustaining a
wholesome, healthy and sustained dialogue between the citizens
and those who administer public policies and programmes is crucial
to the vibrancy of the democracy. In all these areas, AIR and
Doordarshan have been trying to fulfil this role. If one were to go
by the time utilized in transmission of various programmes, what
we notice is that during 2005-2006 AIR devoted something like
51 per cent of its time on rural areas, women’s education,
environment, sports, art and culture. DD-I which is the flagship
channel of Doordarshan, again spent about 46% of its time on
such areas. Entertainment which does not figure in the objectives
listed in Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act also has been a major
ingredient of the programme bouquet of both AIR and
Doordarshan. Entertainment again necessarily would have to have
some kind of a social content. I would like to refer to programme
like Jasoos Vijay, Jeevan Anmol Hai and Kalyani.”
23. On being enquired whether Prasar Bharati, as a Public
Broadcaster, has been able to play a crucial role in determining the
direction and thrust of broadcasting in India and setting standards
through programmes that are meaningful, absorbing, diverse in content,
innovative in design and of the highest quality, the Committee were
informed that as a Public Service Broadcaster, Prasar Bharati has been
able to play a crucial role in determining the direction and thrust of
broadcasting in India and setting standards through programmes that
are meaningful and absorbing. As a major step forward in this direction,
Doordarshan has been executing a major project under which literary
classics in various Indian languages have been selected for making
serials based on them. These serials are being produced by award
winning producers to maintain highest production quality. The aim is
to provide viewers with purposive entertainment that would acquaint
them with literrary treasure in various Indian languages. As a part of
this project, a serial produced in any particular Indian language would
be dubbed in other Indian languages and telecast from concerned

13
Regional Kendras/Channels so that people living in different parts of
the country are able to acquaint themselves with the literary works of
other regions. It would also help in fostering national integration
besides countering the ill effects of the contents shown by various
private channels, which are full of crime, sleaze and violence.
24. The Committee were further informed that unlike private TV
channels/radio stations, Prasar Bharati has always been an agent of
social change and development. AIR and Doordarshan broadcast regular
programmes on Farm & Home, Environment, Family Welfare, National
Rural Health Mission, etc. AIR broadcasts special programmes on AIDS
from 76 Primary Channels titled “Jeevan Hai Anmol”. Doordarshan
take sup various health issues through “Kalyani Programme”. The
Doordarshan serial “Jasoos Vijay” educates viewers about AIDS. Unlike
commercial broadcasters, Prasar Bharati has played a major role in
promoting and preserving the cultural heritage of the country through
broadcast of classical music and dance as well as folk music and
dances through national programme of music, dance, Radio Sangeet
Sammelan and various other programmes.
25. To a specific query whether Prasar Bharati, as a Public Service
Broadcaster, should focus on revenue generation and be expected to
compete with commercial channels or be free to concentrate entirely
on its mandate as enshrined in Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act,
the Ministry stated as under:—
“Prasar Bharati should primarily focus on fulfilling the mandate
given to it by the Parliament as enshrined in Section 12 of the
Prasar Bharati Act. Revenue generation can only be a by-product
of its main focus. The relevance of Prasar Bharati vis-a-vis other
commercial channels lies exclusively in fulfilling its mandate. Total
focus on revenue generation would force Prasar Bharati to
concentrate only on those audiences who have disposable income
thus disenfranchising a large segment who are below the poverty
line or marginally above it.”
26. Emphasising that the primary objective of Prasar Bharati should
be Public Service Broadcasting and not revenue generation, the CEO,
Prasar Bharati stated as under:—
“…We should not compete with commercial broadcasters and our
major objective should not be revenue earning. Our major objective
should be to remain a Public Broadcaster, if not in the classically
pure sense, at least in a substantial sense.”

14
27. On private/commercial broadcasters being assigned the role of
Public Broadcasting as a social obligation, the Ministry expressed the
view that while Prasar Bharati is primarily responsible for Public
Service Broadcasting, the private/commercial broadcasters should also
supplement its efforts.
28. When asked about the major constraints being faced by Prasar
Bharati in fulfilling its mandate as a Public Service Broadcaster, the
Ministry replied as follows:—
“Coming years are going to be very critical and challenging because
of various factors like increasing number of private radio stations
and TV channels and various technological innovations. On the
other hand, Prasar Bharati has been facing staff shortage because
of continuously depleting strength which has been found to be
totally inadequate to meet its increasing activities. Also the funding
pattern of Prasar Bharati has been quite unpredictable and
unstable.”
VI. Financing and Funding Pattern
29. The source of funding of Prasar Bharati for the last five years
was as given below:
(Rs. in Crores)
Year Grant in Aid Total Loan IEBR Total
Non- Plan- (Plan &
Plan Revenue Non-Plan)
2003-04 892 109 1001 84 555 1640
2004-05 919 87 1006 86 734 1826
2005-06 943 135 1078 157 1026 2261
2006-07 968.59* 255.50 1224.09 40.42 975.67 2239.78
2007-08 960.78 120.65 1081.43 264.94 981.47
(target)
*This include Rs. 92.63 crores for leave salary and pension contribution in respect of
Government employees on deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati paid non-cash, by way
of book adjustment.

15
30. Explaining the funding pattern of Prasar Bharati, the Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated as follows:—
“Roughly, Prasar Bharati has a Revenue Budget of about Rs. 1,800
crores. Their Capital Expenditure is roughly about Rs. 200 crores
to Rs. 300 crores every year. It is roughly Rs. 2,000 crores. Of
which, a thousand crores goes by way of Non-Plan grants for
salaries and basic maintenance of the existing infrastructure and
the manpower costs. In addition to that, they get Plan grants which
have both a capital element and a revenue element, and then they
have their own internal revenue generation, which is known as
IEBR, Internal and Extra-Budgetary Resources, which they raise on
their own. So, the Revenue Expenditure of Rs. 1,700 crores to
Rs. 1,800 crores is met by this Rs. 1,000 crores of grant from non-
Plan grants, then Plan revenue grants and their own internal
resources. The Capital Expenditure again, till the end of the Tenth
Plan, is Rs. 200 crores to Rs. 300 crores which they spend is mostly
financed by the Plan capital grants to them and by their internal
resources to some extent. So, this is how the financing of this
whole expenditure takes place.”
31. On raising of internal resources by Prasar Bharati, the CEO,
Prasar Bharati stated:
“Broadly there are only three streams from which funds come to
Prasar Bharati. One is Grants-in-Aid both Plan and Non-Plan.
Second is loans, and this is our internal extra budgetary resources.
In the last three or four years, Grants-in-Aid has been of the order
of Rs. 1000 crores plus every year; loans last year were of the
order of Rs. 157 crores. In so far as raising revenues internally in
the Prasar Bharati set up is concerned, it is gratifying to note that
during the last few years, successful efforts have been made…From
a level of Rs. 555 crores in 2003-04, the internal revenue had gone
up to Rs. 1076 crores in 2005-06 virtually doubling up the efforts.
Revenues have gone up during the recent years and it will be our
efforts to further improve it.”
32. In this context, the Review Committee had in 1999
recommended that Prasar Bharati should target to be financially self
sufficient within 5 years so that the organization would require to
major funding from the Government. In reply to a query about the
follow up action taken in this regard, the Ministry stated:—
“After consideration of the Review Committee Report by the Prasar
Bharati Board, a D.O. letter dated 7th September, 2000 was sent by

16
Prasar Bharati to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
wherein it was indicated that while agreeing to accept the
desirability of an agreed time frame within which Prasar Bharati
should be expected to achieve financial self-sufficiency, the Board
indicated that proposed five year time frame can be accepted
provided certain necessary conditions which were enumerated in
the D.O. letter were also accepted. Subsequently, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting set up a Committee on Capital and
Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati whose report has since
been received. The Government of India have also set up a Group
of Ministers on 7th March, 2006 to examine various issues of the
functioning of Prasar Bharati including its capital structuring and
funding pattern. The Group is also to consider the Report of this
Committee. The Group of Ministers is deliberating on these issues.
Further action would be taken in the light of the recommendations
of the Group of Ministers.”
33. The Committee were informed that the total revenue (net)
earned by All India Radio and Doordarshan in the last five years
were as follows:—
(Rs. in Crores)
Year 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
AIR 115.26 126.04 142.52 233.58 255.93*
Doordarshan 468.91 441.91 574.50 813.25 719.74*
Total 584.17 567.95 717.02 1046.83 975.67*
Prasar Bharati
*Upto February , 2007
34. The cumulative deficit reported by Prasar Bharati Upto 31st
March, 2007 are as under:—
(Rs. in crores)
Year Cash deficit Loan given to
Prasar Bharati
12 3
2000-01 542.32 139.30
2001-02 667.96 142.05

17
12 3
2002-03 700.19 228.99
2003-04 943.28 84.65
2004-05 880.28 85.93
2005-06 906.19 156.86#
2006-07 900.00* 40.02
Total 5540.22 877.80
 Loan in perpetuity 4258.08
Grant Total 5135.88
* Figure is provisional as the accounts of Prasar Bharati are yet not finalised.
# The actual amount of loan was Rs. 175.47 crore and out of this Rs. 18.61 crore was
refunded.
35. It was stated that ‘Funding influences content’ and ‘who pays
commands’ are two important facts, which cannot be ignored while
deciding funding of public service broadcaster. The Committee were
informed that the framers of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation
of India) Act gave full consideration to these facts while identifying
sources of funding for Prasar Bharati. The sources identified under
Section 17 of the Act are:
1. Proceeds of the broadcast receiver fee, and
2. Government support by way of equity , Grant-in-Aid or loan.
36. The Committee were informed that somehow the first and
primary source of funding envisaged in the Act has not been introduced
till date. The second source of funding has been there but quantum of
this funding has been inadequate and up to some extent erratic. Good
amount of support from the Government has been coming in the form
of debt, adding further burden on the finances of the Corporation. It
was stated that if this trend continued, Prasar Bharati might not be
able to do justice to its role as Public Service Broadcaster. In fact, the
direct Government support to the public sector broadcaster is also not
healthy as it can be used to gain influence. The best way of financing
an organization like Prasar Bharati is to create a separate fund in
which money from various sources can be allowed to flow.

18
37. As regards funding pattern of Public Service Broadcasters
globally, the Committee were informed that the Public Service
Broadcasting is met broadly by collection of Licence Fees charged on
radio and TV sets and through Universal Service Obligation Funds
(USOF). In addition, some Governments are supporting through
Government grants. Whereas in UK, BBC is funded by License Fees
and by the sale of its materials and services, in Japan and Sweden,
Public Broadcasters rely almost entirely on License Fees, PSBs in France,
Germany, Italy and Ireland combine the License Fees with advertising.
Spain’s TVE and New Zealand’s NZTV are completely financed by
advertising revenue, while Australia’s ABC is entirely funded by
Government Grants and Canada’s CBC combines Government grants
with advertising revenue.
38. According to the information furnished to the Committee, the
amount of License Fees varied from country to country as may be
seen in the table below:
Sl.No. Name of the License Fees per set
Country Per Year in Euros
(2005)
1. Denmark 270
2. Norway 260
3. Sweden 210
4. Germany 204
5. United Kingdom 186
6. Switzerland 292
7. Finland 194
8. Belgium *121
9. Japan *75
10. France *74
11. Netherlands *58
12. Italy *57
13. New Zeland *36
14. South Africa *21
15. Poland *19
16. Czech Republic *16
*Figures pertain to 1998 and are in British Pound.

19
39. It was pointed out that in many countries, Public Broadcasters
are funded either directly through Licence Fee/Receiver Fee collected
directly from listeners/viewers or indirectly where Government funds
the Broadcaster through taxation. Some countries use mixed model,
where apart from direct/indirect funding, the revenues are generated
by selling limited air-time for advertisements.
40. The Committee were further informed that as the future of the
Corporation was dependent on the decision on its capital structure
and funding pattern, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
had constituted a committee under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for proposing a viable capital
and financial structure for Prasar Bharati. The intention was that once
a viable capital structure for Prasar Bharati was finalized, it was
expected to carry out its activities on commercial basis with appropriate
support for carrying out broadcasting functions in a structured manner
on sound principles of fiscal prudence. The Report submitted by the
committee is stated to be under consideration of the Group of Ministers.
The committee after deliberating on various options available, global
practices and Indian experience, made the following financing and
funding pattern for Prasar Bharati:
A. Licence Fee
Levying Licence Fee on all the television sets at the point of
production at an ad-valorem  rate collected through Excise
Department. The concept of user to fund the cost of the Public
Broadcasting gets addressed with this levy. As the Licence Fee is
recurring in nature the same can be used for funding revenue cost
of Public Broadcasting Services. On a rough estimate the potentiality
of such fee in India may go up to Rs. 896 crores at 10% and
Rs. 448 crores at 5%. (Calculated on the basis of 12 crores sets
sold in 2004 at an average rate of Rs. 8000 per set).
B. Public Broadcasting Service Fee (PBSF)
The Committee also suggested introduction of PBSF on the lines
of telecom sector as the concept has got merit since it makes all
the players in the field to share the cost of making available
television nation-wide on a non-discriminatory access basis. A
percentage of adjusted gross revenue of other FM & TV Channels
and Cable Operators can be collected towards PBSF, which  can
be used for technological up-gradation and capital expenditure
needs of Prasar Bharati. On a rough estimate, as per the available
revenue figures, the amount may work out to Rs. 800 crores at 5%
per annum.

20
C. Revenues of Prasar Bharati
Prasar Bharati should try to maximize the revenue generation on
commercial channels/programmes by competing with other
television channels. In addition, it should aim at maximizing
revenue from best utilization of all the assets. It should aim at
becoming the market leader and technology leader with the support
of the funding received under the above two modes.
D. Government Grant
License Fee and PBSF should be in a position to meet the revenue
cost of Public Broadcasting Services as well as capital requirements
of upgrading and expansion of Prasar Bharati assets. However, in
case of shortfall, Government may have to fund Prasar Bharati in
order to fulfil the Public Broadcasting objectives of Prasar Bharati.
41. The Committee were informed that the Committee on Capital
& Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati found that mix pattern of
funding is well accepted in the case of a Public Service Broadcaster
internationally. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee
that the European Broadcasting Union paper on “Funding of Public
Service Broadcaster” lists the following sources of funding of Public
Service Broadcaster:
1. Broadcasting fee paid by viewers/listeners
2. Concessions fees paid by commercial operators
3. Other sources of public funding
4. Radio/Television advertising
5. Radio/Television sponsorship
6. Subscription fees for pay services.
The reasons advanced in support of the mixed pattern of funding
are:
• In many countries single sources of funding may not provide
sufficient funds.
• Reliance on one particular source of funding creates
dependence
• Combination of various sources of funding creates
alternatives
• Mixed funding system is more robust

21
42. Regarding the proposal for levying of Licence Fee on television
sets, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished
the following clarification during evidence:
“There are two different ways of levying Licence Fee. One is the
BBC model where every year 150 pounds are collected. But despite
that, the cost of collection is huge for them, but they collect a very
large amount of Annual Licence Fee. We felt that in Indian
environment and in Indian condition, levying an Annual Licence
Fee would lead to a lot of harassment and malpractices that are
likely to happen which used to happen. For the same reason, the
motor vehicle tax was converted into a life-time tax because every
year the cost of collection is high and the scope for harassment is
extremely high. So, what we have recommended in our Report is
that instead of an Annual Licence Fee, you capitalize it at the time
of sale of television set and charge it as a lump sum.”
43. The witness further elaborated the concept of Licence Fee as
under:
“Today, a colour television set will roughly be between Rs. 8,000
to Rs. 10,000 range and black and white is much lower. It can be
anything up to Rs. 1,500 to Rs. 2,000 onwards. So, what we have
said is that 10 per cent should be the licence fee. If you take on
an average about 10 million sets are sold in India, and we have
calculated that if we put Rs. 1,000 as an average on various sets,
it would be something like Rs. 1,000 crores. If it is less, if the sale
dips or the collection is less, then 15 per cent the collecting agency,
the Department of Excise or whoever will have to collect that, will
charge as a collection fee, which the Finance Ministry will deduct
at source and then the rest of it can be passed on to. It will be
roughly in the order of Rs. 700 crores to Rs. 800 crores. This is
one source of financing that we have indicated.”
44. Justifying charging of License Fee, the witness continued as
under:
“Our recommendation was based on a very considered view in
our committee meeting that this is an option, that is, the law,
which the Parliament has already for under the Prasar Bharati
Act. License fee is already prescribed under the law. The only
thing is that the Government has not actually notified the quantum
of license fee for the last 10 years or so.”

22
45. Commenting on the concept of Public Broadcasting Service Fee
(PBSF) as another source of funding of Public Service Broadcasting,
the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated:—
“The second source of financing we have said is that the obligation
for doing Public Service Broadcasting should be not only on Prasar
Bharati, but it should also be on other private channels. Today the
problem is that most of the private channels are doing
entertainment programmes which are commercially very viable and
they get all the ad revenues. They mainly do sensational
programme or commercial or entertainment programme. Their
educational content is stretched if they say that it is there. Whereas
Prasar Bharati’s major charter is only to do the Public Service
Broadcasting. So, we have said if there is a mandate that every
channel should do Public Service Broadcasting up to a certain
limit, maybe, 10 per cent of their time they should use for Public
Service Broadcasting. Their 10 per cent programme content should
be so. If they fail to do so, then there should be a levy of Public
Service Obligation for them. This is on the line of the telecom
sector where they have the Universal Service Obligation (USO)
because they do not go into the remote areas which BSNL does.
So, taking the example of USO under the telecom sector, we have
indicated that a similar Public Service Broadcasting Obligation
should be imposed on all the television channels. If they meet that
obligation, then they do not need to pay anything. But if they do
not meet that obligation, then the service obligation should be
levied on them, which can then be transferred to Prasar Bharati
whose main charter is to do the Public Service Broadcasting. So,
this is another method.”
46. On the need for increasing revenue from entertainment channels
run by Prasar Bharati, the witness stated:-
“Some of their programmes are having a major content of
entertainment. For example, on the radio side, I am sure, you are
listening to the FM radios, the new wave of private FM radios.
They are mainly entertainment channels. Similarly, Prasar Bharati
also runs. The All-India Radio runs, I think, 19 FM radio channels
in different cities. They are purely commercial and they raise a lot
of revenue from that. We are saying that if they are doing FM
radio programme, then the operation and cost of that programme
and their revenue must match. If they want to expand their radio

23
services, then those should be done on the basis of like any other
commercial enterprise. But if they are going into the rural areas
where there is no ad revenue, then even the FM radio should be
funded by the Government.”
47. In this context, suggesting a new source of funding of Prasar
Bharati, the witnesses stated as follows:—
“The third source that we have indicated is the public institutions,
whether they are Ministries or State Governments or Departments
or PSUs, which also have a mandate to educate and inform the
public about their own programmes like the Rural Health Mission
or Right to Information Act or the Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme or other schemes of various Ministries. When they do
these programmes, over and above what Prasar Bharati does on
their own, they should be financing the programmes which they
want to be aired on Prasar Bharati. Now, if that happens, then
they get some revenue. We have indicated that it should be
mandatory because Prasar Bharati reaches almost universal in the
rural areas and it has monopoly in the rural areas and no other
terrestrial network exists there. In the urban areas, you have cable
and satellite. But in the rural areas, mainly Prasar Bharati’s
terrestrial network exists. We have said that the other Ministries
should be mandated that they should put more and more of their
programmes as well as social messaging and ads on Prasar Bharati
which will then further finance, and to that extent if these sources
of finance are available to Prasar Bharati, then, the Government’s
direct budgetary support can be curtailed.”
48. Suggesting that Government grant should be last option for
funding Prasar Bharati, the witness added:—
“We have also put one last rider that in case these sources that we
have indicated do not generate—either the Government does not
agree or they do not generate that kind of financing requirement—
then there is a shortfall in the running of Prasar Bharati. Based on
the mandate which the Government may given, in which case,
residual financing by Government should be taken up. But
we have said that it should be capped at whatever they are
giving only for meeting the staff salary cost. This is roughly
Rs. 950 crores. All put together if there is any shortfall, the
Government would only make up the shortfall keeping in view
the concerns which the employees have been voicing.”

24
49. Stressing the need to formulate proper norms for reimbursement
of deficit incurred by Prasar Bharati for Public Service Broadcasting,
the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated as
follows:—
“We have also said in this report that all these should not be
openended. It is not that the Government undertakes to meet
whatever financial deficit Prasar Bharati comes up with. We have
made a recommendation that whether it is Public Service
Broadcasting or Commercial Broadcasting or any other kind of
service which they provide, infrastructure, etc., norms need to be
developed, and the Government would refinance only on the basis
of norms which should be pre-determined in consultation with the
Ministry, the Ministry of Finance, the Planning Commission and
Prasar Bharati and mutually agreed to. Once that happens, then
the reimbursement or financing can be done on the basis of those
norms, which can be reviewed from time to time. This is the
manner in which the public sector enterprises work……. The PSEB
lays down management and financial norms for various public
sector enterprises, and similar exercise needs to be done for Prasar
Bharati. Therefore, as I have said, the sources of funding would
have to be managed in the context of the norms that need to be
developed. It is these that the Group of Ministers asked us that
we should discuss—these norms between Prasar Bharati, Ministry
of Finance and Planning Commission—and make suitable
recommendations as to what should be those norms which we can
then place before the Group of Ministers for their approval. These
are some of the areas through which we hope that over a period
of time Prasar Bharati would be able to become self-sustaining.”
VII. Capital and Financial Restructuring
50. The Committee constituted by Government for suggesting
Capital & Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati reportedly studied
in detail the original objectives of formation, the current relevance of
original objectives, existing physical infrastructure, human resources,
accounts & audit system, proforma accounts, etc. of AIR and
Doordarshan as on 31st March, 2000, opening Balance Sheet of Prasar
Bharati as on 1st April, 2000, its performance during 2000-2005, future
financial projections, etc. The committee also dwelt and deliberated on
the restructuring options available and funding options thereon.

25
51. Some of the suggestions and conclusions of the Committee are
as under:—
I. Prasar Bharati earned an income of Rs. 3055.48 crores during
2001-2005 and incurred revenue expenditure of Rs. 6789.51
crores with a deficit of Rs. 3734.03 crores. The deficit is met
by loans and grants given by the Government.
II. Prasar Bharati requires substantial funds for upgrading the
technology, in order to keep pace with the changing market
needs and competition. After examining various options of
Capital Investment for both AIR & DD, the Committee had
made the following suggestions:
(a) In case of AIR, the Social Service Broadcasting role is
higher in comparison with its commercial activities. Even
the cost of operations is higher due to historical reasons
as the technology adopted is labour intensive. There is
a huge investment requirement in AIR and the chance
of getting commercial viability seems to be remote.
(b) In case of Doordarshan, there is a possibility of getting
commercial viability on certain debt equity norms as
DD generates cash surplus before interest and
depreciation.
III. The whole capital restructuring of Prasar Bharati is viewed
in the above context after evaluating various Organisation
Restructuring Options available. The Committee examined
in detail the following Organisation Restructuring Options:
(a) Bifurcation of Prasar Bharati into two Corporations—
one for holding all the assets and the other for
programming & operations.
(b) Retention of all the assets of Doordarshan and
programming and operations of both AIR and
Doordarshan with the Prasar Bharati leaving the assets
of AIR with the Government which will be leased out
to Prasar Bharati.
(c) Retaining all the assets with the Prasar Bharati as being
done now with the total revamping of the Corporation.
IV . The Committee, after detailed evaluation of pros and cons
of the above options, suggested to adopt option (c) above
i.e. retaining all the assets with the Prasar Bharati as being

26
done now with total revamping of the organisation. Keeping
in view the suggested Organisation Restructuring Option,
the future requirement of capital investments and their
viability, the Committee had suggested Capital Restructuring
Plan on the following lines:
(a) The total investment of Government up to 1.4.2000
amounted to Rs. 2880.12 crores and subsequent releases
amounted to Rs. 5730.52 crores, totalling Rs. 8610.64
crores. It was suggested to write off Rs. 3734.03 crores
utilized for meeting revenue deficit and convert the
balance of Rs. 4876.61 crores utilised for building Assets
(both Fixed and Current) into Capital and Reserves.
(b) It was also suggested that a share capital of Rs. 500
crores could be assigned and the balance amount could
be kept as Capital Reserves. A low equity base was
suggested as the cash flows and financial projections
do not reflect comfortable position with regard to
servicing of capital. In case the operations of Prasar
Bharati showed positive results, the Government could
decide at any time to issue Bonus Shares from Capital
Reserves subject to certain guidelines.
(c) Other options of issuing Quasi-Equity, Debt and Quasi-
Debt, hybrid instruments by converting a part of amount
were not suggested in the absence of serviceability of
such instruments from the future cash flows of Prasar
Bharati.
52. Explaining the background for setting up the Committee on
Capital & Financial Restructuring, the Secretary, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting stated as follows:—
“One area of source of financing in the Act itself is a licence fee.
The second which they have said is revenues or the income which
the Prasar Bharati may raise from its own sale of products or
whatever or any fee which they may charge on the service which
they render to other organizations. The third is Government grant.
As of now, the fees for the services which they raise are very
limited because the nature of these services is very limited. The
licence fee has not been put in Prasar Bharati. The Government
have not agreed so far to levy the licence fee. Therefore, only the
third source of financing has effectively remained in position for
the last several years and that is the Government grant, both in
Plan and non-Plan.

27
This is the context when the Capital Restructuring Committee was
constituted. This was constituted after a detailed discussion between
the Minister of Information and Broadcasting, the Finance Ministry
where the Finance Minister could not come but the Finance
Secretary and the Expenditure Secretary were present and the
Deputy-Chairman, Planning Commission. All three of them sat
together and said that capital restructuring should be the first
requirement if Government has to bring down its commitment in
terms of Plan and non-Plan and other sources of funding need to
be identified. Therefore, if you have to go anywhere outside the
Government for financing apart from taxes or licence fee or
Government grant, you need to borrow from the market, you need
to have commercial balance sheet, you need to have a capital base
of the organization.
The Prasar Bharati is a statutory organization, but it does not
have a balance sheet in the commercial sense of the term. Therefore,
in order to be able to present a balance sheet to the financing
organizations and, therefore, do more commercial activity or
marketing, if at all that is the charter, you need to have a capital
base. When we looked at the financing of the last 50 years or
even longer for AIR, we took all the Government investments in
DD and Akashwani into account in this capital restructuring and
based on the audit figure of the C&AG as of date on 1.4.2000, the
accumulated investments were identified. From 1997, when Prasar
Bharati was constituted as a separate autonomous body, what they
used to get by way of earlier budget allocations they started getting
as loans.”
53. In this context, the witness elaborated further as under:—
“The Government and the Ministry of Finance have never insisted
that they should repay either the loan or interest. So, what we
have done in this is that we have said that all the loans and
interest, whatever outstanding liabilities, which Prasar Bharati as
an autonomous organization has towards Government, should be
waived or converted into equity. Now, that is Rs. 4000 some odd
crores. The first recommendation is that the balance sheet should
be cleaned out. It should not be treated as outstanding liability of
Prasar Bharati and the sum of Rs. 500 crores out of Rs. 4,000 odd
crores should be converted into equity or the interest is waived.
We have said only Rs. 500 crores should be made into equity and
the rest of Government investment in the past could go into
reserves because they only recognize the existing assets. But it

28
does not need to be taken into account as capital base. The reason
is that even if they have to start declaring dividend and if it is
Rs. 4000 crores, then one per cent will be a huge amount. Therefore,
we set a small capital base so the equity servicing cost should not
go very high. At the same time, it should be adequate for any
financial institution to be interested in lending to Prasar Bharati
for any commercial ventures they want to take up.”
54. According to the Report of the Committee, as part of the future
investment requirements, All India Radio had proposed investment
under 6 options. AIR proposed Option I as a non-liner retrogressive
model envisaging status quo, the other 5 models envisage a mix of
automation, digitalisation and multi-media coverage in line with
modern developments and keeping in view the steps being taken by
other National Broadcasters worldwide. An amount of Rs. 1600 crores
under Option I and I A, Rs. 3200 crores under Option II,
Rs. 4400 crores under Option III, Rs. 5900 crores under Option IV and
Rs. 3200 crores under Option V is envisaged over the next 10 years.
The Options II, III, IV and V basically involve digitalization, multi-
media services and option-wise increase in FM coverage, strengthening
external services and short wave channels. It has been stated that AIR
is of the view that option IV is best for its balanced growth of
broadcasting in the country.
55. It has been further stated that AIR projected income of
Rs. 175 crores for the year 2005-2006 progressively going to Rs. 292 crores
in the year 2014-15 under Option I. Under option 1 A the income
projected is Rs. 410 crores in 2014-15. In case of Option II the income
is projected at Rs. 650 crores and incase of Option III it is projected
at Rs. 850 crores for the year 2014-15. Similarly , in case of Options IV
the income is projected at Rs. 1180 crores and in option V Rs. 1080
crores for the year 2014-15. The total Revenue Deficit projected over a
period of 10 years stands at Rs. 548.69 crores in case of Option I,
Rs. 93.26 crores in case of Option 1 A, a brief surplus of Rs. 95.79 crores in
case of Option III, surplus of Rs. 446.12 crores in case of Option III,
surplus of Rs. 1563.38 crores in case of Option IV and surplus of
Rs. 748.35 crores in case of Option V . AIR reportedly feels that
Option IV is highly developmental and progressive and identifies with
the future needs of the country.
56. Similarly, Doordarshan has proposed an investment of
Rs. 1453 crores under Option I—Terrestrial with only replacement,
Rs. 3388 crores under Option II—Terrestrial with digitalization,
Rs. 1596 crores under Option III—DTH with terrestrial and Rs. 3531 crores

29
under Option—IV—DTH with terrestrial and full digitalization. DD
reportedly prefers and feels that Option IV seem is inevitable in view
of technological changeover throughout the world towards digital
broadcasting.
57. It has been stated in the Report that DD projected an income
of Rs. 630.10 crores during 2005-2006, progressively going up to
Rs. 1446 crores in 2014-15 under Option I, Rs. 1605 crores in 2014-2015
under Option II, Rs. 1486 crores in 2014-2015 under Option III and
Rs. 1645.34 crores in 2014-2015 under Option IV . The gross deficit/gap
between income and expenditure is projected over the period of ten
years at Rs. 9928.74 crores under Option I, Rs. 11,148.42 crores under
Option II, Rs. 10,475.92 crores under Option III and Rs. 11,695.61 crores
under Option IV . The Government support is expected for the Public
Broadcasting services over the period of ten years to an extent of
Rs. 10,949.01 crores under Option I and Option II and Rs. 11,625.01 crores
under Option III and IV . DD projected for the period of ten years a
surplus of Rs. 1020.27 crores under Option I, Rs. (-) 199.49 crores
under Option II, Rs. 1149.09 crores under Option III and Rs. (-) 70.60
crores under Option IV before Prasar Bharati HO expenses, interest
and depreciation.
58. Commenting on the investment requirements as proposed by
Prasar Bharati, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
stated:
“It is the fourth option (of Doordarshan) which is the most practical
and desirable option. But… here is a bill attached to that, which
is Rs. 3,500 crores. This is only on capital expenditure. This does
not include the revenue expenditure in producing programmes.…
The net grants that are required under option four amount to
something like Rs. 11,600 crores to be provided over the next 10
years period. They will earn by their own commercial sales. So,
when we take this aspect, we wish to spend Rs. 3,500 crores on
providing the state-of-the-art infrastructure both in the terrestrial
and also in the DTH network. Also, we wish to digitalize the
whole thing in 10 years period. That is the ideal solution and the
consumers would be extremely happy. Therefore, the bind for the
Government to face is to raise, for the ideal solution the kind of
resources that are required. To raise that kind of resource is what
we have indicated. We have put three options—either the
Government has to provide it by way of grants…. Now, whether
Government provides it by way of grant or by putting a licence
fee or any other route, is what the Ministry of Finance and the

30
Cabinet and the Planning Commission need to address themselves.
We, as a Committee of officers have indicated the options available.
If Government tells us, the Planning Commission tells us, we will
do it.”
VII. Digitalisation of Terrestrial Network
59. The Committee were informed that presently, AIR has got
225 stations and 361 Broadcasting Transmitters. Doordarshan has got
64 Kendras/Production Centers, 197 High Powered Transmitters,
831 Low Powered Transmitters, 354 Very Low Power Transmitters and
18 Transposers. DD operates 30 Channels and has 126 Maintenance
Centers.
60. Two channels of Doordarshan, viz. DD1 & DD News, are
available in terrestrial mode. Terrestrial coverage of DD 1 channel is
estimated to be available to about 91 percent population of the country
whereas coverage of DD News channel is estimated to be available to
about 46 percent population.
61. Doordarshan’s DTH service “DD Direct Plus” was launched in
December, 2004 with a bouquet of 33 TV channels (19 DD channels &
14 private channels). Capacity of DTH platform has been increased for
transmission of 50 TV channels. DTH (Ku band) signals can be received
anywhere in the country (except Andaman & Nicobar Islands) with
the help of small sized dish receive units.
62. On spectrum allocated to Prasar Bharati, the Committee were
informed that Band I, III, IV & V are allocated for TV broadcasting.
Number of channels available in these bands is as under:
Sl.No. Band Freq. Range No. of channels
(in MHz)
1. Band-I 54-68 2
2. Band-III 174-230 8
3. Band-IV 470-582 14
4. Band-V 582-798 27
798-960 Practically not available
due to existing
utilization by Telecom
operators.

31
63. It was pointed out that Terrestrial TV broadcasting in the
country, at present, is allowed only to Prasar Bharati and as such the
above channels are available for TV broadcasting to Doordarshan. In
case of analog transmitters, only one programme channel can be relayed
from a transmitter and for relay of each additional channel, a separate
transmitter is required. In case of digital transmitters, 5 to 8
programmes can be relayed from a transmitter depending on the
compression format used. Doordarshan plans to set up digital
transmitters in 11th Plan utilising the available channels in Band-IV .
64. The Committee were informed that the latest position of
digitalization of terrestrial network of DD and AIR was as follows:—
Doordarshan
(i) Programme Production
There are total 64 Doordarshan Kendras (Studio centres) in
DD network. Out of these, 17 are major DDKs and the
remaining 47 are smaller DDKs. 9 major DDKs have already
been made fully digital and the remaining 8 DDKs are being
made digital during 2006-07. As regards smaller DDKs,
30 DDKs were targeted to be made partially digital during
10th Plan. Out of these, 11 have been made partially digital
and the remaining 19 are being made partially digital during
2006-07. All smaller DDKs are planned to be made fully
digital during 11th Plan, subject to availability of adequate
resources.
(ii) Terrestrial transmission
Doordarshan had set up four digital transmitters one each
at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in January, 2003
for an experimental service to gain experience in the
technology. There are, presently, 1392 analog transmitters in
the country. Doordarshan have included the schemes for
digitalization of terrestrial transmission in the draft 11th Plan
proposals which are yet to be finalised. Complete
digitalisation of terrestrial transmission is envisaged to be
achieved by end of 12th Plan period, subject to availability
of adequate resources.
(iii) Satellite transmission
Doordarshan is presently operating 30 TV channels.
Transmission of all these channels is in digital mode. For
the purpose, digital earth stations have been set up at all
major DDKs. Digital Satellite News Gathering System has
also been introduced in DD network.

32
All India Radio
Hard disc based system has been provided at 76 AIR stations
under phase-I in the network at capital cost of Rs. 748 lakh
approximately. The system has the advantage of high quality digital
recording, reliability, playback facility for linear non-destructive editing,
non-deterioration of signal quality with successive generation of sound
dubbing.
Hard disc based system will be provided at another 61 AIR stations
under phase-II in the network at a capital cost of Rs. 451 lakh
approximately. The system is expected to be provided at these stations
by March, 2007. The action for the same is currently under process.
High-end hard disc based system (client-server) will be provided
at 48 stations in the network. The system has the advantage of high
quality digital recording, reliability, facility for linear as well as
nonlinear non-destructive editing, non-deterioration of signal quality
with successive generation of sound dubbing and potential for
automation. The procurement action is under process.
526 nos. Ultra Portable Digital Recorders have already been
introduced in the network at a capital cost of Rs. 1030 lakh. These
recorders have the advantages of connectivity to studios through PSTN/
ISDN lines. 125 nos. of Digital Field recorders are also proposed to be
provided at AIR Stations shortly. 61 nos. Digital Audio Consoles are
proposed to be provided at 11 important AIR stations in the network
at a capital cost of Rs. 729.5 lakh (approximately). 255 nos. Hand Held
OB Recorders (Digital recorders) will be introduced in the network in
near future at a capital cost of Rs. 255 lakh (approximately). One
studio in Delhi is fully digitalized.
Digitalization of Connectivity: Upgradation of existing analog
uplink to Digital Mode have been done at the following places:
Hyderabad, Patna, Delhi, Ahmedabad, Shimla, Srinagar, Bangalore,
Trivandrum, Bhopal, Mumbai, Cuttack, Jaipur, Lucknow, Guwahati,
Shillong, Itanagar and Chennai. New Digital uplinks have been
provided at Ranchi, Raipur, Almora, Jalandhar, Kolkata and Jammu.
Supply and installation of C-band receiver Terminals at almost all
stations is expected during 10th Plan. 2 nos. of Mobile DSNG and 2
nos. of Flyaway DSNG system have been ordered. 21 nos. of MSS
portable terminal have been procured. Work on the commissioning is
in progress.

33
65. In the above context, the CEO, Prasar Bharati stated as under:—
“Sir, we have to see that there are some technology challenges. We
are an emerging new country with lot of potential and we must
occupy a rightful place in the body of nations. On the
telecommunication front, most developed countries have already
digitalised substantially and they have already set up milestones
and years of final targets when analog will go and digitization
will be the only mode. We have only begun now. So, we will have
to decide among ourselves as to by what time would India like
that our digitalisation mode is complete. That would determine
the kind of investments which would be necessary.”
66. The Committee were informed that in the draft XI Plan of
Rs. 5600 crores; digitalization in studios, transmission and connectivity
have been proposed. It has been stated that hundred percent
digitalization of studios and connectivity will be achieved. So far as
transmission is concerned SW DRM transmitters have been proposed
for Regional and Nation-wide channels. Old MW Transmitters (due
for replacement) are proposed to be replaced by digital (DRM) MW
Transmitters. Similarly old FM Transmitters (due for replacement) are
proposed to replaced by digital transmitters (DRM+).
67. The Committee were further informed that complete
digitalization of entire terrestrial network is proposed to be achieved
by 2015. However, this will depend upon the approvals and the
availability of required funds.
IX. New Technologies
68. Asked about the new technologies being introduced by Prasar
Bharati to remain competitive and effective in the era of convergence,
the Committee were informed that Doordarshan is constantly keeping
a watch on the new emerging technologies in the field of broadcasting
and has been adopting them from time to time depending on their
suitability to Doordarshan network and availability of resources. New
technologies adopted by Doordarshan in recent years and those planned
to be adopted in 11th Plan are as under:—
(i) Ku-band transmission:  Doordarshan started Ku-band
transmission (free to air DTH service) in December, 2004
with a bouquet of 33 TV channels. The transmission is in
digital mode and it is possible to receive signals with the
help of small sized dish receive units. Capacity of Ku-band

34
earth station has been augmented for increasing the number
of TV channels on Doordarshan’s DTH platform to 50.
(ii) Digitalisation: All satellite channels of Doordarshan have
transmission in digital mode. All 17 major DDKs (Studio
centres) are being made fully digital by end of 2006-07.
30 number of smaller DDKs are being made partially digital
by end of 2006-07. All smaller DDKs and OB facilities are
envisaged to be made fully digital in 11th Plan. Digitalisation
of terrestrial transmission is planned to be taken up in 11th
Plan and completed in about 10 years time i.e. by end of
12th Plan period.
(iii) High Definition TV (HDTV):  HDTV is a technology that
offers numerous advantages in terms of excellent image
quality and wide screen image. The wide screen image
provides powerful viewing experience. The HDTV image
has five times more visual information than a conventional
TV picture. This makes this technology superior and gives
pictures similar to 35 mm films. Doordarshan’s proposal for
a pilot project in HDTV has been recently approved “in
principle” by the Planning Commission and further action
in the matter is being taken. During 11th Plan, Doordarshan
proposes to set up HDTV production and transmission
facilities at 4 metro cities viz. Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and
Chennai. Doordarshan plans to cover important events of
forthcoming Commonwealth Games at Delhi in 2010 in
HDTV .
(iv) Internet Protocol TV (IPTV): IPTV (Internet Protocol
Television) describes a system where a digital transmission
service is delivered using the Internet Protocol over a
network infrastructure, which may include delivery by a
broadband connection. IPTV uses a two way digital
broadcast signal that can handle viewers’ requests to access
many available media services. The viewer must have a
broadband connection and a set-top box to send and receive
requests. The Broadband service providers (like MTNL,
BSNL, Reliance Infocom, etc.) have infrastructure in place
and hence can offer IPTV . The role of broadcasters is limited
to providing their content for distribution on IPTV network.
(v) Mobile TV: It is possible to transmit television programmes
for reception in moving vehicles/hand held devices (mobile
phones) using digital terrestrial transmitters. Doordarshan
started experimental mobile service in Delhi in January, 2006.

35
DD News channel programmes can be watched in moving
vehicles with the help of appropriate antenna system and
decoder. Doordarshan has taken up a pilot project of
DVB-H transmission utilizing the existing digital transmitter
at Delhi. DVB-H transmission is expected to start around
end of 2006. This would enable reception of TV programmes
on hand held devices (DVB-H enabled mobile phones) in
the coverage zone of the transmitter. Based on the results
of pilot project of DVB-H transmission, mobile TV service
may be launched in various cities where digital transmitters
are likely to be set up in 11th Plan.
(vi) Webcasting: Doordarshan is using this platform to provide
DD News service to internet viewers. Live News can be
watched at website “www.ddinews.gov.in”.
(vii) Interactivity: SMS based interactivity has been provided in
National, News and Sports channels. The viewers can send
their response to various questions put during the special
telecast like cricket matches, etc. “News on SMS” service
has also been started.
69. New Technologies adopted by All India Radio are as follows:—
(i) AIR proposes to introduce Multi-media service with multiple
channels of programmes (sound, data and video) in satellite
mode duty supported by terrestrial mode in Metropolitan
cities. This will, however, require additional allocation of
frequency spectrum.
(ii) DTH channels will be augmented.
(iii) P . Bassed delivery: The digital radio broadcast systems like
DRM, DRM+, DMB-TT, DVB-H and S-DMB have potential
for IP based delivery of not only internet services but
IP/audio services also. Some of the applications like
Broadcast Website push internet services, two way internet
services with interactive channels through mobile, ISDN and
PSTN can be utilized for delivery of broadcast content. The
full benefits of the convergence will be harnessed by the
digital radio broadcast systems planned in the XI Plan.
(iv) A number of value added services like Dynamic Label,
Interactive Text Transmission, Broadcast Website, Multimedia
Object Transfer (MOT), Slide Show, Paging Emergency
Warning, one way push internet services, traffic and travel
information using Transport Protocol Expert Group (TPEG)

36
transmission, Different, Global Positioning System (DGPS)
transmission, are possible using digital broadcasting systems.
All India Radio can avail the opportunities of these value
added services, which will not only cater to the needs of
various sections of the listeners but provide scope to enhance
the revenue earnings through private investments.
X. Programme Content and Production
70. The Committee wanted to know whether in the context of last
nine years of autonomous functioning, any effort was made to assess
the extent to which the quality of programmes by Prasar Bharati have
improved. Responding to the query, the Ministry stated that the
Audience Research Units of All India Radio and Doordarshan are
providing largest in-house audience feed back and research support
network by conducting regularly listenership/viewership surveys for
various channels of AIR and Doordarshan. Besides that, IRS and TAM
data is also used as inputs to assess the public response to the
programmes. The programmes are modified on the basis of viewership
response and in case the programme does not meet audience/viewers’
expectations, it is taken off. It was also stated that the programmes
produced by AIR and Doordarshan have undergone a marked
improvement in the last 9 years. Improvement have been brought about
in content, style of presentation, formats and technology.
71. When the Committee pointed out that the quality of
programmes of Prasar Bharati have reportedly been adversely affected
by the absence of strategisation and also the existence of a kind of
tokenism in the Corporation, the Ministry stated in reply as follows:—
“It would not be correct to say that quality of programmes of
Prasar Bharati have been adversely affected by the absence of
strategisation and the existence of a kind of tokenism. The
popularity of the programmes of AIR as well as Doordarshan is
increasing. Listener-ship data collected by AIR shows that during
2004-05 the average listener-ship of primary channels of AIR was
56% and for CBS, it was 61%. Average actual listener-ship of FM
Rainbow across the country was approximately 42% and that of
FM Gold was 27%. The most important fact to note was that
listener-ship size was higher for AIR FM Channels compared to
private FM Channels. In the case of Doordarshan, a number of
programmes are having TRP ratings more than 6 in respect of 15
plus females. The TRP for 4+ home in cable and satellite homes
nears 20 for most of the programmes telecast from DD National.
In terms of viewer-ship in all homes, Doordarshan has a share of

37
almost half. The upward trend of revenue generation seen in the
last 2 years also supports the fact of upswing in the quality of
programmes in the case of AIR and Doordarshan. It may be noted
that this upward swing has been maintained despite staffing and
funding problems and in the face of ever increasing competition.”
72. In view of the newer options of entertainment available to the
listeners/viewers, the Committee wanted to know the measures being
taken by Prasar Bharati to improve the quality of its programmes. In
reply, the Ministry stated:—
“It is the constant endeavour of Prasar Bharati to improve the
quality of programme on AIR and Doordarshan in consonance
with the emerging media scenario and people’s changed needs
and taste. Lots of efforts have been put into altering the packaging
of the programmes besides improvement in the content. Interactive
programmes are the new mantras. ARU Units existing in AIR and
Doordarshan which provide continuous feed-back on the
effectiveness of the programme in public perception. Besides data
is also collected from independent sources from IRS and TAM.
The daily monitoring and evaluation of the programme is done
through daily programme meetings in all stations/kendras provides
scope for detailed analysis and require improvement in case of
each and every programme of AIR and Doordarshan. The
Programme Advisory Committees for various stations/kendras
comprise of eminent people from various disciplines and they offer
comments and suggestions for improvement of programme
contents. These suggestions are duly acted upon. Doordarshan
appoints Programme Monitors in respect of self-finance
commissioning programmes. These Monitors monitor the
programme at production stage and report any short-comings to
the Director, who takes appropriate action for removal of the short-
comings.”
73. Conceding that in the present context, the only option before
Prasar Bharati is to improve the programme content and delivery, the
CEO, Prasar Bharati stated:—
“There is so much which we need to do in the software because
all the other allied actors in the drama, broadcasting are only the
baratis, the dulha is the programme content. So, the programme
has to be good. Everybody else is to support the programme
whether it is sound-man, cameraman, light-man or editor. Basically,
it is the programme content and delivery which has to be
chastened. Then, the package of schedule is there.”

38
XI. Marketing
74. The Committee were informed that All India Radio with its
wide network of 225 Radio Stations and 361 Transmitters covers 91.42%
of India by area and 99.13% by population (as on 31.12.2005) operating
in a multi cultural, multi linguistic country like India. AIR broadcasts
in 24 languages and 143 dialects. Its external service covers
27 languages including 16 foreign languages. The listerership of AIR
as per the market report of 2004-05 stands at 53% in case of urban
and 58% in case of rural areas with an overall average of 56% in
India. With the opening up of private FM channels AIR is facing
competition in the four Metro Cities and the average listenership stood
at 30% for the year 2004-05.
75. They were further informed that Doordarshan presently operates
26 channels with 64 Doordarshan Kendras/Production Centres and
1400 transmitters, covering 90% of India by population. The Market
share of DD I amounts to 47.4% (Urban 38.6% & Rural 58.6%), DD
News 12.9% (Urban 12.2% & Rural 13.7%), DD Sports 2.3% (Urban
3.5% & Rural 1.1%), among the TV house holds in India, as per IRS
Survey. The recent spate of new channels has affected the market share
of DD which is facing severe competition mainly in urban areas.
76. According to the Annual Report (2006-2007) of the Ministry , in
recent years, Prasar Bharati while fulfilling its mandate as a Public
service Broadcaster has also been making concrete efforts to augment
its revenue generation by way of considerable and aggressive marketing
of its in-house programmes and also producing customized
programmes. A single-window facility for all the channels of All India
Radio and Doordarshan, Marketing Divisions cater to all the needs of
advertising.
77. On advertising revenue generated by Prasar Bharati, the Acting
CEO, Prasar Bharati stated:—
“Out of the total TV advertising, 80 per cent goes to the private
channels and Doordarshan is getting only 20 per cent. In terms of
the private channels, top three  channels; that is Sony , Zee and
Star in reverse order, all earn more than Doordarshan. Top four
channels, Sony, Star, Zee and Doordarshan, take about 80 per cent
of the total advertisements. The other smaller channels share the
rest of 20 per cent.”

39
78. The Committee pointed out that it has been felt that marketing
has been neglected by Prasar Bharati for all these years because of the
assumption that it does not have to compete with anyone. The Review
Committee had also pointed out that there was urgent need to improve
the distribution of Doordarshan satellite channels by private cable
operators and bring increased advertising revenue. Enquired about the
measures being taken by Prasar Bharati over the years to strengthen
the marketing initiatives, the Ministry informed as follows:—
“The marketing efforts of Prasar Bharati have to be analysed in
the historical background in which such efforts were neither called
for nor required given the public broadcaster role of Doordarshan
and All India Radio and monopoly environment. This resulted
into situation of non-existence of a professional marketing set up.
With the private sector coming into broadcasting field, strong
necessity of a professional marketing set up is felt in the
organisation and terms of reference given to the consultant to do
organizational restructuring study of Prasar Bharati includes this
point also. However, Prasar Bharati has already established
marketing divisions in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad,
Chennai, Bangalore, Guwahati, Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram
utilizing its existing manpower. But this cannot be a substitute for
a professionally managed service.”
79. On marketing set up, the Committee on Capital & Financial
Restructuring of Prasar Bharati had recommended as follows:—
“Marketing professionals should man marketing functions with
adequate experience stationed at Prasar Bharati Headquarters. He/
she should be supported by experienced professionals both at AIR
and DD. Basing on the need and potential of different cities, people
at different levels have to be recruited. The existing employees
may also be given an opportunity in case they possess suitable
qualifications and aptitude to handle such functions.”
80. Conceding that marketing is indeed a week area of Prasar
Bharati, the Acting CEO, Prasar Bharati stated as follows:—
“The basic difference is that private channels are technically very
lean. If you look at their engineering and technical staff, it is much
lower than the norms that we have been following. They are very
rich in marketing staff. That is the criticism which has been coming
all the time; we accept that we are weak in marketing. We do not
have any dedicated marketing staff; we have only borrowed staff
from here and there.”

40
XII. Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of Employees
81. The Committee were informed that against the sanctioned
strength of 47,285, the working strength of Prasar Bharati was 38,829,
out of which 37,174 were on deemed deputation from Government to
Prasar Bharati with 1,675 people recruited on the rolls of Prasar Bharati
after its formation.
82. Apprising the service conditions of Prasar Bharati employees,
the Ministry informed that when Prasar Bharati Board was constituted
on 23rd November, 1997 in accordance with Section 11 of the Prasar
Bharati Act, all the persons working in All India Radio and
Doordarshan were placed on ‘deemed deputation’ with effect from
1st April, 2000. Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 also provided
for transfer of service of Government employees working in All India
Radio and Doordarshan to Prasar Bharati after obtaining their consent.
The Proviso also gave them the option to continue as Central
Government employees. Section 33 of the Act, inter alia,  provides for
framing Regulations with regard to recruitment, remuneration and
service conditions of all employees, etc. These regulations would have
to be made by the Corporation with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
83. It was further clarified that the Central Government employees
working on ‘deemed deputation’ with Prasar Bharati belong to different
Services such as IB(P)S, IB(E)s borne on in the cadres of All India
Radio and Doordarshan, etc. Besides these, there are posts not borne
on All India Radio and Doordarshan cadres, which form part of other
Services such as IIS, CSS, CSSS, etc. Government employees on
“deemed deputation” are under the administrative control of the
borrowing organization on part with regular deputationists and subject
to transfer by the competent authority in the borrowing organization.
The basic different between normal deputation and deemed deputation
is that in the former the employee’s willingness is taken before sending
him on deputation whereas in the latter the deputation is ordered
even without his consent due to the exigencies of administration.
84. The Committee were further informed that till date the services
of erstwhile employees of All India Radio and Doordarshan have not
been transferred to Prasar Bharati because this could be done only by
adopting the procedure laid down in Section 11 of Prasar Bharati Act.
For completing this exercise, all the service conditions and regulations
had to be finalized and intimated to the erstwhile employees of AIR
and Doordarshan while making the offer of transfer of their services

41
to Prasar Bharati. Rule 37 A of CSS (Pension) Rules provides that all
such Government servants are required to be transferred en-masse to
the autonomous body on terms of foreign service without any
deputation allowance till such time they get absorbed. Accordingly the
Ministry issued an Order on 19th February, 2002 putting the employees
of AIR and Doordarshan on “foreign service” with effect from 1st
April, 2000 without any deputation allowance. This order was further
amended on the recommendation of Prasar Bharati replacing the words
“foreign service without deputation allowance” by “deemed deputation
without deputation allowance”. However, the employees are drawing
their pay from the Government and its own IBER. This was in line
with the notification issued by DoP&T on 30th September, 2000, in
respect of BSNL which refers “on as is where is basis”, on deemed
deputation without deputation allowance.
85. It was further stated that after the creation of the Corporation,
steps were taken to finalize the Recruitment Rules and Regulations to
enable the Central Government employees working on ‘deemed
deputation’ with Prasar Bharati to exercise their option in terms of
Section 11 of the Act. By September, 2002 Regulations in respect of 122
categories of posts were notified in consultation with the Government
of India. Regulations in respect of most of the remaining categories of
employees were also in place in draft form. At that stage, various
Associations of Employees expressed the view that the Regulations
were not acceptable to them and, therefore, the notified Regulations
be not given effect to and further Regulations be not notified.
Accordingly, an MoU was signed with the Joint Forum of AIR and
Doordarshan Engineering Employees wherein it was agreed that all
Recruitment Rules whether notified or not would be reviewed. In
accordance with the provisions of the MoU, the Corporation constituted
four different committees for finalizing the entire issue and making
appropriate recommendations in respect of Administration, Engineering
and Programme Cadre and as well as Service Conditions. The
employees were also represented in the said committees. During the
meetings of these committees, the Associations representing the
employees raised certain issues such as grant of higher pay scales
which had huge financial implications. Despite concerted efforts,
consensus could not be arrived at.
86. The Committee were further apprised that with regard to the
powers of Prasar Bharati to transfer its employees from one station/
kendra to another, there were differing judgments by the High Court
of Punjab, Haryana and Madras. The employees of Doordarshan and
All India Radio who were government servants and whose services

42
were required to be transferred to Prasar Bharati in terms of Section
11 of the Act, and not yet transferred, continue to work in Prasar
Bharati on ‘deemed deputation’. This peculiar situation created doubts
in the minds of the employees regarding power and jurisdiction of
Prasar Bharati in connection with transfer within the organization, other
allied matters of service conditions and status of such government
employees. All these factors led to numerous court cases some of which
had already been decided by Courts with divergent views. Such
contradictory rulings necessitated the organization to approach higher
judicial fora to set the controversy at rest once for all. The CAT,
Principal Bench and Madras High Court have affirmed that Prasar
Bharati has power to redeploy/transfer the Central Government
employees on deemed deputation with Prasar Bharati. However, High
Court of Punjab and Haryana held differently. The case has been
challenged before the Apex Court, which has granted interim stay,
and the SLP is pending for final decision.
87. Subsequently, an appeal was filed by Prasar Bharati in the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in respect of its authority to transfer employees
on “deemed deputation”. This appeal came up for hearing in Supreme
Court on 29th March, 2005. The Supreme Court directed that the
uncertainty about the service conditions of employees be resolved
expeditiously and the case was adjourned to the last week of May,
2005. Thereafter, the then CEO wrote a D.O. letter to the then Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on 7th April, 2005 bringing
to his notice the developments in the Supreme Court and his
discussions with the Solicitor General of India who had opined that
all requisite Rules and Regulations would have to be framed by Prasar
Bharati and approved by the Government of India within two weeks.
It was suggested that to speed up the process, a Fast Track mechanism
be set up so that Ministry of Finance and Department of Personnel &
Training are fully associated with the exercise from the very beginning.
A meeting was also held by the then Minister for Information and
Broadcasting with the representatives of NFADE in the wake of the
employees affiliated to the Federation resorting to relay hunger strike
and observing one hour shut down of AIR and Doordarshan
transmission on 5th May, 2005. During the meeting, the employees
reportedly expressed apprehension regarding the manner in which the
Rules were being framed and requested that view point of their
representatives be taken into account before finalizing the Recruitment
Procedures and Service Conditions. The employees also expressed
concern regarding curtailment of certain benefits such as Central Pool
Accommodation, the facility of CGHS and Admission to Central
Schools, etc.

43
88. The Committee were then informed that an affidavit was filed
in the Supreme Court on 29th August, 2005 bringing the above
developments to the notice of the Hon’ble Court and having regard to
the complexities of the problems, the number of cadres, the financial
implications involved, a large number of employees who are
represented by various Associations whose view points have also to
be considered as well as the endeavour to find a lasting solution to
the vexed issues, the Hon’ble Court were requested to grant further
time to resolve the issues and comply with the order dated 29th March,
2005. When the case came up for hearing in the Supreme Court on
6th December, 2005 the Hon’ble Supreme Court, in view of the
submissions that dispute and difference between the parties were
pending consideration at the highest level, adjourned the case for six
months.
89. In this context, the Ministry apprised the Committee as
follows:—
“Subsequently, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was constituted by the
Government of India on 7th March, 2006 to go into the working
of the Prasar Bharati including the service conditions of employees.
The GoM has held three meetings so far on 18th May, 2006,
14th August, 2006 and 31st August, 2006 to resolve the various
financial and administrative issues which will eventually lead to
the restructuring of the Prasar Bharati. Matter is still before the
GoM and is yet to take a final decision on the issues placed before
them.
In the Civil Appeal No. 3244 of 2002 filed by Sh. Amarjeet Singh
and others, the Supreme Court had given the judgement on 2nd
February, 2007 and has directed the Union of India to take a firm
decision in terms of Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act within six
months. The Secretary, Department of Personnel & Training
(DoP&T) has been directed to file an affidavit before the Court
within or immediately after the expiry of six months period. In
view of the Supreme Court’s observations, the entire process of
deciding about the service matters of the employees of Prasar
Bharati is required to be effectively completed by 2nd August,
2007. As mentioned in the minutes of the third meeting of GoM
dated 31st August, 2006, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
is required to be ready with specific proposals on service conditions
and pay structures. The modalities are being worked out by Prasar
Bharati on which the Ministry has to obtain the approval of DOP&T
and consult the Ministry of Finance. After preparation of specific
proposals with regard to the service matters of the employees of
Prasar Bharati and after obtaining due approval, the proposals
will be submitted to the GoM for taking a decision.”

44
90. In response to a query as to whether Prasar Bharati has powers
to frame its own rules regarding service matters, the Acting CEO,
Prasar Bharati stated as follows:—
“There are powers to make rules and regulations vested with the
Corporation but they are not absolute powers in the case of
financial and service matters. Certain powers to make rules and
regulations are vested with the Corporation but in financial and
matters of human resource development, that is employment
matters, rules and regulations which are framed by the Corporation
require prior approval of the Government. They will go to the
Department of Personnel & Training and they will compare it with
the people working in other Corporations and Departments and
they are not interested in things with a specific approach.”
91. The Committee were further informed that continuation of
benefits like accommodation from the General Pool, Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS), admission for wards in Central
School, etc. would not be available to the employees after their services
are regularized in Prasar Bharati. On the question of allotment of
General Pool accommodation, the Committee were informed as
under:—
“The employees of All India Radio and Doordarshan are yet to be
transferred to Prasar Bharati in terms of the Prasar Bharati Act,
1990. For the present, the services of these employees have been
placed at the disposal of Prasar Bharati on the existing terms and
conditions on “deemed deputation” basis with effect from 1.4.2002.
In the light of the fact that Prasar Bharati employees still continue
to be Government servants the matter for their continued eligibility
for allotment of General Pool accommodation was taken up by
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with the Ministry of
Urban Development and a decision was taken to allow employees
of All India Radio and Doordarshan to retain their General Pool
accommodation for a further period of 5 years beyond 22.11.2002
and then with the stipulation that the number of houses to be
allowed to Prasar Bharati employees will be frozen at the level
which was existing as on 19.7.2005. Although Prasar Bharati’s own
quarters are under construction; this would not solve the problem
entirely. It has been, therefore, felt essential that the Central
Government employees/staff now working in Prasar Bharati on
deemed deputation should be eligible for allotment of General Pool
accommodation beyond November, 2007 till they are formally
transferred to Prasar Bharati as per the provisions of the Act. The
issue  has therefore been placed for consideration of GoM.”

45
92. Further regarding CGHS facilities and facility of admission in
Kendriya Vidyalayas for the wards of Prasar Bharati employees, the
Committee were informed as follows:—
“On 31.3.2000 the Ministry of Health extended the CGHS facilities
to Prasar Bharati employees on cost to cost basis at par with the
employees of other Autonomous Bodies which have been extended
CGHS facilities earlier. CGHS will provide only OPD facilities and
the employees will not be entitled to indoor facilities. Since the
employees continue to be Government servants it has been
proposed that they should be provided with complete CGHS
facilities as available to other Government servants till they are
formally transferred to Prasar Bharati.
It has been proposed that the children of Prasar Bharati employees
should be treated at par with the children of other Central
Government employees for the purpose of admission in Kendriya
Vidyalayas.”
XIII. Human Resource Development
93. Regarding human resources development in Prasar Bharati, the
Review Committee (1999) had recommended as follows:
“We recommend the urgent induction after careful selection of
bright, innovative, and young, creative talent into Prasar Bharati.
This, we feel, will help to rejuvenate the organization.”
94. The Committee on Capital & Financial Restructuring of Prasar
Bharati had also recommended that as Prasar Bharati is engaged in
the entertainment business which requires presence of energetic youth
in the organisation at various levels, introducing suitable VRS in Prasar
Bharati with a view to inducting young blood into the system should
be thought of. The Committee suggested that Prasar Bharati should
develop dedicated cadres for Finance, Costing, Marketing, Legal, HR-
Training and Internal Audit manned by experienced professionals.
95. On human resources development in Prasar Bharati, the
Committee were informed that at present the organization has got
mainly programming, administrative and engineering categories. The
needs of marketing and accounting functions are met from the people
drawn from other areas. The important functions of Accounts, Finance,
Marketing, Human Resources, Information Technology and Audit are
yet to be fully formed and manned. A representative of Prasar Bharati
conceded before the Committee that its major weakness is “rising
average age of employees and lack of fresh blood”.

46
96. In this context, the Committee enquired about the measures
being contemplated to induct new blood with professional background
into Prasar Bharati in order to strengthen its human resource base. In
reply, the Ministry stated:—
“The Expenditure Reforms Commission in its report on Prasar
Bharati while making comments on the overstaffing in the
organisation has recommended a thorough idnependent review of
the staffing by a competent professional organisation. In accordance
with this recommendation, National Productivity Council has been
entrusted with the organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati,
which includes managerial, organisational and financial aspects.
On receipt of its report, further action would be taken in the
matter.”
97. In response to a related query, the then Acting CEO, Prasar
Bharati stated:—
“Out of 225 radio stations throughout the country, in 90 stations,
there are not only no Station Directors but there are not even
Assistant Station Directors there. They are being run by programme
executives. How that chain of promotion has been broken, that is
a little complicated. We are trying to speed up the promotion by
having more Promotional Committee meetings. The problem is that
to get a promotion you have to be regularized in the previous
rank for a particular number of years. You have to spend four or
seven years in the lower posts before you are fit for the next
promotion. In many cases recruitment has been done really only
once in fifteen years ago, it was done on a massive scale. Those
people who have come in large numbers, they have stagnated. If
you do recruitment about three per cent every year, you will get
a stable pattern.”
XIV . Future Status
98. According to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
Prasar Bharati as an organization has been functioning as the Public
Service Broadcaster in this country and has been performing the task
assigned to it in terms of Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act. During
the last more than 9 years, experience has revealed that some of the
major problems in relation to the working of the organization need to
be attended to, not only to sustain the performance of the organization
in the current tempo but also to strengthen the organization in respect
of personnel administration, finance, programming, engineering,

47
commercial and marketing activities giving it adequate strength to
compete with private television and new FM radio channels while
retaining its identity as a Public Service Broadcaster.
99. The Committee were informed that with this in view, a Group
of Ministers (GoM) has been constituted to examine various issues
pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati. The GoM is examining
the following matters:—
(i) Capital structure and funding pattern for Prasar Bharati;
(ii) Restoration of Section 22 of the Prasar Bharati Act;
(iii) Continuation of facilities of accommodation, health and
education to the employees;
(iv) Financial package and service conditions to be offered to
the employees for joining Prasar Bharati;
(v) Filling up of essential category posts in AIR and
Doordarshan;
(vi) Amendments, if any, to Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, in the
light of working of the Act;
(vii) Transition to commercial audit; and
(viii) Other related issues, if any.
The GoM held three meetings, viz. on 18th May, 2006, 14th August,
2006 and 31st August, 2006.
100. Regarding the constitution of Group of Ministers, the Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting apprised the Committee as
follows:
“The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Minister
of Information and Broadcasting requested the Government to
appoint a Group of Ministers in which all the stake holding
Ministries are represented, hoping that through this Group of
Ministers, the basic dilemma that Prasar Bharati has, and based on
the experience of last several years, a way forward can be found.
We certainly look forward to your guidance, your support and
your recommendations. I can assure you that we will place them
before the Group of Ministers as and when they meet.”
101. The witness further held out an assurance before the
Committee stating as follows:
“Certainly, we will await the recommendations (of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology), once they are finalized,
and place them before the Group of Ministers. The Group of
Ministers have not yet reached the ultimate stage of decision-
making.”

48
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
I. Functions and Objectives
1. Prasar Bharati came into existence on 23rd November, 1997
bringing Akashvani (AIR) and Doordarshan (DD) under one roof
following the enactment of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation
of India) Act, 1990. With its vision of “Bahujana Hitaye Bahujan
Sukhaye”, AIR has played a pivotal role in meeting the education,
entertainment and information needs of the people since the time it
was formed in 1923. From a modest beginning in September, 1959
with a small transmitter in Delhi, Doordarshan has grown to be one
of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. As enshrined in
Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, the Corporation would be
guided by specified objectives with emphasis on upholding the unity
and integrity of the country, nurturing the democratic and social
values enshrined in the Constitution and projecting the varied
cultural traditions of different regions of the country. In a multi-
ethnic and multi-linguistic country like ours, Prasar Bharati’s role in
upholding the unity and integrity of the nation cannot be over-
emphasised. However, having gone into the role of Prasar Bharati
and its future status, the Committee find that there are several areas
relating to the working of the Corporation which call for specific
attention, bold decisions and a systematic follow-up on the part of
the Government. These aspects have been dealt with by the
Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.
II. Organisational Structure
2. The Committee observe that the Prasar Bharati Board consists
of a Chairman; six part-time members; three whole-time members
consisting of an Executive Member, a Member (Personnel) and a
Member (Finance); two Ex-Officio Members, viz. DG, Doordarshan
and DG, AIR; one representative of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and two representatives of the employees of the
Corporation. Out of the stipulated fifteen members on the Board, as
on 4th December, 2006, only six were in position with the key posts
like that of the Executive Member, Member (Personnel), Member
(Finance), etc. remaining vacant. The new CEO, Prasar Bharati joined
the Corporation on 2nd January, 2007 after the post having remained

49
vacant for more than six months. It is astonishing to note that there
are positions on the Prasar Bharati Board which have been lying
vacant for more than three years. With the power of general
superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the
Corporation having been vested solely on the Prasar Bharati Board,
it is a matter of qualm as to how the truncated Board could discharge
its responsibilities effectively in meeting the emerging challenges
being faced by Prasar Bharati. It is, therefore, not surprising to the
Committee that the performance of Prasar Bharati has remained
lacklustre ever since its formation. The Committee deplore such a
callous attitude on the part of the Ministry in not taking prompt
measures for filling up the vacant positions on the Board of Prasar
Bharati. They, therefore, recommend that prompt steps be taken for
filling up all the existing vacant positions on the Board and they be
apprised of the outcome thereon.
III. Autonomy of Prasar Bharati
3. The Committee observe that it was with the objective of
ensuring plurality and diversity of views and ideas to enable citizens
to arrive at informed judgment on issues of concern to them that
the Prasar Bharati was set up an autonomous body under the Prasar
Bharati Act, 1990. Primarily, Prasar Bharati was expected to organize
and conduct public broadcasting services to inform, educate and
entertain the public and ensure a balanced development of
broadcasting on Radio and Television. As compared to the other
Public Sector Undertakings, Prasar Bharati was expected to act
independently of the Government. Notwithstanding the noble ideals
for attaining autonomy, the Committee note that Section 32 of the
Prasar Bharati Act vests a whole lot of powers on the Government
for making rules with regard to service conditions, salary and
allowances, etc. and taking decisions with regard to investing of its
funds, preparation of annual statement of accounts, preparation of
annual report, etc. Whatever might have been the compulsions for
retaining these powers with the Government, the Committee believe
that the provisions are serious impediments coming in the way of
autonomy of Prasar Bharati and fulfilling the avowed objectives of
the Corporation.
4. In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting explained to the Committee that these powers have
been retained by the Government on account of the fact that about
70% of funds required by Prasar Bharati are provided by the
Government under Plan or Non-Plan allocation. The view put

50
forward was that Prasar Bharati could not be expected to be given
the same financial autonomy as that of PSUs enjoying Navratna
status. However, the Secretary did admit that “Prasar Bharati will
never be able to achieve programme and editorial autonomy as long
as they depend financially on Government.” The CEO, Prasar Bharati
advocated that BBC is the best-suited model for any Public Service
Broadcaster. Going a step further he commented, “I do not visualize
Prasar Bharati with the kind of mandate that the Parliament of India
has given it to deviate much from the BBC model.” Another
representative of Prasar Bharati felt that “as the Act stands, it would
probably require an amendment to the Act.” To say the least, in the
present context, the concept of autonomy sounds a trifle jaded as far
as Prasar Bharati is concerned and calls for serious measures to repair
the same. The Committee trust that the proposed move for capital
and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and funding of Public
Service Broadcasting operations would create a favourable atmosphere
for such a change. At the same time, they also stress that in a multi-
ethnic and multi-linguistic society like ours, it should be ensured
that the Corporation adheres to its specified objective of upholding
the unity and integrity of the country and nurturing the democratic
and social values enshrined in the Constitution.
IV . The Role of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service Broadcaster (PSB)
5. With the latest technological innovations and rapid proliferation
of private radio stations and television channels, Public Service
Broadcasting attains greater significance. In a multi-channel scenario
that is mostly driven by market forces, the country can ill afford to
ignore the information and education needs of the rural masses and
the less privileged citizens. As distinct from commercial broadcasters,
the Public Service Broadcaster is meant to foster national integration,
preserve the nation’s cultural heritage, provide platform for interaction
between the common man and the policy markers, etc. The Public
Service Broadcaster is also expected to play the role of a catalyst for
rapid socio-economic transformation. This is even more important in
a country like ours with distinct cultures, multiple religions and
ethnic diversities. Recognizing the essentiality of Public Service
Broadcasting in our country, the Committee would like to stress that
Prasar Bharati should, at any cost, continue to fulfil its mandate as
a Public Service Broadcaster.
6. The Committee find that AIR devoted about 51% and DD-I
about 46% of the time for programmes on art and culture, women’s
education, environment, sports, rural development, etc. Both AIR and

51
Doordarshan continue to broadcast regular programmes on farm &
home, family welfare, National Rural Health Mission, AIDS
awareness through special programmes like ‘Jeevan Hai Anmol’,
‘Jassos Vijay’, ‘Kalyani Programme’,  etc. According to the Ministry,
Prasar Bharati has been able to play a crucial role in determining
the direction and thrust of broadcasting in India and setting standards
through programmes that are meaningful and absorbing. As a major
step forward in this direction, Doordarshan has been executing a
major project under which literary classics in various Indian
languages are selected for making serials on them by award winning
producers after which they are dubbed in other Indian languages
and telecast in other regions of the country. While taking note of
the distinguished role being played by Prasar Bharati as an agent of
social transformation and development, the Committee are of the
considered view that, with multiple players now in the field of
broadcasting, Prasar Bharati can ill-afford to dilute in any way its
avowed objective of Public Service Broadcasting. On the other hand,
there is an urgent need to find innovative ways and means of
stepping up its coverage of the rural areas and difficult terrains.
7. With Public Broadcasting not being a financially viable
proposition, the need for revenue generation is the first and foremost
hurdle for Prasar Bharati in carrying on its mandate as a Public
Service Broadcaster. Endowed with social obligation of public
broadcasting, the Corporation has serious limitations for competing
with other commercial broadcasters in the country. In that sense, the
CEO, Prasar Bharati was emphatic in his view: “We should not
compete with commercial broadcasters and our major objective should
not be revenue earning.” Therefore, maintaining a balance between
Public Service Broadcasting and revenue generation has been a
formidable challenge before Prasar Bharati ever since its inception.
At the same time the Committee note that sharing of social obligation
in broadcasting by commercial broadcasters is, in fact, another
important issue that needs to be addressed. They also note that the
role of public broadcasting is well defined all over the world and
the Public Broadcaster is given a clear-cut mandate with definite
resources. In this background, there is need for Prasar Bharati to
carry on Public Broadcasting functions efficiently at optimum cost
and the same time achieving maximum profitability on commercial
broadcasting operations. It is also inevitable that Prasar Bharati
should continue with its role as an agent of enrichment and
empowerment of the masses, the strong dictates of financial self-
reliance notwithstanding. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
Government should formulate a specific strategy to ensure that social

52
obligation is shared by all the players in the broadcasting sector
and to ensure definite financial support to Prasar Bharati in order
that Public Service Broadcasting continues to be its hall mark. They
expect the Government to take prompt measures in this regard.
V. Financing and Funding Pattern
8. The Committee note that the revenue earned by Prasar Bharati
during the years from 2003-2004 to 2005-2006 was Rs. 567.17 crores,
Rs. 717.02 crores and Rs. 1046.83 crores respectively. The revenue
expenditure of the Corporation in the corresponding years was Rs.
1363.25 crores, Rs. 1500.61 crores and Rs. 1738.96 crores with a deficit
of Rs. 943.28 crores, Rs. 880.28 crores and Rs. 906.19 crores. The cash
deficit has been met by releasing loans and grants by the
Government. The Balance Sheet of Prasar Bharati reflects a
cumulative deficit of Rs. 5540.22 crores (provisional) as on 31.03.2007.
The Committee note that the Review Committee on the Working of
Prasar Bharati had recommended in 1999 that Prasar Bharati should
target to be financially self sufficient within five years so that the
Corporation would not require major funding from the Government.
The Committee, however, note with concern that this has remained
a distant dream with no definite steps taken to achieve the same.
Since the fate of the Corporation cannot, in any case, be allowed to
continue to hang fire indefinitely, the Committee expect the
Government to pursue the matter with all the seriousness it deserves.
9. The Committee also find that a number of Committee were
appointed to go into the various aspects of working of Prasar Bharati,
viz. Sengupta Committee on 1996, Review Committee in 1999 and
the Committee on Capital & Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati
in 2006. However, there does not seem to have been any serious
follow up on the recommendations made by the committees. The
Committee have been informed that the recommendations of the
letter stand referred to a Group of Ministers (GoM) which is yet to
take a decision in this regard. In Committee’s view, funding pattern
of Prasar Bharati is a key factor in determining the autonomy of the
Corporation. Public Service Broadcasting throughout the world being
not a remunerative activity, Prasar Bharati is saddled with heavy
debt for no fault of its own. While deploring the undue delay in
arriving at a definite decision regarding the funding pattern of Prasar
Bharati, the Committee trust that, in view of the urgency involved,
a decision will soon be taken to arrive at a viable capital structure
for Prasar Bharati.

53
10. The Committee feel that sayings like ‘funding influences
content’ and ‘who pays commands’ must have influenced the framers
of the Prasar Bharati Act to provide for raising of resources through
Broadcast Receiver Licence Fees to sustain the operations of Prasar
Bharati. In fact, the funds coming through the second source of
income as provided for in the Act, i.e., Grant-in-Aid from the
Government, has been adding further burden on the finances of the
Corporation. Moreover, viewing from the context of autonomy of
Prasar Bharati, heavy dependence on Government funds is not a
healthy practice. The Committee have been informed that funding
of Public Service Broadcasting through collection of Licence Fee on
television sets is a common phenomenon across the world. According
to the Ministry in countries like UK, Japan, Sweden, France,
Germany, Italy, Ireland and several others, much of the resources
are raised through the levy of Licence Fee. Some other countries
follow a mixed model, where apart from direct or indirect funding,
revenue is generated by selling limited air-time for advertisements.
The Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring had
recommended levying Licence Fee on all television sets at the point
of production at an ad-valorem rate collected through the Excise
Department. According to them, while it would also meet the concept
of user funding the cost of Public Broadcasting, the recurring amount
could be used for funding the revenue cost of Public Broadcasting
Services. It was estimated that if such a levy is 10%, it would fetch
an amount of Rs. 896 crores per annum and at the rate of 5% it
would be Rs. 448 crores. It was also submitted before the Committee,
that charging of Licence Fee was something prevalent in the country
in the yesteryears, but was abolished in the eighties. As the cost of
collection of Licence Fee annually would be quite high, it has been
suggested in the report of the committee on Capital and Financial
Restructuring that it should be collected in lump sum as one time
fee. Whatever be the merits of these arguments, the Committee are
of the considered view that the proposal requires wider consultations
with the stakeholders and detailed examination before taking a final
decision in the matter. The Committee further desire that other
possible options for funding of Prasar Bharati should also be
explored.
11. The Committee note that another source of funding suggested
is through the levy of Public Broadcasting Service Fee (PBSF) on the
lines of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) in the telecom
sector. The rationale put forward for the levy of the fee is that all
players should bear the burden of social obligation in broadcasting.
It has been proposed that every channel should be given the mandate
to set aside 10% of their time for Public Service Broadcasting and
the fee should be levied on them to the extent they fail to meet the
obligation. On a rough estimate, the amount to be realized through
PBSF is expected to be the tune of Rs. 800 crores at the rate of 5%

54
per annum. Yet another source of revenue suggested by the Ministry
during the course of evidence is through financing of programmes
sponsored by Ministries, State Governments and Public Sector
Undertakings to be aired on Doordarshan in keeping with their
mandate to educate and inform the public on Government policies
and programmes. The revenue earned through these programmes,
over and above what Prasar Bharati does on its own, would go a
long way in bringing down Government’s direct budgetary support
to Prasar Bharati. The Committee urge the Government to examine
these proposals in right earnest to their logical conclusion.
12. The Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring had
also suggested that Prasar Bharati should try to maximize the revenue
generation on its commercial channels and programmes by AIR and
Doordarshan competing with commercial broadcasters. It was also
suggested that if AIR wished to expand the FM Channels, which
are run purely on commercial lines, it should have the freedom to
do so. Programmes meant for entertainment, other than those for
education, agriculture, public health and sanitation, literacy campaign,
etc., should earn commercial revenue through advertisement or
sponsorship. In addition, it was also suggested that efforts should
be made for maximizing revenue through best utilization of the
assets owned by Prasar Bharati. Prasar Bharati should aim at
becoming the market and technology leader with the support of the
revenue generated through the above measures. The Committee feel
that the above suggestions are very relevant and should be considered
for implementation after weighing the pros and cons thereof. They
suggest that no stone should be left unturned in the efforts to make
Prasar Bharati fully self-reliant.
13. The Committee also note that in their Report, the committee
on Capital and Financial Restructuring seems to exude confidence
that Prasar Bharati would be able to meet the revenue cost of Public
Broadcasting as well as capital requirements for upgrading and
expansion of its assets through the collection of Licence Fee and
Public Broadcasting Service Fee. With this, Government would be
required to fund Prasar Bharati only to the extent of shortfall, if
any, in order that it may fulfill its Public Broadcasting objectives.
The Ministry, however, expressed the view that instead of keeping
the criteria for such funding open-ended, it should be in conformity
with the norms to be drawn up in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, Planning Commission and Prasar Bharati and mutually
agreed to. The Secretary also apprised the Committee that the GoM
had asked the Ministry to draw up suitable norms in this regard in
consultation with others and submit the same for their approval.
The Committee trust that by the Ministry must have completed the
exercise and submitted the proposal for the approval by  the GoM.

55
They would like to be apprised of the further action taken in the
matter.
VI. Capital and Financial Restructuring
14. The Committee note with concern that Prasar Bharati is
saddled with a cumulative deficit of Rs. 5540.22 crores pertaining to
post Prasar Bharati period of 9 years which has been met by loans
and grants given by the Government. On the other hand, Prasar
Bharati is in dire need of substantial funds for upgradation of its
technology in order to keep pace with the technological advancement
and competition in the broadcasting sector. The Committee find that
with the labour intensive technology in AIR, it require huge
investment for modernizing its network without commensurate
revenues. In the given context, the committee on Capital and
Financial Restructuring, after evaluating various organizational
restructuring options, arrived at the conclusion that the only viable
option for Prasar Bharati is to retain all the assets as was being
done at present with total revamping of the Corporation. As part of
Capital Restructuring Plan for Prasar Bharati meant to bring down
Government grants in terms of Plan and non-Plan, the committee
suggested that Rs. 3734.03 crores released by Government till 1st
April, 2005 which was utilized for meeting revenue deficit be written
off and the balance of Rs. 4876.61 crores utilized for building Fixed
and Current Assets be converted into Capital Reserves after assigning
Rs. 500 crores as share capital of Prasar Bharati. It has been pointed
out that a low equity base is being suggested for Prasar Bharati as
the cash flow and financial projections do not reflect a comfortable
position with regard to servicing of capital. It was felt that Prasar
Bharati needed a capital base for any financial institution to be
interested in lending to it for any commercial venture that it may
want to take up and also for the Corporation to undertake commercial
activity and marketing. The Committee feel that the proposed Capital
Restructuring Plan merits serious consideration of the Government.
15. The committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring had
also worked out the future investment requirements of Prasar Bharati.
After considering as many as six investment options for AIR, it was
felt that Option IV with a total investment of Rs. 5900 crores
envisaged for the next 10 years would be the best suited for balanced
growth of broadcasting in the country. With this level of investment,
the income projected by 2014-2015 was Rs. 1180 crores with a surplus
of Rs. 1563.38 crores over a period of Rs. 10 years. Similarly out of
the four options considered for Doordarshan, Option IV with an
investment requirement of Rs. 3531 crores with provision for DTH
with terrestial and full digitalization seemed to be inevitable in view
of technological changeover throughout the world towards digital

56
broadcasting. The income projected under the option by 2014-2015
was Rs. 1645.34 crores with an overall deficit of Rs. 11,695.61 crores
requiring Government support of Rs. 11,625.01 crores for Public
Broadcasting Services over the period of ten years. During evidence
the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting exuded
considerable optimism that although the investment requirements
were quite high, if the money could be invested, it would create a
state-of-the-art infrastructure in the terrestrial and DTH network and
would take Prasar Bharati to greater heights. The Committee have,
nonetheless, not gone into the merits and demerits of each option,
which they expect the Ministry to do. With no soft options left, the
Committee are of the firm view that Government would have to
take a few bold decisions to make Prasar Bharati viable and
competitive. They are of the view that, having done so much of
ground work, the question of capital and financial restructuring of
Prasar Bharati should be pursued vigorously until it reaches the
logical conclusion. At the same time, the Committee feel that the
Herculian task of financial self-sufficiency in Prasar Bharati may
not become a reality without mobilization of maximum resources
internally. The Committee, therefore, also suggest that in the coming
years Prasar Bharati should strive tirelessly to become financially
self-reliant in order to reduce over-dependence on Government
allocations.
VII. Digitalisation of Terrestrial Network
16. The Committee note that Doordarshan, which is one of the
largest terrestrial networks in the world, operated 30 Channels and
has 126 Maintenance Centres. Doordarshan has also the distinction
of having exclusive rights for terrestrial TV broadcasting in the
country. Out of 64 Doordarshan Kendras (DDKs), only 9 major DDKs
have been made fully digital and 8 more are in the process. The
remaining DDKs are either being made partially digital or are yet to
be digitalized. It has only four digital transmitters set up at Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai on an experimental service against a
total number of 1392 analog transmitters in the country. Doordarshan
has reportedly included proposals for digitalization of terrestrial
transmission in the 11th Plan proposals which are yet to be approved.
According to Doordarshan, complete digitalization of terrestrial
transmission, as of now, is expected to be achieved only by the end
of the 12th Plan, subject to availability of adequate resources. It is
quite distressing to note that Doordarshan is still in the initial stages
of switching over from analog to digital while most of the developed
countries have already digitalized substantially. In the current era of
intense competition in broadcasting, Prasar Bharati has been placed
at a very disadvantageous position on account of the slow pace of
digitalization by Doordarshan. The Committee sense that

57
digitalization would be the most formidable challenge that Prasar
Bharati would have to address for making the transmission by
Doordarshan more efficient and competitive. They, therefore,
emphasise that digitalization of its network should be accorded
highest priority and pursued vigorously.
17. The Committee note that AIR network consists of 225
Broadcasting Centres and 361 Broadcasting Transmitters. Hard disc
based system that has the advantage of high quality digital recording,
reliability, playback facility for linear non-destructive editing, non-
deterioration of signal quality with successive generation of sound
dubbing, etc. has been provided only at 76 Broadcasting Centres
with a provision for covering 61 more AIR stations under Phase II
which was expected to be implemented by March, 2007. Whereas
526 Ultra Portable Digital Recorders have already been introduced
in the network, the process is on for provision of 125 Digital Field
Recorders, 61 Digital Audio Consoles and 255 Hand Held OB
Recorders. Upgradation of analogue uplink to digital mode has been
done at 23 AIR Stations. Despite all these steps taken for
digitalization of network, the Committee note with dismay that only
one AIR studio in Delhi is fully digitalized thus far. It leaves much
to be desired in the process of converting AIR into a competitive
network. The Committee, therefore, desire that digitalization of AIR
infrastructure should be accorded highest priority and the need for
adequate resources for meeting the challenge should be pursued
vigorously.
VIII. New Technologies
18. The Committee note that there is constant need for inducting
innovative technologies for remaining competitive and effective in
an era of convergence and also for widening the audience/viewership
network of Prasar Bharati. K-band transmission by Doordarshan was
started in December, 2004 and the number of TV channels on DTH
platform is now being increased from 33 to 50. In principle approval
for High Definition TV (HDTV), which produces five times more
visual information than a conventional TV picture, has been received
and the proposal for setting up production and transmission facilities
at 4 Metro cities have been included in the 11th Plan proposal. The
Committee note that induction of other new technologies like Internet
Protocol TV (IPTV), Mobile TV , Webcasting, SMS based interactivity,
etc. are at different stages of implementation or consideration by
Doordarshan. AIR proposes to introduce multi-media service with
multiple channels of programmes in satellite mode duly supported
by terrestrial mode in metropolitan cities. There are also proposals
for harnessing latest technologies in digital radio broadcast systems
and introducing value added services like Dynamic Label, Interactive

58
Text Transmission, Broadcast Website Multimedia Object T ransfer,
etc. which will not only cater to the needs of various sections of the
listeners but also provide scope for enhancing its revenue earnings.
With plethora of new TV and FM channels entering into fray, both
Doordarshan and AIR need to give thrust to induction of the latest
technologies emerging in the broadcasting sector. The Committee
stress that the new technologies be inducted at the earliest in order
that Prasar Bharati may be able to reap the benefits of the same
well in time.
IX. Programme Content and Production
19. The Committee feel that what will determine the relevance
and competitiveness of Doordarshan and AIR will be the content
and delivery of the programmes. The CEO of Prasar Bharati hit the
nail on the head when he admitted candidly that in any programme,
the dulha is the programme content while all other allied actors are
baratis. Notwithstanding the tall claims made by the Ministry before
the Committee that constant improvements are being made in the
content, style of presentation, format and technology of programmes
on the basis of feedback received from listeners/viewers through
Audience Research Units and from IRS and TAM data, the general
impression gathered by the Committee is that there is much scope
for improvement in the quality of the programmes broadcast by
AIR and Doordarshan. Specific attention of the Committee was drawn
to the absence of strategisation and existence of a kind of tokenism
in Prasar Bharati. When compared to the advancement being made
by the media in general, the Committee feel that there is much
scope for improvement in the quality of programmes by AIR and
Doordarshan. Prasar Bharati needs to deploy more professionally
qualified personnel for monitoring programme content and
production. There is also need to make the Programme Advisory
Committees and Programme Monitors more effective and purposeful.
The Committee trust that Prasar Bharati will accord highest priority
to content and delivery of programme and orchestrated efforts will
be made to bring about an overall improvement in the sphere.
X. Marketing
20. It is bewildering to note that with 225 Radio Stations and
361 Transmitters owned by AIR covering 91.42% of the country by
area and 99.13% by population and despite broadcasting programmes
in as many as 24 languages and 143 dialects, the listnership of AIR
as per the market report in 2004-2005 stood at 53% in case of urban
areas, 58% in case of rural areas and a paltry 30% in metro cities.
Likewise, Doordarshan operates 26 channels with 64 Doordarshan
Kendras and 1400 transmitters covering 90% of India by population,
but the market share of DD I is 47.4%, DD News is 12.9% and DD

59
Sports is 2.3% as per IRS Survey. The market share of advertisement
revenue of Doordarshan is only 20% with the remaining 80% being
shared by private channels, indicating the need for refocusing
marketing and advertisement approach and initiatives by Prasar
Bharati. The Committee, therefore, emphasise the urgency of
strengthening the marketing set up in Prasar Bharati. They trust that
the Corporation would rise to the occasion and do the needful in
this regard.
21. The weak point of Prasar Bharati, according to the Committee,
is the non-existence of a professional marketing set up. This was
corroborated by a representative of Prasar Bharati who conceded,
“we accept that we are weak in marketing”. Going to the genesis of
the problem, it was brought out tellingly that it originated from the
historical background in which AIR and Doordarshan enjoyed total
monopoly in broadcasting sector where marketing efforts were not
called for. Although Prasar Bharati has made some efforts in this
direction by setting up Marketing Divisions in Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Kochi, Guwahati and
Thiruvananthapuram utilizing the existing manpower, it, lacks the
required professionalism and drive in the absence of skilled
marketing professionals. There is an urgent need to restructure the
marketing set up in Prasar Bharati through induction and deployment
of professionals in the field. However, it is heartening to note that
setting up of a professional marketing infrastructure is part of the
terms of reference given to the National Productivity Council engaged
for making a study on the organizational restructuring of Prasar
Bharati. The Committee attach utmost importance to professional
marketing set up in Prasar Bharati and desire that the move should
be pursued vigorously. All out efforts should be made to strengthen
marketing set up in Prasar Bharati and to step up its advertisement
revenue. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific
steps taken in this regard.
XI. Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of Employees
22. The Committee note that out of 38,829 employees, only
1,675 people were recruited on the rolls of Prasar Bharati after its
formation and as many as 37,174 were originally Government
employees who are now working on ‘deemed deputation’ in Prasar
Bharati in accordance with Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act. By
September, 2002 Prasar Bharati had framed and notified Regulations
with regard to recruitment, remuneration and service conditions in
respect of 122 categories of posts according to Section 33 of the Act
in consultation with the Government of India and Regulations in
respect of most of the remaining categories of employees were in
place in the draft form. As various Employees’ Associations at this
stage expressed the view that the Regulations were not acceptable to

60
them, an MoU was signed with the Joint Forum of AIR and
Doordarshan Engineering Employees wherein it was agreed that all
the Regulations would be reviewed. With the Associations
representing the employees subsequently raising certain issues for
grant of higher pay scales which had huge financial implications, a
consensus could not be arrived at.
23. The Committee also note that on 29th March, 2005, the
Supreme Court directed that the uncertainty about the service
conditions of employees be resolved expeditiously. At a subsequent
meeting held by the then Minister for Information and Broadcasting
with the Employees’ Associations, apprehensions were expressed by
them at the manner in which Rules were being framed and wanted
their viewpoint to be taken into account before finalizing the
Regulations. Subsequently, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was
constituted by the Government on 7th March, 2006 to go into the
working of Prasar Bharati including the service conditions of
employees. In their judgment against a Civil Appeal, the Supreme
Court on 2nd February, 2007 has directed the Union of India to take
a firm decision in terms of Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act
within six months. As per the judgment, the entire process of framing
the Regulations regarding the service matters of employees of Prasar
Bharati is required to be completed by 2nd August, 2007. The GoM
had also in their third meeting held on 31st August, 2006 asked the
Ministry to get specific proposals on service conditions and pay
structures of employees of Prasar Bharati ready. The modalities were
to be worked out by Prasar Bharati on which the Ministry would
obtain the approval of the Department of Personnel and Training
and the Ministry of Finance and finally submit it to the GoM for
their final decision. The Committee note with serious concern that
the question of service conditions and pay structures of the
employees of Prasar Bharati has been hanging fire for more than 7
years without arriving at any decision, Notwithstanding the legal
and administrative hurdles that came in the way of finalizing the
Regulations, the Committee are of the firm view that Prasar Bharati
and the Ministry should have expedited the whole process. Despite
the deadline of 2nd August, 2007 set by the Supreme Court for
framing the Regulations fast approaching and having received the
directive from GoM about nine months ago, nothing concrete seems
to have been done by Prasar Bharati to finalise the Regulations
regarding service conditions and pay structures of the employees.
Without mincing words, the Committee would like to say that the
Government cannot dilly-daily any further on an issue of such vital
significance relating to the healthy functioning of the Corporation.
While deploring the delay in the finalisation of the Regulations, the

61
Committee desire that the stalemate should be ended by drawing
up the Regulations and getting them approved at the appropriate
level. The Committee would await the action taken by the Ministry
in this regard.
24. The Committee also note with concern that the fate of the
employees of Prasar Bharati who are not eligible for any additional
benefits from Prasar Bharati because they are on “deemed deputation
without deputation allowance”, but are at the same time being
deprived of the normal benefits admissible to Government
employees. It is distressing to note that the extended period for
retention of accommodation allotted from the General Pool to the
employees of Prasar Bharati on ‘deemed deputation’ would end on
21st November, 2007 although Prasar Bharati’s own project for
construction of staff quarters is nowhere near completion. Likewise,
they are eligible only for OPD facilities under the Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS) which has been extended to
them on cost to cost basis at par with the employees of other
autonomous bodies. The wards of the employees of Prasar Bharati
are also being deprived of the facility for admission in Kendriya
Vidyalayas. It is only logical that all the benefits entitled to
Government servants should continue to be provided to the
employees of Prasar Bharati till such time their services are absorbed
in Prasar Bharati. Undoubtedly, these factors have left the employees
of Prasar Bharati in the lurch, being deprived of the benefits on
either side. In Committee’s view this would only breed
discontentment and indiscipline among the employees resulting in
low morale and commitment. The Ministry cannot remain a mute
spectator in such circumstances. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should take up these issues at the highest level so as to
redress the grievances of the employees.
XII. Human Resources Development
25. The Committee note with concern that Prasar Bharati is
plagued with a peculiar phenomenon wherein with the stated
overstaffing on one side, there are as many as 90 radio stations
across the country which are being run by programme executives in
the absence of Station Directors and Assistant Station Directors and
there is also dearth of personnel to take up important specialized
functions in Accounts, Costing, Finance, Human Resources
Development, Marketing, Legal, Information Technology, Audit, etc.
At present the organization has more number of staff on the
programming, administrative and engineering categories. The crux
of the problem as identified by a representative of Prasar Bharati

62
seems to be “rising average age of employees and lack of fresh
blood”. Obviously it calls for induction of young and creative talent
to rejuvenate the organization. The Committee note that National
Productivity Council has been engaged to go into the organizational
restructuring of Prasar Bharati including managerial, organization and
financial aspects. The Committee trust that the study would be
expedited and the organizational restructuring, including introduction
of suitable VRS depending on the need, would be taken up with a
view to strengthening the human resource base of Prasar Bharati.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
whole exercise being undertaken by Prasar Bharati.
XIII. The Future Status of Prasar Bharati
26. The Committee note that a Group of Ministers was constituted
by Government on 7th March, 2006 to address some of the problems
plaguing Prasar Bharati as well as to evolve strategies to sustain its
performance in the current tempo. The GoM is to examine various
issues pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati and
strengthening the organization in respect of personnel administration,
finance, programmeing, engineering, commercial and marketing
activities with view to giving it adequate strength to compete with
private television and new FM radio channels while retaining its
identity as a Public Service Broadcaster. The Group is also expected
to resolve the various financial and administrative issues that will
eventually lead to the restructuring of Prasar Bharati. The GoM has
so far held three sittings, viz. on 18th May, 2006, 14th August, 2006
and 31st August, 2006. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting had, during evidence, given an assurance that the
recommendations of the Committee on the subject would be placed
before the GoM before they take any final decision on the various
aspects relating Prasar Bharati. With the Committee having dealt
with and made important recommendations regarding several vital
issues pertaining to the role of Prasar Bharati and its future status,
they trust that the GoM will give due weightage to their
recommendations on these matters. The Committee would await the
decision of the Government on these matters.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
11 June, 2007 Chairman,
21 Jyaistha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

63
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SETTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04th October, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri Lalmani Prasad
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
9. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
11. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
12. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
13. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary

64
WITNESSES
(Representatives of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting)
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Shri S.K. Arora Secretary
2. Shri Pradeep Singh Additional Secretary
3. Shri Brijeshwar Singh CEO, Prasar Bharati and DG, AIR
4. Shri L.D. Mandaloi DG, Doordarshan
5. Shri A.S. Guin Engineer in Chief, All India Radio
6. Shri N.S. Ganeshan Engineer in Chief, Doordarshan
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting to the sitting of the Committee. Emphasizing the
significance of the Prasar Bharati in the current scenario, he requested
the representatives to enlighten the Committee on the subject.
3. Accordingly, the CEO, Prasar Bharati gave presentation covering
various aspects of “The role of Prasar Bharati and its future status”.
The members sought certain clarifications on various issues relating to
the subject. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the same.
4. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

65
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 08th November, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘139’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
8. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri A.K. Ahluwalia — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then considered the draft list of points on the
subject, “The role of Prasar Bharati and its future status” and the
members gave their suggestions. It was decided to obtain written replies
from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on the list of points
and to hold evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting on the subject during the ensuing Winter
Session of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

66
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05th January, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Sohan Potai
6. Shri Tufani Saroj
7. Shri P .C. Thomas
8. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
10. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
11. Shri Motiur Rahman
12. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Ahluwalia — Assistant Director

67
WITNESSES
(Representatives of Ministry of information & Broadcasting)
Sl.No. Name of Officer Designation
1. Shri S.K. Arora Secretary (I&B)
2. Shri S.B. Lalli Chief Executive Officer
3. Shri L.D. Mandloi DG, Doordarshan
4. Shri Brijeshwar Singh DG, AIR
5. Shri Pradeep Singh Addl. Secretary (B)
6. Shri A.K. Jain Member (Finance)
7. Shri Ramesh C. Mehra AS & FA
8. Shrimati Stuti Kacker JS (P&A)
9. Shri A.S. Guin E-in-C (DG : AIR)
10. Shri N.S. Ganesan E-in-C (DG : DDn)
11. Shri Arvind Kumar Director (BPL & FM)
12. Shri Pawan Kumar Director (BC)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting and the other officers accompanying
him to the sitting of the Committee. Emphasising the need for
improving the financial position and also developing human resource
in Prasar Bharati, the Chairman requested the representatives to
enlighten the Committee on the present functioning and future status
of Prasar Bharati. Accordingly, the Secretary , Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting and other representatives briefed the Committee on
the various aspects of the subject.
3. The members then sought certain clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject. The representatives of the Ministry responded
to the same.
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The Committee then decided to have further evidence on the subject
on a later date.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then, adjourned.

68
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday , the 22nd January, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1651 hrs. in Committee Room ‘139’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
5. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
7. Shri Motiur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Ahluwalia — Assistant Director
WITNESSES
(Representatives of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting)
Sl.No. Name of Officer Designation
12 3
1. Shri S.K. Arora Secretary (I&B)
2. Shri Pradeep Singh Addl. Secretary

69
 12 3
 3. Shri Ramesh C. Mehra AS & FA
 4. Shri N. Baijendera Kumar Joint Secretary
 5. Shri V .B. Pyarelal Joint Secretary
 6. Shri B.S. Lalli CEO, Prasar Bharati
 7. Shri A.K. Jain Member (Fin.), Prasar Bharati
 8. Shri Brijeshwar Singh DG : AIR
 9. Shri L.D. Mandloi DG : Doordarshan
10. Shri N.S. Ganesan Engineer in Chief
(Doordarshan)
11. Shri A.S. Guin Engineer in Chief (AIR)
12. Shri Rajat Bhargava ADG (F&A), Prasar Bharati
13. Ms. Krishna Tyagi GM (B&A), Prasar Bharati
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting and other officers accompanying him
to the sitting of the Committee. Emphasising the need for a sound
funding mechanism and a robust capital structure for Prasar Bharati,
the Chairman, requested the representatives to enlighten the Committee
on the Report of the Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring
of Prasar Bharati. Accordingly, the Secretary , Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting and other representatives briefed the Committee on
the various aspects of the working of Prasar Bharati dwelt upon by
the Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring.
3. The members then sought clarifications on various issues relating
to the subject. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the
same.
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then, adjourned.

70
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22nd May, 2007 from 1500 hrs.
to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri G. Nizamuddin
5. Shri Sohan Potai
6. Shri Lalmani Prasad
7. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
9. Shri Narahari Mahato
10. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
12. Shri Dara Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESS
Shri P .K.H. Tharakan — Secretary (R) (Retd.)

71
Representatives of Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (ASSOCHAM)
(i) Shri Pavan Duggal — Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court of India
(ii) Shri Ramji Srinivasan — Advocate
(iii) Shri Deepak Gupta — American Express
(iv) Shri D.P . Vadya — Hughes Communications
(v) Shri Amit Verma — Acme Telepower
(vi) Shri Jagdish Agarwal — Acme Telepower
(vii) Shri T.R. Dua — COAI
(viii) Shri S.V . Ramana — Genpact
(ix) Maj. Gen. Sharma — Satyam
(x) Shri Amitabh Singhal — ISPAI
(xi) Shri Amit Dev — Time Broadband
(xii) Shri R.K. Singh — MCorp Global
(xiii) Shri Ajay Sharma — ASSOCHAM
(xiv) Shri Varun Aggarwal — ASSOCHAM
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the sitting. The Committee, then, took up the Draft
Report on ‘The Role of Prasar Bharati and its future status’ for
consideration and adopted the same with some modifications/
amendments as shown in the Annexure-VI.
3. As the House was not in Session, the Committee decided to
present the above said Report to the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction
71(A).
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
7. *** *** ***
8. *** *** ***
9. *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then, adjourned.
***Matters not related to this report.

72
ANNEXURE VI
MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS CARRIED OUT BY THE
COMMITTEE IN THE DRAFT REPORT ON ‘THE ROLE
OF PRASAR BHARATI AND ITS FUTURE STATUS’
Sl.No. Page No. Para No. Line No. Modifications/Amendments
For Read
1. 52-53 4 Last “They, therefore, “At the same
stress.......... time, they also
intimated to the str ess that in a
Committee.” multi-ethnic and
multi-linguistic
society like ours,
it should be
ensured that
the Corporation
adheres to its
specified objective
of upholding the
unity and integrity
of the country and
nurturing the
democratic and
social values
enshrined in the
Constitution.”
2. 57 10 Last Add at the end: —“The Committee further
desire that other possible options for
funding of Prasar Bharati should also be
explored.”