STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2008 / Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)
63


SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 October, 2008
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2008 / Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka)

CIT No. 196
Price : Rs. 102.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Gov ernment ........................ 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of th e Government ................................. 51
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reite ration ...................................................... 54
C
HAPTER V Observ ations/Recommendations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ....................... 88
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2008-09)
held on 27 August, 2008 ............................................ 92
A
NNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Fifty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ...... 95
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2008-09)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
17. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
18. Shri P.C. Thomas
(iii)
* Shri Badiga Ramakrishna, M.P. ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 26 August, 2008

(iv)
19. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Dr. C.P. Thakur
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present this Sixty-third Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
for Grants (2008-09)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April,
2008 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. The Ministry
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fifth Report on 9 July, 2008.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 27 August, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
27 August, 2008 Chairman,
5  Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry
of Information Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April,
2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. It
contained 44 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and categorised
as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Para Nos: 1-7, 9-10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24,
25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 35-42 & 44 Total: 35
Chapter- II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government.
Para Nos: 11 & 20 Total: 02
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and require reiteration:—
Para Nos: 8, 22, 26 & 34 Total: 04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:—
Para Nos: 29, 30 & 43 Total: 03
Chapter-V

4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
and final action taken replies to the Recommendations contained
in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early
date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. BUDGETARY PLANNING
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
6. In their Fifty-fifth Report, the Committee had called for details
about the exact status of all the ongoing and new Schemes figuring in
the Eleventh Plan and Annual Plan 2008-09 within one month of
presentation of their Report to Parliament. The Committee had also sought
for the date of commencement and the up-to-date expenditure on all the
43 Schemes dropped by the Planning Commission.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“ A copy of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012) (tentatively
fixing at Rs. 5529.00 crore) is placed at Annexure ‘ A’ and approved
Annual Plan 2008-09 at Annexure ‘B’.
As regards 43 ongoing Schemes of Tenth Five Year Plan, these were
dropped at the time of finalisation of Annual Plan 2007-08.
Therefore, question of incurring of expenditure on these 43 dropped
Schemes in the year 2007-08 does not arise. A list of these 43 dropped
Schemes is also enclosed at Annexure ‘C’ ”.
(Please see Annexures A, B & C of Chapter IV at
Page Nos. 55, 70, 81)
8. The Committee observe that the information now furnished
by the Ministry with regard to the exact status of all the ongoing and
new Schemes figuring in the Eleventh Plan and the Annual Plan
(2008-2009) is a mere reproduction of what they had earlier submitted
to the Committee during the course of examination of the Demands
2

for Grants (2008-09). The Committee’s query regarding the exact status
of the Schemes, both ongoing and the new ones figuring in the Eleventh
and Annual Plan 2008-09 has not been addressed to in the reply of the
Ministry. While disapproving of this attitude of the Ministry, the
Committee desire that the requisite information may be furnished to
them without any further delay.
9. As regards the 43 Schemes of the Tenth Plan which were
dropped by the Planning Commission in the Eleventh Plan, the
Committee had very specifically asked for Scheme-wise details
including inter-alia the date of commencement and the expenditure
incurred till date. The Committee have gathered an impression that by
restricting their reply to the financial year 2007-08, the Ministry have
tried to circumvent the issue which is deplorable. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the requisite information be furnished to them
expeditiously.
II. BUDGETARY ANALYSIS
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
10. The Committee, having observed in their previous Report,
the failure of the Ministry in 2006-07 and 2007-08 to comply with the
Finance Ministry’s stipulations of quarterly exchequer control with a
limit of maximum of 33% funds in Quarter-4 of the financial year and
a March spending control with a maximum ceiling of 15% of the
funds, had expressed their strong disapproval over this tendency of the
Ministry and had impressed upon the Ministry to work out a strategy
at the earliest for judicious spread of expenditure in all the four
quarters.
11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“The Statement given below indicates the figures of Budget
Estimates, Revised Estimates, Expenditure during the last quarter
of 2007-08, Expenditure during March, 2008 and percentages of
expenditure with reference to BE and RE:—
(Rs. in crore)
Supplemented R.E. Expenditure % Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure
BE 2007-08  2007-08  Upto 31st  upto Dec. w.r.t. Upto 29th upto 31st
Dec. 2007 Feb. 2008 March 2008
BE RE
1686.87 1610.07 1135.29 67.30 70.51 1515.71 1585.73
3

(Rs. in crore)
Expenditure Expenditure % Expenditure during % Expenditure during
during last during March last Qr. w.r.t.  March 2008 w.r.t.
Qr. 2008 
BE RE BE RE
450.43 70.03 26.70 27.98 4.15 4.35
12. It will be seen from the above that because of the close
monitoring of the expenditure undertaken by the Ministry and of the
periodical review meetings held by Secretary (I&B), Ministry could keep
the expenditure during the last quarter of 2007-08 within the permissible
33% and during March, 2008 within 15%.
13. The Ministry intends to continue close monitoring of the
expenditure, as in 2007-08, during 2008-09 so that expenditure is
maintained within the permissible limits of 33% during the last quarter
and 15% during March, 2009.
14. The Committee observe substantial difference in the figures
submitted by the Ministry to them at the time of examination of
Demands for Grants (2008-09) and the Action Taken Notes submitted
now. It appears that the figures of utilisation of Plan allocations only
were furnished to the Committee initially. The data submitted in the
Action Taken Notes pertains to the utilisation of the total allocations
made to the Ministry in the relevant fiscal. The Committee expect the
Ministry to be very careful while submitting facts and figures to them
in future.
III. COMMONWEALTH GAMES, 2010
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
15. In their Fifty-fifth Report, observing the slow pace of the Scheme
related to the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and lack of separate fund
allocation for the same, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to
obtain mandatory approvals post haste for expeditious implementation
of the Scheme and had strongly advocated for favourable consideration
of the Ministry’s request for separate allocation of funds for the
Commonwealth Games.
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“The meeting of the Expenditure Financial Committee (EFC) under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure) to consider the
4

proposal for Commonwealth Games at Pune, 2008 and
Commonwealth Games at Delhi, 2010, was held on 19.03.2008.
While recommending the proposal for approval of CCEA, the EFC
had recommended that there should be a committee constituted
by the Ministry of I&B chaired by the AS&FA to scrutinize and
firm up the cost estimates. Accordingly, the committee was
constituted. The committee held five meetings to discuss the
proposed cost estimates and has submitted the report. The report
has been sent for approval of the Secretary, Department of
Expenditure. After approval of the Report of the committee, the
proposal will be submitted for the approval of CCEA”.
17. The Committee note the steps initiated by the Ministry to
expedite the process of approvals from concerned agencies/authorities.
However, keeping in view the fact that a very short time is left upto
the event, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that apart
from expeditious approvals, the implementation schedule should also
be worked out in such a manner that there are no embarrassments
during this international event. The Committee would also like to be
apprised about the efforts made by the Ministry in pursuance of their
recommendation regarding allocation of funds for the Commonwealth
Games, 2010 over and above the Plan Outlay and the outcome of such
efforts as the reply of the Ministry is silent on this issue.
IV. CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
18. The Committee, had observed in their Fifty-fifth Report that
the opening of Regional Offices in Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati was
pending as the Ministry could not approach SFC for seeking approval
as the stipulated matching savings could not be found by abolition of
any posts in the Board. In view of this, the Committee recommended
that instead of looking around for matching staff savings in other units,
the Ministry should approach the SFC to seek a one time relaxation of
the laid down stipulations so that these three Regional Offices could
come through.
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“It has been decided that the posts of Regional Officers at Delhi,
Cuttack and Guwahati Regional Offices of CBFC will be filled from
within the present sanctioned strength of the Indian Information
Service. The matching savings required for filling up other posts
4

in these Regional Offices have since been located in the Films
Division, a separate Media Unit under this Ministry. The matter,
therefore, is processed accordingly so as to operationalise the CBFC’s
Eleventh Plan scheme “Opening of regional offices of CBFC at Delhi,
Cuttack and Guwahati” at an early date”.
20. The Committee are pleased to note that at last a solution has
been found to this vexed issue. The Ministry have decided to fill the
posts of Regional Officers at Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati Regional
Offices of CBFC from the present sanctioned strength of the Indian
information Service and also the matching savings required for filling
up of other posts have been located in Films Division. The Committee
hope that the Ministry will now make all concerted efforts without
wasting any further time to facilitate opening of the Regional Offices
at these places at the earliest.
V. FILMS DIVISION (FD)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
21. The Committee had observed that inspite of spending only
Rs. 2.86 crore (upto January, 08) out of the RE allocation of Rs. 5.13 crore
in the fiscal 2007-08, the Films Division had been allocated a sum of
Rs. 11.00 crore for the year 2008-09 for developing short, socially relevant
messages and for producing documentaries which can be slotted on
television and for digitisation of FDs audio-visual archives (which as of
now cannot be downloaded). The Committee had desired in their
previous Report that the huge stock of precious audio-visual archives
should be digitised and downloading arrangements be made for an
appropriate price in order to create some sort of revenue model for the
organisation.
22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“Though it is a fact that only Rs. 2.86 crore had been spent up to
31 January, 2008, major expenditure occurring during Feb.-Mar.,
2008 was due to the following reasons:
The 10th Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF) was successfully
organized from 3rd to 9th February, 2008. Because of this, a major
portion of the funds earmarked for this Scheme was utilised in the
months of February and March, 2008.
In the Webcasting and Digitisation Scheme, the Final Grant was
Rs. 5.35 crore, whereas BE was Rs. 3.50 crore. During the year, a
6

total of 1,291 films were digitized. Thus, a total of 6,204 films out
of the 8,131 films in Films Division’s archives have been digitized
as on 31 March, 2008. The agency outsourced for the work,
submitted the bills during Feb.-March, 2008 and hence expenditure
on this account could be incurred during that period only.
During the Eleventh Plan, a new Scheme namely ‘Production of
Documentary Films’ has been introduced with the objective of giving
a boost to the documentary film movement in the country. This
Scheme aims to tap the talent available in the private sector as also
talented individuals. For this, funds to the tune of Rs. 5.00 crore
have been allocated during the current Financial Year.
Further, as the work on finalization of the Scheme viz. Museum
of Moving Images (MoMI) for which a budget provision of
Rs. 5 crore has been made, is proceeding at a rapid pace which
includes preparing an organizational structure for the Museum,
creation of posts to man the Museum, obtaining EFC approval and
ensuring that the physical work on the Museum begins, it is hoped
that the funds earmarked for the year 2008-09 will be utilised in
full and physical progress will also be made accordingly”.
23. The Committee note that a major portion of the funds for
2007-08 could be used by the Films Division in the months of February
and March, 2008 only, resulting in non-adherence to the stipulations
pertaining to the expenditure percentage to be incurred in the last
month of the financial year. The Committee hope that the Ministry
would take utmost care to avoid repetition of such instances in future.
24. The Committee regret to point out that the action taken note
is completely silent on their recommendation regarding the
downloading of digitised archival material of Films Division for creating
a revenue model. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
examine the matter and work out the modalities for facilitating
downloading of these digitised records at a prescribed price for
augmentation of revenue.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
25. In their earlier Report, the Committee felt that having a
dedicated satellite could obviate the need for developing multitudinous
film prints, improve the viewing quality, curb interpolations, check piracy
and if the Ministry or the designated agency was able to offer a bouquet
of services, it could also be a source of substantial resource generation
and had asked the Ministry for their views in the matter.
7

26. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“This Ministry, while acknowledging the role of digital transmission
via dedicated satellite in curbing piracy, has already pursued for
reduction/exemption from payment of service tax on digital
transmission of cinema and Ministry of Finance has agreed to it
during the fiscal budget 2007-08. We have also been pursuing with
Ministry of Finance for reduction of custom duty payable on import
of equipments related to digital transmission. Ministry of Finance,
during 2007-08 and 2008-09 have considerably reduced the base
custom duty from 10% to 5% on digital equipments under the
heading ‘project’ ”.
27. The Committee note that the Ministry have initiated action
in the direction of enabling digital transmission via dedicated satellite.
The Ministry of Finance have agreed to reduction/exemption from
payment of service tax on digital transmission of cinema and also to
reduce the base custom duty on import of digital equipment from
10% to 5%. The Committee hope that all these efforts of the Ministry
will culminate in digital transmission via dedicated satellite at the
earliest.
VI. CHILDREN’S FILM SOCIETY OF INDIA (CFSI)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
28. The Committee, having noted in their earlier Report that out
of Rs. 2.71 crore allocated for the year 2007-08, only a sum of Rs. 0.45
crore was spent by CFSI till 31 January, 2008 and the work on film making
and related activities commenced only after a sum of Rs. 1.95 crore was
reappropriated from Film Complex Head to the relevant Head, had
disapproved of the way the things were being mismanaged thereby
defeating the very objective for which the Society has been set-up.
29. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“ At the beginning of the Eleventh Plan, CFSI’s Plan Scheme ‘Film
Production’ was not allocated any sum of money. Therefore, when
the State Government of Andhra Pradesh cancelled the allocation
of land made in favour of CFSI in December, 2007 and funds were
available, the matter of approval of the Scheme ‘Film Production’
was taken up with Planning Commission. Planning Commission
conveyed its approval on 31.01.2008 for utilization of Rs. 1.95 crore
out of this amount towards ‘Film Production’ and hence the funds
8

could be released only in February, 2008 and hence expenditure
had been done subsequent to that”.
30. The reply of the Ministry reinforces the Committee’s
apprehensions that the lack of any allocation for CFSI’s Plan Scheme
‘Film Production’ at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan would result
in financial mismanagement. The Committee fail to understand the
reasons for proposing Schemes without provision for sufficient means
to supplement the same. Flaunting of Schemes only on paper and
without approvals and resources is absolutely meaningless. The
Committee would, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to exercise
due caution in management of new Schemes and plan well in advance
for their implementation so that all expenditure is not spilled over to
Quarter-4 and the Schemes are completed in time and without
depending on reappropriation from other Schemes.
VII. SATYAJIT RAY FILM AND TELEVISION INSTITUTE, KOLKATA
(SRFTI)
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
31. The Committee on being initially informed that SRFTI, Kolkata
had spent no funds upto January, 2008 from the RE stage allocation of
Rs. 3.77 crore and later on being informed during the oral evidence by
the Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting that the entire
amount had been released to the Institute had, while expressing their
displeasure over the lapse, cautioned the Ministry about recurrence of
such lapses in future.
32. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as
under:—
“SRFTI, Kolkata was allocated an amount of Rs. 7.77 crore during
the year 2007-08 at the BE stage as Grant-in-aid.
However, the EFC/SFC approval for the said Plan Scheme was
for Rs. 3.77 crore and, therefore, the RE allocation to SRFTI
was Rs. 3.77 crore for 2007-08. The sanction order was issued
on 29.2.2008 for an amount of Rs. 3.77 crore to SRFTI-Kolkata
after following the due procedure in this regard. However, a
draft was issued in favour of SRFTI, Kolkata for an amount
of Rs. 2,81,80,433/- after deducting the unspent balance of the
previous financial year on 3.3.2008. The said amount was debited
from the Government account on 29.2.2008 as per the sanction
order”.
9

33. The Committee are not convinced with the explanation now
offered by the Ministry about the financial irregularities in release of
funds to the Satyajit Ray Film And Television Institute. They fail to
understand the reasons for issuing a draft in favour of SRFTI, Kolkata
for Rs. 2,81,433 after deducting the unspent balance of the previous
financial year. The Committee believe that the unspent balance of
previous financial year were to be returned at the end of the year itself
instead of deducting from allocations of the next fiscal. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the precise reasons for the same.
VIII. MUSEUM OF MOVING IMAGES (MoMI)
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
34. The Committee having noted in their Fifty-fifth Report that the
Museum of Moving Images was started in the Tenth Plan and is an
ongoing Project in the Eleventh one and observing the lack of momentum
in the progress of this prestigious Project, had recommended that the
Ministry should get down in right earnest to implement this Scheme
without further delay and if need be put up a regular monitoring
mechanism to assess and oversee progress of the Project.
35. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as
under:—
“Work on finalization of the Scheme MoMI, on the basis of the
brainstorming session held on 14.03.2008 in Mumbai, is proceeding
at a rapid pace. This includes preparing an organizational structure
for the Museum, creation of posts to man the Museum, finding
matching savings for creation of these posts, obtaining EFC approval
and ensuring that the physical work on the Museum begins. It is
hoped that the funds earmarked for the year 2008-09 will be utilised
in full and progress is also made accordingly. It would be the
Ministry’s endeavour to complete this Project during the Eleventh Plan
period. The project is being monitored by Secretary (I&B) in the
Senior Officers’ meeting held every week. It is further submitted
that surrender of posts in order to find matching savings for creation
of posts to run MoMI has to be undertaken without causing
dislocations in other media units under this Ministry”.
36. The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s efforts to implement
the Scheme at a rapid pace. The Committee hope that the Ministry’s
assurance to optimally utilize the allocation for 2008-09 and complete
the Project during the Eleventh Plan period would hold good and the
monitoring at senior levels would help in timely completion of the
10

Project. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of a definite
time line within which the Ministry expect to complete all the requisite
procedures and formalities so that the physical work on the Museum begins.
IX. NATIONAL CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE FOR ANIMATION,
GAMING AND SPECIAL EFFECTS
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
37. The Committee having noted in their Fifty-fifth Report that
National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects
which is being set up under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) mode
could address the issue of shortage of manpower in the ICT Sector, had
desired that the Ministry should single mindedly pursue the setting up
of the Centre at the earliest for the development of higher end skills in
the fields of animation gaming and special effects.
38. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“Ministry has noted the observation of the Standing Committee
that the Ministry should single mindedly pursue the matter of
setting up of the Centre. The consultant is expected to submit its
report in July, 2008. Thereafter, based on the recommendations of
the consultant, DPR of the Scheme will be prepared and the approval
of the Competent Authority will be sought”.
39. The Committee are pleased to note the action taken by the
Ministry in pursuance of their Recommendation. The Committee expect
the Ministry will maintain this tempo without any interruptions to
ensure that this important Project sees the light of the day as per schedule.
X. PRASAR BHARATI
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
40. The Committee, having noted in their Fifty-fifth Report the
severe problems being faced by Prasar Bharati due to acute shortage of
staff, had desired that some relief ought to be provided to Prasar Bharati
to augment its staff strength through some short term measures till a
comprehensive proposal is worked out.
41. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as
under:—
“ As regards filling up of vacant posts in Prasar Bharati, Prasar
Bharati is not able to fill up direct recruitment posts as it has not
11

set up recruitment boards for this purpose as laid down in Section
10 (1) of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)
Act, 1990. No doubt, Prasar Bharati is facing severe shortage of
staff due to which the commissioned Stations/Offices are not
fully operational. The requisite staff for new projects has not
been sanctioned. However, Stations and offices are being
run by redeployment of staff from the existing offices. The
matter has been referred to the Group of Ministers for their
consideration and recommendations. The manpower requirement
could not be discussed in the meeting of GoM held on
03.04.2008”.
42. The Committee infer from the Ministry’s reply that Prasar
Bharati is not able to fill up the vacant direct recruitment posts as it
has not set up recruitment boards for this purpose. The Committee
cannot accept this as a credible and valid reason. When the Section
10 (1) of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act,
1990 was laid down in 1990 itself, the Committee find it difficult to
understand the reasons that had held back the Organisation from setting
up the Recruitment Boards in the foregone years. The procrastination
over filling up of vacant posts is creating severe operational difficulties
in Prasar Bharati. The Committee find the casual manner with which,
the Ministry treat this operational problem of the Public Sector
Broadcaster, totally deplorable. The Committee reiterate that the Ministry
should focus on this problem in all earnest and as suggested by the
Committee, find some short term measures to augment manpower of
Prasar Bharati without any further delay.
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
43. Observing the inordinate delay from the side of NPC in the
submission of its Report on the organisational restructuring of Prasar
Bharati, the Committee had desired in their Fifty-fifth Report that NPC
be directed to give its report by a stipulated date so that the Ministry
could work out and submit a comprehensive proposal based on the
directions of the Group of Ministers to redress this problem.
44. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“Study on organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati has been
entrusted to the National Productivity Council (NPC). NPC had
submitted an interim report on Organizational Restructuring of
Prasar Bharati in October 2007. The report was examined in AIR
and DD and comments thereon were sent to NPC. Subsequently
12

various meetings were held with NPC by CEO to incorporate the
suggestions made by Prasar Bharati and expedite the matter.
CEO, Prasar Bharati took a meeting with senior officers of NPC
on 25.04.2008 where senior officers of Prasar Bharati were also
present to discuss the draft report prepared by NPC and to give
it a final shape. The report was submitted by NPC in the meeting.
It was decided that NPC should discuss their draft report with
senior officers of Programme and Engineering wings of AIR and
DD. It is learnt that the NPC has started the exercise of holding
meetings with AIR and DD officials. As desired by the Standing
Committee, NPC has been asked to submit the final report by a
stipulated date”.
45. The Committee note that their advice has been acted upon
and NPC has been asked to submit the final report by a stipulated
date. The Committee would appreciate if the matter is pursued further
without making any compromise in terms of stipulated dates for
consultations/submission of reports, etc. so that the organisational
restructuring of Prasar Bharati is done at the earliest.
XI. FILLING OF VACANT POSTS IN PRASAR BHARATI BOARD
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
46. In their previous Report, the Committee having noted that
against the seven vacancies existing in the Prasar Bharati board as on 18
February, 2008, action has been initiated to fill up the vacancies of the
Chairman and two part time members and that selection process for the
posts of DG, AIR and DG, DD was in advance stage, had impressed upon
the Ministry to fill up all the vacancies at the earliest as vacant key posts
are a major cause of underperformance in the organization.
47. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as
under:—
“The vacancy of Chairman, Prasar Bharati has since been filled
up. Shri Arun Bhatnagar has been appointed as Chairman, Prasar
Bharati w.e.f. 01.5.2008. The process for filling up the two vacant
posts of part time Members has been initiated. The selection
process for filling up the post of DG, AIR and DG, Doordarshan
has begun.”
48. The Committee note that the crucial post of Chairman has
been filled up w.e.f. 1 May, 2008. However, the Committee are concerned
to find that the selection process for filling up the posts of DG, AIR
13

and DG, Doordarshan has only ‘begun’ now although the Committee
were given to understand by the Ministry during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants (2008-09) that the selection process
for the aforesaid posts is in ‘advance stage’. The Committee are unhappy
over the delay in filling up of these posts which are important in the
regular functioning of the public broadcasting service. They, therefore,
desire that the process should be speeded up and conclusive action
taken within a period of three months.
14

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee observe from Demand No. 59 pertaining to the
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting that a sum of Rs. 1910.00 crore
has been allocated to the Ministry for the year 2008-09. While
Rs. 700.00 crore out of this is on the Plan side, the remaining Rs. 1210.00 crore
is on the Non-Plan side. The Budget Estimates for 2008-09 show an increase
of 18.6% over the year 2007-08 RE which was pegged at Rs. 1610.00 crore.
Significantly, the entire increase of Rs. 300.00 crore over the RE of last
year is on the Plan side with the allocation going up from Rs. 400.00 crore
in 2007-08 to Rs. 700.00 crore in 2008-09. On the Non-Plan side, the
allocation has remained static at the last year’s figure of Rs. 1210.00 crore.
It is heartening to note that on the Revenue (Plan) side there has been
an increase of Rs. 110.48 crore over RE 2007-08. This is in contrast to the
last year when the Revenue (Plan) side witnessed a drastic curtailing of
Rs. 166.60 crore as compared to RE 2006-07. On the Capital (Plan) side,
the increase of Rs. 189.52 crore over RE 2007-08 is in continuation of the
last year’s trend when there was a steep enhancement of Rs. 166.60 crore
over RE 2006-07. Overall, there is an increase of 75% on the Plan side
over the last year’s RE.
Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee are factual in nature.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee in their 43rd Report on Demands For Grants,
2007-08, after an in-depth analysis of the data pertaining to the utilization
of budgetary allocations had noted that the main reason for reduction
in Outlay under the Annual Plans during the Tenth Plan was the
pronounced inability of the Ministry to utilize funds optimally. However,
in the First year of the Eleventh Five Year Plan viz. 2007-08, besides the
inability of the Ministry to utilize the allocated funds timely and optimally,
15

the crucial delays in finalization and approval of the Eleventh Plan in
general and the Annual Plan 2007-08 in particular are areas of concern.
This has led to several new Schemes being reduced at the RE stage to
token allocations, re-appropriation of funds from one Scheme to the other
Scheme and above all an element of uncertainty in the implementation
process. Some of the issues covered in the subsequent paragraphs bear
ample testimony to this viewpoint. The Committee hope that the planning
and implementation performance taken recourse to in 2007-08 is merely
an aberration and that the Ministry and all other authorities concerned
would take sufficient pre-emptive measures to ensure that such a situation
is not repeated in the subsequent years of the Eleventh Plan or thereafter.
They would also like the Ministry to seriously consider the
recommendations of the Committee with a view to correcting/modifying
their implementation strategies and also to improve their performance
in the remaining years of the Eleventh Plan. A retrospection of their
performance in the first year of the ongoing Plan and the last two years
of the Tenth Plan would, in the view of the Committee, provide valuable
insights to the Ministry to reorient their functioning in order to ensure
optimum and effective utilization of the allocations made during the year
2008-09.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry accepts the recommendation of the Committee that
is should re-orient the implementation strategy of the various Schemes
based upon the experience gained during the last two years of the X Plan
and the first year of the XI Plan. The Ministry is confident that through
regular monitoring, the Plan outlay for 2008-09 would be fully utilized.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that for the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry had
proposed an outlay of Rs. 16829.00 crore before the Planning Commission.
This was virtually four times of the funds allocated to the Ministry (Rs.
4831.00 crore) during the Tenth Plan and about six times of what was
actually spent by the Ministry (Rs. 2808.22 crore). The Committee are
highly disappointed to note that against this, the Ministry have been
allocated a measly sum of Rs. 5529.00 crore only, that too tentatively. The
media and entertainment industry, as per a recent study, is having an
overall compounded growth rate of 18% which is well above the growth
rate of the economy. Being a sunshine industry, it is contributing
substantially to economy, growth and employment generation. The
Committee also note that the size of the industry is going to be more
16

than double in the next five years from the present Rs. 51300.00 crore
(estimated) to a phenomenal Rs. 115700.00 crore in 2012. The Committee
while appreciating the very positive prospects of the growth potential
of the industry, are of the firm opinion that this would only be possible
in a conducive policy environment. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry
should ensure a suitable and industry friendly policy framework to enable
the industry to perform optimally in the coming years.
The independent estimates by private agencies, as observed by the
Committee, indicate that media and entertainment sector is on a vibrant
growth path, and is growing at a rate higher than the average GDP growth
rate. Economic growth in this sector depends on, inter alia , three major
factors:—
(a) increasing public investment;
(b) putting in place appropriate policies that promote private
investment in this sector; and
(c) reforming regulatory framework to promote a competitive
growth conducive environment.
The Ministry has been focusing on all the three areas to ensure that
the growth momentum remains sustainable.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee need hardly point out that if hamstrung on funds
availability front at this crucial juncture, the various units in the
Broadcasting and Films sectors of the Ministry would not be able to reap
the benefits of this boom in the industry. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that in order to ensure that the units in these two
sectors in the Ministry are able to achieve the maximum in this period
of industry high, the allocations to these two sectors be suitably hiked
in the remaining three years of the Eleventh Plan and at the RE stage
of the year 2008-09.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
On the part of the Ministry, the Committee expect them to come
up with a clear cut roadmap enumerating strategies and schemes through
which they would utilize this welcome opportunity to expand substantially
in the remaining period of the Eleventh Plan alongwith the specific
financial proposals for each of the sectors. The Committee would like
17

to be apprised of the specific action taken by the Government in this
regard at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted by the
Ministry.
In order to ensure that maximum available funds in the Broadcasting
and Film Sectors are utilized, the Ministry focused, as a first step, to
approve all on going Schemes which are continuing from the X Plan
period and are likely to be completed in first two or three years of the
XI Plan. As a second step, the new Schemes have been taken up for
approval. Once the new Schemes are approved, the pace of expenditure
will substantially improve and the Ministry is confident that the rising
trend of financial utilization experienced in the first year of the XI Plan
will continue in remaining years of the XI Plan.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that some of the major thrust areas in the
Scheme of things worked out by the Ministry for the Eleventh Plan include
digitisation of AIR and Doordarshan and the High Definition Television
(HDTV) Programme, International Channel, expansion of Conditional
Access System (CAS) to remaining parts of the metros and 55 more cities
and the introduction of Internet Protocol Television, completion of Phase
II and III of FM Channels in the Broadcasting Sector. Apart from these
initiatives, a Headend-in-the-Sky (HITS) Policy is also on the anvil. In
the Film Sector, the major proposals include Museum of Moving Images,
upgradation of Film and TV Institute of India at Pune and setting up
of National Centre for Excellence in Animation, Gaming and Special
Effects. Converting Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) into
an International Media University (IMU), setting up of National Press
Centre and the Press Information Campaigns are the three major proposals
in the Eleventh Plan on the Information Sector side. In the opinion of
the Committee, all these Schemes are of immense importance and the
Ministry should make earnest endeavours to ensure fructification of all
these initiatives expeditiously so that the benefits of their technological
advancements reach the target groups at the earliest and the broadcasting
standards of the country are maintained at par with the best in the world.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation are noted for further action.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
18

Recommendation (Para No. 7)
During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants
2008-09, the Committee looked into the procedures, processes and the
manner in which the financial requirements of the Ministry were arrived
at. Proposals are initiated at the beginning of the Plan by the various
Media Units, duly vetted by the Administrative wings concerned,
suggesting activities to be taken up and their cost implications. The
Ministry then prioritizes them and a consolidated proposal is submitted
to the Planning Commission for their consideration. The Committee find
that in the case of the Eleventh Plan proposal (2007-2012) of the Ministry,
the Planning Commission took a meeting on Zero-Based Budgeting
exercise on 17 May, 2007. The Minutes of this meeting conveying action
to be taken and other suggestions of the Planning Commission were
issued on 18 October, 2007 to the Ministry. Based on this communication
of the Planning Commission, the Ministry carried out an in-house Zero-
Based Budgeting exercise and the number of Schemes proposed in the
Eleventh Plan was brought down from 101 to 69. The Eleventh Plan
proposal was tentatively approved in December, 2007 by the Planning
Commission and a sum of Rs. 5529.00 crore was allocated as Outlay for
the Plan to the Ministry. Furthermore, during this exercise, the Planning
Commission dropped 43 ongoing Schemes of the Tenth Plan from the
Annual Plan 2007-08 which was already approved in February 2007.
Evidently, there had been glaring shortcom ings in the whole approach
of the Ministry to this vital process. Had the Plan proposals been worked
out well in advance by the Ministry, their consideration by the Planning
Commission would not have been delayed. If Zero-Based Budgeting had
been resorted to by the Ministry at the outset and not after being asked
to do so by the Planning Commission, crucial months in the planning
process nay the development process could have been salvaged. While
expressing their dissatisfaction over this lopsided planning performance,
the Committee would like to know about the measures that have been
put in place by the Ministry to avoid recurrence of such sorry episodes
in future.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry has taken note of the observations of the Committee
in this regard. All necessary steps will be taken to ensure timely submission
of Plan proposals. The Ministry has taken a couple of steps as given
below, which is likely to bring about systemic improvement in Plan
formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. The Plan
coordination work has been given to Economic Division of the Ministry
with direct supervision by Economic Adviser. A regular system of
monitoring is in place, in which the progress of Plan implementation is
19

reviewed at the Senior Officers’ Meeting every week by Secretary. A new
scheme— “Economic Analysis of Growth Initiatives” has been approved
to carry out various studies that will facilitate understanding of the Plan
implementation and the policy evaluation.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe from the minutes of the meeting taken by
the Planning Commission on 17 May 2007 on Zero-Based Budgeting
exercise that the Planning Commission had made certain observations /
suggestions about the proposals of the Ministry. These include the need
to look into the desirability of having 30 Channels (Doordarshan); radically
improving the quality of production and services; having a few Schemes
rather than spreading the thin resources; indepth and independent
evaluation of institutions and programmes for restructuring and focus;
as much outsourcing of operations as possible; and capacity building of
the existing manpower through training and technology. It is the
considered opinion of the Committee that all these aspects merit serious
consideration by the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the specific action taken by the Ministry on these suggestions/
observations of the Planning Commission.
Action Taken by the Government
In so far as the need to look into the desirability of having 30
Channels (Doordarshan) is concerned, it may be mentioned that all the
30 Channels are meant for meeting Government of India’s Public Service
Broadcasting Obligations in one form or the other. The Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting attaches high priority to improving the quality
of production and services in all Sectors. This is, however, a continuous
process and necessary funds are being allocated for the purpose. Training
for man power development is also being organized regularly. Prasar
Bharati has got Staff Training Institutes at different places for training
of its staff in broadcasting technology.
In so far as the need for evaluation of Programmes is concerned,
a Plan Scheme, “Economic Analysis of Growth Initiatives” has been
launched during XI Five Year Plan (2007-2012) i.e. with effect from Annual
Plan 2007-08, with the objective of studying and evaluating the impact
of regulatory and development policies in respect of Films, Information
and Broadcasting Sectors. The budgetary allocation for this Scheme has
been enhanced from Rs. 8.00 lakh in 2007-08 to Rs. 28.00 lakh in
2008-09.
20

As regards, reduction is number of Schemes, it may be stated that
in the Annual Plan 2007-08, there were 101 Plan Schemes. These have
been reduced to 69 Schemes, from Annual Plan 2008-09, after clubbing
various Schemes.
[Min of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008/-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 10 )
The Committee note that the Internal and Extra Budgetary
Support (IEBR) component which, hitherto, used to be a part of Plan
Outlay has been excluded from the Plan Outlay w.e.f. Annual Plan
2007-08. The Committee have been informed that the IEBR component
would now be utilized to meet revenue expenditure (including creation
of content) of the Prasar Bharati, the source of IEBR generation. From
the data obtained by the Committee, it is observed that barring the year
2002-03 the IEBR component has never been fully utilized in the
succeeding Annual Plans. During the years 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and
2006-07, the IEBR amounting to Rs. 1.23 crore, Rs. 135.01 crore, Rs. 312.03
crore and Rs. 264.60 crore respectively has remained unspent. In
2007-08, a sum of Rs. 250.89 crore out of net IEBR amount of Rs. 616.04
crore has remained unspent by the end of December, 2007. The total
accumulated IEBR as on the same date is Rs. 1086.34 crore. The Committee
are of the opinion that the accumulation of such a sizable amount of IEBR
funds in a cash starved organization like Prasar Bharati is due to the lack
of a clear cut policy about the specific, prudent and optimum utilization
of this self-generated wealth. The recent decision of the Ministry to exclude
the IEBR from Plan Outlay and utilizing them only for revenue expenditure
of Prasar Bharati from the year 2007-08 onwards has also not delivered
the desired results as can be seen from the substantial IEBR funds
remaining unspent at the end of nine months of the current Financial
Year. The Committee, therefore, desire that a well defined policy about
specific and focused utilization of IEBR funds may be formulated by the
Ministry in consultation with Prasar Bharti. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard at the
earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has informed that expenditure of an amount of
Rs. 650.20 crore (Rs. 353.65 crore for Non Plan and Rs. 296.55 crore for
Plan) has been incurred as against the earning of Rs. 1028.13 crore during
the financial year 2007-08. The expenditure from IEBR has been incurred
with the approval of Prasar Bharati Board. Further, Prasar Bharati has
21

to keep Rs. 600 crore as Reserve Fund for meeting the gap between the
receipt in Grant-in-Aid and expenditure.
Optimum utilization of IEBR was discussed by GoM in its meeting
held on 03-04-2008. The GoM has recommended that Prasar Bharati should
generate enough resources to meet its operational expenses upto 50%
over the next 10-year period. IEBR will be used extensively for “Software
and Programme Related Expenses” excluding Special Software pertaining
to J&K, North East and DD Urdu. Prasar Bharati will also meet the entire
expenses on Repairs and Maintenance of Capital Assets, Service Tax,
Other Office Expenses and liabilities on account of salaries and related
expenses for Staff, recruited on contract basis by Prasar Bharati, out of
the IEBR.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 5.06.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee’s examination revealed that the poor performance
of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in regard to the
management of finance was not confined to the planning process only.
The Ministry of Finance, through their modified Budget and Cash
Management Scheme have stipulated a quarterly exchequer control with
a limit of maximum of 33% funds in the last quarter (Q-4) of the financial
year and a March spending control with a maximum ceiling of 15% of
the funds. The Ministry have failed to comply with these stipulations in
both the years 2006-07 and 2007-08 with 35.94% and 34.05% respectively
of the allocated funds remaining in Q-4. In the year 2006-07, even the
March spending limit has been exceeded as 18.75% of the allocated amount
was carried forward to March, 2007. The Committee strongly deprecate
this tendency of the Ministry of carrying forward major chunks of allocated
funds to the last quarter/month of March. The Committee hope that now
when, as per their own assurances before the Committee, the planning
problems have been more or less solved, the Ministry would duly prioritize
the spending in the Annual Plan 2008-09 so that the expenditure is spread
judiciously over all the four quarters and the cascading effects of Q-4/
month of March are a thing of the past. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the strategy worked out by the Ministry in this regard
at the earliest and its effect on the financial performance of the various
Schemes being implemented by the Ministry in the year 2008-09.
Action Taken by the Government
The Statement given below indicates the figures of Budget Estimates,
Revised Estimates, Expenditure during the last quarter of 2007-08,
22

Expenditure during March, 2008 and Percentages of expenditure with
reference to BE and RE:—
(Rs. in crore)
Supplemented R.E. Expenditure % Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure
BE 2007-08  2007-08  Upto 31st  upto Dec. w.r.t. Upto 29th upto 31st
Dec. 2007 Feb. 2008 March 2008
BE RE
1686.87 1610.07 1135.29 67.30 70.51 1515.71 1585.73
(Rs. in crore)
Expenditure Expenditure % Expenditure during % Expenditure during
during last during March last Qr. w.r.t.  March 2008 w.r.t.
Qr. 2008 
BE RE BE RE
450.43 70.03 26.70 27.98 4.15 4.35
It will be seen from the above that because of the close monitoring
of the expenditure undertaken by the Ministry and of the periodical
review meetings held by Secretary (l&B), Ministry could keep the
expenditure during the last quarter of 2007-08 within the permissible
33% and during March, 2008 within 15%.
The Ministry intends to continue close monitoring of the
expenditure, as in 2007-08, during 2008-09 so that expenditure is
maintained within the permissible limits of 33% during the quarter and
15% during March, 2009.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. G-20016/9/2008-B&A, dated 27.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 14 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Another problem area identified by the Committee during the course
of their examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry pertains
to the launching of New Schemes. The Committee note that once a New
Scheme has been devised by the Ministry, obtaining ‘in principle’ approval
of the Planning Commission is mandatory for inclusion of the Scheme
in the Plan proposals. After the ‘in principle’ approval is obtained, the
approval of SFC/EFC/Cabinet is required to be obtained as per the
prescribed procedure and depending upon the financial implications of
the proposal. The Committee find that out of the 28 New Schemes included
in the Annual Plan 2008-09 of the Ministry, the requisite approvals/
23

clearances are still pending in respect of 9 New Schemes. These include
such important Schemes like High Definition TV (HDTV), Digitisation
of Transmitters, Special Component for Commonwealth Games,
International Channel, Converting IIMC to International Media University,
Opening of Regional Offices of Central Board of Film Certification at
Delhi, Guwahati and Cuttack, Setting up of National Centre for Excellence
in Animation, Gaming and Special Effects. Incidentally, out of the 43
ongoing Schemes of the Tenth Plan which were dropped by the Planning
Commission in the First Year of the Eleventh Plan (2007-08), 11 Schemes
were unapproved. The Committee are perturbed to note from the
statement of the representative of Prasar Bharati during the Oral Evidence
on 28 March, 2008 that initially, they were told to prepare Plan proposal
for 2007-08 as was being done in the past. However, the instructions were
later revised to prepare umbrella Schemes. Resultantly, the Annual Plan
2007-08, which was approved in February, 2007 was reconsidered by the
Planning Commission along with the proposal for the Eleventh Plan in
May, 2007 and the entire thing had to be re-jigged after the Planning
Commission conveyed their suggestions to the Ministry in the middle
of October, 2007. By the time, the Eleventh Plan and the Annual Plan
2007-08 were tentatively approved in December, 2007, nine precious
months of 2007-08 were lost which proved quite detrimental to the
implementation of all the Schemes in general and the New Schemes in
particular. The Committee find the extant situation is not very conducive
to expeditious implementation of New Schemes of national importance.
They, therefore, desire that the Ministry should strive to work out in
consultation with authorities concerned at various levels, a more
streamlined approval system in which the New Schemes do not continue
to languish for years together and are approved expeditiously. This is
highly essential in order to facilitate their implementation before they
lose their relevance or become technologically obsolete. The Committee
would like to have a detailed feedback in the matter from the Ministry
about the action taken by them at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The new Schemes are prepared by the Media Units concerned,
which are subsequently examined by the Administrative Wings and the
IFD. Notes to SFC/ EFC are prepared and these are then circulated to
SFC/ EFC members including Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission. These are considered for approval by the SFC / EFC. All
these processes involve considerable time. Efforts are, however, being
made to expedite approval of all Schemes and progress is monitored
through periodical review meetings of Secretary (l&B).
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 15.05.2008]
24

Recommendation (Para No. 14)
India is hosting the prestigious Commonwealth Games in
October, 2010. While scrutinizing the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Ministry, the Committee have noted that a sum of Rs. 99.00 crore has
been allotted for the Commonwealth Games. The proposal for
Commonwealth Games inv olving an expenditure of Rs. 542.00 crore
including Rs. 494.00 crore for Prasar Bharati, Rs. 20.00 crore for the Press
Information Bureau and Rs. 28.00 crore for India Trade Promotion
Organization has been considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) on 19 March, 2008 and the Ministry now intend to put up the
proposal before the CCEA. The Committee also note that the Ministry
had projected the funds requirement for Commonwealth Games
separate from the Eleventh Plan allocations. However, the allocation of
Rs. 99.00 crore during 2008-09 forms a part of their total Plan
allocation of Rs. 700.00 crore. The Committee are highly disturbed
with the abysmally slow pace of the Scheme. The Scheme is still at the
approval stage with hardly two and a half years left upto the event.
Because of procedural requirements even one rupee cannot be spent from
the amount of Rs. 99.00 crore allocated in the current year till the
mandatory approvals and clearances are obtained. This is unfortunate
to say the least. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to take
steps on a war footing basis to ensure that not only the mandatory
approvals/clearances are obtained post haste but the implementation
of the Scheme starts immediately thereafter, in right earnest. The
Committee have no hesitation in agreeing with the view of the
Ministry that the allocation for Commonwealth Games ought to be made
over and above the Plan Outlay for the Eleventh Plan and, therefore,
recommend strongly a favorable consideration on the request of the
Ministry.
Action Taken by the Government
The meeting of the Expenditure Financial Committee (EFC) under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure) to consider the proposal for
Commonwealth Games at Pune, 2008 and Commonwealth Games at Delhi,
2010, was held on 19-03-2008. While recommending the proposal for
approval of CCEA, the EFC had recommended that there should be a
Committee constituted by the Ministry of l&B chaired by the AS & FA
to scrutinize and firm up the cost estimates. Accordingly, the Committee
was constituted. The Committee held five meetings to discuss the proposed
cost estimates and has submitted the report. The report has been sent
for approval of the Secretary, Department of Expenditure. After approval
25

of the Report of the Committee, the proposal will be submitted for the
approval of CCEA.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
As a part of the Eleventh Plan Scheme, the Ministry plan to convert
the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) into an International
Media University (IMU). Having observed a lack of clarity about the
proposal and the other deficiencies in the infrastructure, faculty and
academic contents, the Committee had in their 43rd Report on the
Demands for Grants 2007-08 recommended prompt commencement of
preparatory work for the conversion of IIMC into IMU. A year later, the
Committee now find that no headway has been made in this regard. The
Minister of Information and Broadcasting and Parliamentary Affairs in
his Statement made on 26 February, 2008 in the Lok Sabha under the
direction 73 (A) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha has
inter alia  stated that the IIMC had approached the University Grants
Commission for the grant of Deemed University status to it. The proposal
has, however, been rejected by the UGC because of several deficiencies
including IIMC running only Post Graduate Diploma courses; not
complying with UGC norms of minimum of five Post-Graduate
departments; Memorandum of Association and Rules and Regulations of
IIMC requiring amendments as per UGC norms; faculty being not as per
UGC norms (One Professor, two Associate Professors and adequate
number of Lecturers in each department) and IIMC lacking necessary
infrastructure facilities viz. administrative, academic, hostel, faculty houses
and staff quarters. The Ministry in the meantime have constituted a Task
Force headed by the Secretary, Ministry of l&B / Chairperson, IIMC for
the purpose. The Committee note that the Task Force in their meeting
held on 14 January 2008 have suggested that the management should
work on an Act of Parliament for grant of Deemed University status to
IIMC. The Committee also note that as per the directions of the Task
Force, the best option for developing a roadmap for the implementation
of the Scheme is being explored through a Consultant. The developments
of the entire last year have vindicated the view of the Committee that
the Scheme was conceived in haste and was lacking in clarity. The
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry have not taken their
advice, given last year, to start preparatory work for the Scheme in the
right earnest and with the seriousness it deserves. The Committee have
26

a lurking apprehension that the current suggestion of the Task Force
about acquiring Deemed University status for IIMC through an enactment
is also being offered without in-depth consideration. The Committee rather
tend to go by the reasoning offered by the UGC while rejecting the
proposal of granting Deemed University status to IIMC. The shortcomings
and deficiencies pointed out by the UGC will have to be taken care of
even if the Deemed University status is acquired through the route of
an enactment. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry should
give a serious rethink to the entire proposal in all its dimensions before
opting for a particular way of implementing it. In the opinion of the
Committee, consultations with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development and the Ministry of Law and Justice would also help the
Ministry in coming to the right conclusions in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The views expressed by the Committee have been duly noted and
will be taken care of while implementing the Scheme i.e. to convert the
IIMC into International Media University.
The Ministry has approved the proposal to appoint Educational
Consultants India Limited (Ed. CIL) an autonomous body under the
Ministry of Human Resource Development, as Consultant to draw up
the road-map for converting IIMC into International Media University.
While appointing Ed. CIL as consultant they will be directed in clear
terms to address all the deficiencies, observed by the Standing Committee
and accordingly include the necessary provisions/modalities in their
Detailed Project Report of the Scheme in question so that the operation
of the Scheme may start without any further loss of time.
An outlay of Rs. 44.03 crore has since been earmarked for this
Scheme under the 11th Plan. The Planning Commission has been
approached for ‘in principle’ approval of the Scheme.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 23/11/2008-IP&MC, dated 23.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
A New Scheme in the Eleventh Plan, ‘the Media Outreach
Programme’ is meant for dissemination of information about flagship
Programmes of the Government through Public Information Campaign,
Media Interactive Session, dissemination of success stories and conduct
of Press Tours. The Programme covers Schemes like Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan, Mid-Day Meal, Right to Information, Prime Minister’s 15 point
Programme for Welfare of Minorities, Integrated Child Development
Services Scheme (ICDS), Tribal Welfare, National Rural Employment
27

Guarantee Act (NREGA) and of course the six components of Bharat
Nirman, Total Sanitation, Old-age Pension Scheme, etc.. The Committee
are happy to note that a concerted effort at last has been made in the
direction of apprising the common man, who is the ultimate beneficiary
of the welfare Schemes of the Government, about what all these Schemes
are and how to get benefitted from them. The Committee are sure that
this Programme will go a long way in improving the implementation
aspect of the various welfare Schemes of the Government, introduce the
much needed transparency, make the implementing agencies more
accountable, cater to the much felt need for coordinated dissemination
of information and act as a welcome interface between the Government
and the common man. The Committee, therefore, desire that instead of
piecemeal allocations for the Programme, the Government should ensure
that sufficient funds are allocated for this path breaking initiative to
facilitate its moving ahead, full steam.
Action Taken by the Government
At the outset this Ministry expresses gratitude to the Hon’ble
Committee for its precious words of encouragement, while appreciating
the steps taken by this Ministry with respect to the Scheme.
It is accepted that the allocations for this Scheme during 2007-08,
the first year of the 11th Plan Scheme, was done in installments, since
this was a new Scheme and necessary approvals were to be obtained. The
Planning Commission had initially approved a token allocation of Rs 9.0
lakh only, whereas the annual requirement was Rs. 10.0 crore. Thereafter,
the procedures relating to formulation, appraisal and approval of the
Scheme including obtaining ‘in-principle’ approval of Planning
Commission and holding the EFC Meeting with representatives of
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission took some time and were
finally completed in November, 2007. In view of the insufficient allocation,
the Ministry allocated funds for this Scheme through three re-
appropriations, after locating savings in other Schemes. These two re-
appropriations were within the powers of this Ministry but the third and
last re-appropriation required the approval of Ministry of Finance. In
view of the above, it would be appreciated that this Ministry made special
and timely efforts to allocate funds to this Scheme despite there being
no Plan allocation from the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
However, this Ministry would like to state that during 2008-09, the
entire requirement of funds for this Scheme has been met through the
allocation of Rs. 9.60 crore at the beingining of the year itself.
[Min of I&B, O.M. No. 23/9/2008-Press, dated 21.05.2008]
28

Recommendation (Para No. 17)
One of the constant focal points in successive Reports of the
Committee, the National Press Centre, seems to be now moving toward
its logical culmination. The Committee are relieved to note that finally
a major part of planning, approvals and clearances has been taken care
of and the Ministry are now moving ahead in the right earnest to get
the Project executed. The Ministry expect the work on the Project to
commence from the middle of this year and the Centre would be ready
for occupation by June, 2010 i.e. within two years. The Committee would,
however, like to point out that in all their previous replies furnished to
the Committee, the Ministry have been stating that the National Building
Construction Corporation (NBCC) would complete the Project within 18
months of the receipt of statutory approvals. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Ministry to impress upon the NBCC to adhere to the
previously assured timelines instead of extending it by 6 months since
the Project is already inordinately delayed. The Committee note that the
Project is now being regularly and constantly monitored at senior levels
in the Ministry and PIB. In order to ensure that the present tempo is
maintained till the end, there should not be any laxity in the monitoring
mechanism.
Action Taken  by the Government
NBCC has projected completion of the civil construction work
of the NPC within 18 months and testing and commissioning of
Electrical Sub-Station (ESS), fire fighting equipments, lifts, interior and
furnishings, provision of audio-visual system, etc. within the further
6 months i.e. to make the building operational and ready for occupation.
As per MoU signed with NBCC, they have to complete the project
within 24 months from the date of approval of drawings by the
statutory authorities. This Ministry would like to state that NBCC have
assured that they would strive hard to handover the building as early
as possible.
This Ministry would like to assure that there will be no laxity in
monitoring of the Scheme.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 23/9/2008-Press, dated 21.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The ‘Modernization of Directorate of Advertising and Visual
Publicity’ was taken as a New Scheme during the year 2007-08. The Scheme
envisages computerization, digitization, procurement of modern office
infrastructure to improve the efficiency of DAVP. As in the case of several
29

other New Schemes, this Scheme was also included in the Plan without
the necessary approvals. Consequently, to begin with, a token amount
of Rs. 1.00 lakh was allocated for the Scheme at the BE stage. The Outlay
was subsequently enhanced to Rs. 54.00 lakh at the RE stage. The
Committee note that DAVP is also playing an important role in
dissemination of information and is supplementing the ambitious Media
Outreach Programme. The modernization would, therefore, go a long
way in enabling the Directorate to function in a more efficient and
professional manner. They, therefore, desire that sufficient funds should
be allocated for the Scheme so that its implementation does not suffer
due to paucity of funds.
Action Taken by the Government
The Scheme ‘Modernization of Directorate of Advertising and
Visual Publicity’ was proposed for inclusion in the 11th Plan and being
a new Plan Scheme under 11th Plan, a token provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh
was made under BE 2007-2008. Subsequently, after obtaining
‘In Principle’ approval of the Planning Commission, the Scheme
was implemented with augmentation of funds to the tune of
Rs. 54.00 lakh at RE stage. This amount has been fully utilized, as on
31.3.2008.
A provision of Rs. 2.67 crore has been made in the Annual Plan
2008-09 for the Scheme, while the total allocation under the 11th Plan
is Rs. 7.95 crore. Thus adequate allocation under Annual Plan 2008-09
has been made for the Scheme ‘Modernization of DAVP .’
[Min of I&B, O.M. No. 10/6/2008-MUC, dated 15.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
In yet another instance of a New Scheme’s implementation suffering
due to the lack of necessary approvals, the Directorate of Field Publicity
was allocated a mere Rs. 12.00 lakh for the year 2007-08. Even this amount
remained unspent till October 2007, again due to the lack of necessary
approvals. The SFC approval was fi nally obtained on 1 February 2008
when only two months of the financial year  were left. Till the end of
February, 2008 DFP was able to utilize an amount of Rs. 40.74 lakh against
the enhanced allocation of Rs. 44.34 lakh. In so far as the physical
achievements of DFP are concerned, its performance in the case of two
of its programmes viz. Tour Days and Film Shows has not been upto
the mark. In the case of Tour Days, against a target of 33816 programmes,
the achievement upto December 2007 was less than 50% at 15610
programmes. As regards Film Shows, the position is equally dismaying
30

with the achievements upto December 2007 being 27146 programmes
against a target of 60924 programmes. Though, the Ministry have assured
that the achievements of DFP in respect of these two Programmes will
be maximized in the last quarter of 2007-08, the Committee have their
own reservations in view of the performance of the DFP in the first nine
months of the Plan year and the fact that 59 Field Units of DFP have
been closed so far. The Committee would, therefore, like DFP to perform
in a more professional manner in 2008-09 so that there is no repetition
of slippages in achievement of physical targets.
Action Taken by the Government
The two Plan Schemes of DFP have been approved by the Ministry.
DFP received the approval for the first Scheme viz. Conducted Tours/
Skill Upgradation on 2nd February, 2008 and for the second Scheme viz.
Modernisation and Upgradation of Hardware and Software at ROs and
FPUs on 11th February, 2008. After the receipt of Administrative/ Financial
approvals from the M/o l&B, both the Schemes were implemented
immediately.
Following is the physical achievements of DFP during the year
2007-08:—
Target Achievement %age
Tour days : 33816 21,349 63.13
Films shows : 60924 36,868 61.00
Special programmes : 7380 11,834 160.00
It may be seen from the above table that although the achievements
are not fully met out against the targets set with regard to Films Shows
and Tour Days, the achievement was much higher in case of Special
Programmes, the reason being the large number of special programmes
were organized by DFP as part of the PIC campaigns through out the
year.
As regards non repetition of slippages in achievement of physical
targets, the field functionaries of DFP are being directed to fully achieve
the targets set for each publicity programme during the coming years.
However, DFP also plans to conduct a review of the targets in view of
the winding up of some 60 FPUs over the past two years and acute
shortage of manpower and vehicles in the Directorate owing to Economic
Reforms Committee recommendations.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 20/15/2008-IP&MC, dated 9.05.2008]
31

Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Central Board of Film Certification which was set up under
the Cinematograph Act, 1952 carries out its day to day activities from
its nine Regional Offices located at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore,
Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati. The last
three Regional Offices mentioned are functioning on an adhoc basis with
the help of staff borrowed from other Media Units and by giving additional
charge to the Officials of the Board posted in other Regional Offices. The
Committee find that the proposal for opening of Regional Offices at Delhi,
Cuttack and Guwahati was mooted in the year 2002. However, the SFC
has not been approached for seeking the approval of the proposal as the
stipulated matching savings could not be found by abolition of any posts
in the Board. In the year 2007-08, an allocation of Rs. 0.90 crore was
earmarked for opening of these Regional Offices. But as in the case of
similar allocations made in the past years, this amount also remained
unspent in the absence of SFC approval. During their Study Visit to
Mumbai on 26 December, 2007, the Committee were informed by the
representatives of the CBFC about the serious difficulties being faced by
them due to these three Regional Offices not coming through. The
Committee also noted that CBFC was managing all its activities at the
nine Regional Offices with only 82 personnel. There are 14 vacancies in
the personnel strength of the Board. The Committee expect the Ministry
to appreciate the fact that India has the largest Film Industry in the
world making over 900 feature films and a larger number of short films
every year and the CBFC is mandated with the certification of these
films. It is quite possible that with inadequate staff strength and due to
the adhoc manner in which the Regional Offices at Delhi, Cuttack and
Guwahati are being operated, the qualitative assessment while certifying
the films may suffer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should, instead of looking around for matching staff savings in
the other Units, approach the SFC in an appropriate manner and seek
a one time relaxation of the laid down stipulations in the context of the
functioning of the Regional Offices of CBFC at Delhi, Cuttack and
Guwahati.
Action Taken by the Government
It has been decided that the posts of Regional Officers at Delhi,
Cuttack and Guwahati Regional Offices of CBFC will be filled from
within the present sanctioned strength of the Indian Information Service.
The matching savings required for filling up other posts in these
Regional Offices have since been located in the Films Division, a separate
Media Unit under this Ministry. The matter, therefore, is processed
accordingly so as to operationalise the CBFC’s 11th Plan scheme “Opening
32

of regional offices of CBFC at Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati” at an early
date.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 812/3/2008-F(C), dated 26.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
Apart from this, the Committee would like that the resources of
FD be utilized for the production of small spots on various social issues
and Schemes, etc. These could be sourced out to TV Channels through
DAVP or some other appropriate agency. This would not only restore
Film Division to its old glory but also enable it to contribute more
positively to the system.
Action Taken by the Government
As recommended by the Committee, the new Scheme of Films
Division, ‘Production of Documentary Films’, envisages inter alia , to
produce socially relevant messages of 30 seconds-2 minutes duration in
consultation with various Central Ministries for release in theatres across
the country, produce video magazines related to culture, tourism and
travel for State Governments, and produce documentaries through outside
producers for release on different television channels.
This would ensure that the resources of Films Division are utilised
in full and also ensure that it makes a positive and visible contribution.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/04/2008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
Another suggestion which merits consideration is the desirability
of having a dedicated satellite with the Ministry. It can beam back films
to several thousand cinema houses simultaneously thus obviating the
need of developing as many thousand prints of the films. Besides, there
will be lot of improvement in viewing quality. It may also help in curbing
interpolations in films after they are released and also check piracy.  Apart
from this, if the Ministry or the entity designated by the Ministry for
the purpose is able to offer a bouquet of services to various user groups
and viewers, the project can be a source of substantial resource generation.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Ministry’s views in the
matter.
33

Action Taken by the Government
This Ministry, while acknowledging the role of digital transmission
via dedicated satellite in curbing piracy, has already pursued for reduction/
exemption from payment of service tax on digital transmission of cinema
and Ministry of Finance has agreed to it during the fiscal budget 2007-
08. We have also been pursuing with Ministry of Finance for reduction
of custom duty payable on import of equipments related to digital
transmission. Ministry of Finance, during 2007-08 and 2008-09 has
considerably reduced the base custom duty from 10% to 5% on digital
equipments under the heading ‘project’.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 110/7/2008-FI, dated 15.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note that wayback in the Ninth Plan, the Ministry
decided to construct the CFSI Film Complex at Hyderabad because it
was felt that the infrastructure could be used for the Film Festivals
organized in Hyderabad every alternate year. This was decided despite
the fact that CFSI is a very small organization and ninety per cent of its
staff is located in Mumbai. The Project lingered on for a decade and a
half and it has now been decided to drop it. Ironically, Maharashtra
Government has now been requested to sanction a plot in Film City,
Mumbai for the purpose. Apart from all the efforts of the Ministry during
this period coming to a nought and a project of significance not fructifying,
a sum of Rs. 6.32 lakh has also gone down the drain. The Committee
are constrained to observe that this is a case of inept planning and
processing of a Scheme. While expressing their serious unhappiness
over this misadventure, the Committee desire that utmost care should
now be taken by the Ministry in planning and processing the Project at
Mumbai.
Action Taken by the Government
The Children’s Film Complex which was proposed to be set up in
Hyderabad got entangled on the issue of its day to day operations and
maintenance of the Complex after being set up. The State Government
of Andhra Pradesh finally decided to set up the Children’s Film Complex
themselves in a public private partnership and, therefore, cancelled the
land allotment earlier made to the Ministry in this regard. However, the
Ministry has taken note of the Committee’s observations and guidance
34

and assures that almost care would be taken in planning and processing
such projects in future.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-110113/042008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
What has further concerned the Committee is that an attempt has
perhaps been made to misreport the chain of events in the official
document. While in the Outcome Budget 2008-09, the production of feature
and short films have been shown as zero as on 31 December, 2007, two
feature and one short films have been shown as achievements during the
remaining quarter of 2007-08. In the very same document in the Chapter
‘Review of Performance of Autonomous Bodies’, the Ministry have claimed
that as on 31 December, 2007 the production of 2 features and 1 short
film was nearing completion. This is in stark contrast to what was finally
said by the Secretary of the Ministry during oral evidence that no funds
were available for production of films till the re-appropriation of Rs. 1.95
crore was effected at the fag end of the financial year 2007-08. The
Committee consider the entire matter highly improper. The Outcome
Budget has been introduced by the Government to bring in more
transparency in the working of Ministries/Departments and to usher
in more clarity in their accountability to Parliament. The Outcome Budget
is not meant for obfuscating issues. The Committee, while expressing
their disapproval on this lapse, desire that the Ministry should be
extremely careful while reporting its facts and figures in future.
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry would like to clarify that the two feature films and one
short film were nearing completion as on 31.12.2007 and were finally
completed in the last quarter i.e. January to March, 2008. These films
were carried over from the year 2006-07. As also mentioned in para 26
above, funds for Film Production could be released only in the month
of February, 2008. As advised by the Committee, due caution will be
exercised by the Ministry while reporting facts and figures in future.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/04/2008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Ministry has been for quite some time mulling over the proposal
of converting the Film and Television Institute of India into a Global Film
School. The rationale given in this regard is that India being the producer
of the highest number of films in the world requires a world-class, state-
of-the-art Film School with advanced teaching methodology as well as
35

technology at par with the best. The Scheme has been bequeathed to the
Eleventh Plan from the Tenth Plan. A sum of Rs. 2.56 crore has been
indicated as allocation as for 2008-09 in the Outcome Budget of the
Ministry for certain civil work, machinery, equipment, creation of
infrastructure, etc. The Scheme of Global Film School finds mention as
an ongoing Scheme of the Eleventh Plan in all the documents submitted
to the Committee by the Ministry. The Committee were, therefore,
astonished to hear from the representative of the Ministry during the
Oral Evidence held on 28 March, 2008 i.e. only a few days after the
submission of materials to the Committee that the Ministry were actually
now looking at not having a Global Film School but upgrading the FTII
into a school of international standing. It is but obvious that the Scheme
for Global Film School, which has hitherto been flaunted as one of the
major Schemes of the Ministry, was conceptualized without much thought
being given to its feasibility and viability, thereby, necessitating an
alternative proposal. In the process, however, several precious years have
been lost. While strongly disapproving the cavalier attitude of the Ministry,
the Committee expect that much more planning and introspection would
go into the revised proposal for upgrading the FTII. Since, valuable time
has already been lost in persisting with the Global Film School Scheme,
the Committee would like the Ministry to attend to the upgradation of
the FTII with due promptitude. They would like to be apprised of a
definite roadmap drawn for the purpose at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
It is submitted that an outlay of Rs. 52 crore has been earmarked
for the Plan Scheme viz. Global Film School under Film and TV Institute
of India (FTII), Pune in the 11th Plan. Further an outlay of Rs. 2.56 crore
has been proposed for this Scheme for the current year.
It is further submitted that this is a new Plan Scheme introduced
during the 11th Plan; it did not exist during the 10th Plan.
A concept paper prepared by the former Director, FTII has outlined
the rationale for setting up a world class film school in order to enable
India to produce world class alumini which would enable us to produce
global films, earn huge export revenue and also cast India as a soft power
on the global stage. It is submitted that all this has to be achieved without
diluting the brand name of the existing FTII school at Pune. It may be
pointed out that the new school proposed to be set up adjacent to the
existing school. Therefore, it has been decided to set up a new globally
comparable school in the additional piece of land available with FTII,
Pune, which would offer new contemporary courses. However, the
students of the new school would have the option of studying the subjects/
36

courses being offered currently in the existing school, the objective being
that the two schools under the FTII umbrella should be able to derive
synergy from each other. It is hoped that existing FTII school, which is
already a national brand, would also achieve global standard in due
course of time.
However, the Committee’s directions in this regard have been taken
note of.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/4/2008-F(FTI), dated 14.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Satyajit Ray Film and TV Institute, Kolkata was allocated a
sum of Rs. 7.77 crore at BE stage for 2007-08. The amount was reduced
to Rs. 3.77 crore at the RE stage. As per the written information submitted
to the Committee on 18 March, 2008, the actual expenditure by the Institute
upto 31 January, 2008, is zero. During the course of Oral Evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry on 28 March, 2008, the Secretary of the
Ministry, to the surprise of the Committee, informed that the entire amount
of Rs. 3.77 crore had been released quite some time back. Though, the
Officer apologized to the Committee for this faux pas, the Committee
find it inexplicable as to how such inconsistencies could creep into
information submitted by the Government to one of the bodies of
Parliament. This was not the only such instance. The Committee found
several such inconsistencies in the information furnished to them by the
Ministry in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 2008-09,
a few of which have been documented at other places in this Report.
The Committee consider this a grave lapse and express their displeasure
over the casual attitude of the Ministry in furnishing information to
Parliament and its entities. The Committee expect that there would be
no recurrence of such lapses in future.
Action Taken by the Government
SRFTI, Kolkata was allocated an amount of Rs. 7.77 crore during
the year 2007-08 at the BE stage as Grant-in-aid.
However, the EFC/SFC approval for the said Plan Scheme was
for Rs. 3.77 crore and, therefore, the RE allocation to SRFTI was Rs. 3.77
crore for 2007-08. The sanction order was issued on 29.2.2008 for an
amount of Rs. 3.77 crore to SRFTI-Kolkata after following the due
procedure in this regard. However, a draft was issued in favour of SRFTI,
Kolkata for an amount of Rs. 2,81,80,433/-after deducting the unspent
balance of the previous financial year on 3/3/2008. The said amount was
37

debited from the Government account on 29/2/2008 as per the sanction
order.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/4/2008-F(FTI), dated 14.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Museum of Moving Images was started in the Tenth Plan and
is an ongoing Project in the Eleventh one. The Project is intended to be
an entertaining and educational museum containing artifacts connected
with film making, exhibiting the work of noted directors, producers and
institutions for the benefit of film enthusiasts. It would also depict the
evolution of Indian Cinema over the last hundred years. A sum of
Rs. 5.00 crore has been earmarked in the year 2008-09. The Committee note
that National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), the executing
agency of the Project has submitted a final DPR to the Ministry in which
the total cost of the Project has been assessed as Rs. 44.20 crore besides
a sum of Rs. 1.65 crore charged for preparation of the DPR. The Committee
further note that an MoU is being signed between Films Division and
NBCC for the Project. On the operational side, the Secretary of the Ministry
had convened a meeting on 14 March, 2008 which was attended by
eminent personalities from the fields of cinema and museum. Apart from
discussing various issues related to the Museum, it has also been decided
to prepare a concept paper on Indian Cinema and as to how the same
would be put on display/projected in MoMI. In their 43rd Report on
DFG 2007-08, the Committee while deprecating the delay in the
implementation of the Project, had stressed upon the need for taking it
up in right earnest to ensure its timely completion. Comparing the latest
developments with the situations obtaining one year back, the Committee
are dismayed to find that not much has been achieved by the Ministry
in the direction of actual implementation and timely completion of the
Project. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should now
get down in right earnest to implement this Scheme of national
significance. If need be, a monitoring mechanism similar to one being
put in place for National Press Centre may be considered for regular
monitoring of MoMI. The Committee would also like to be furnished
with definite timelines regarding the remaining stages for conceptualising
and implementation of the Project within three months of the Presentation
of this Report of Parliament.
Action Taken by the Government
Work on finalization of the Scheme MoMI, on the basis of the
brainstorming session held on 14.03.2008 in Mumbai, is proceeding at
a rapid pace. This includes preparing an organizational structure for the
38

Museum, creation of posts to man the Museum, finding matching savings
for creation of these posts, obtaining EFC approval and ensuring that the
physical work on the Museum begins. It is hoped that the funds earmarked
for the year 2008-09 will be utilised in full and progress is also made
accordingly. It would be the Ministry’s endeavour to complete this Project
during the 11th Plan period. The project is being monitored by Secretary
(l&B) in the Senior Officers’ meeting held every week. It is further
submitted that surrender of posts in order to find matching savings for
creation of posts to run MoMI has to be undertaken without causing
dislocations in other media units under this Ministry.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/04/2008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 36 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that animation, gaming and special effects are
upcoming areas in the ICT sector and have immense potential, worldwide.
The National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special
Effects which is being set up under the public private partnership mode
is expected to address the issue of shortage of skilled manpower in these
emerging sectors having high technology content. In view of the growing
demand of skilled manpower for animation, gaming and special effects,
the Committee in their 43rd Report on DFG 2007-08 had recommended
that the Project be pursued and implemented at the earliest. The
Committee find that a sum of Rs. 10.00 lakh was allocated for the Scheme
during 2007-08. No funds were utilized till December 2007, however, a
sum of Rs. 2.35 lakh has been utilized as fee to the Consultant, thereafter.
The remaining balance has been surrendered. The Committee have been
informed that the total Eleventh Plan allocation for the Scheme is
Rs. 52.00 crore. A sum of Rs. 1.00 crore has been earmarked for the Scheme
in the year 2008-09. The Ministry expect the Report of the Consultant,
DPR of the Scheme and its approval by the competent authority to be
completed by March, 2009. The Ministry have simultaneously started a
dialogue with the Ministries of HRD and Labour to start courses in the
Universities and Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) respectively for
animation. The curriculum for the ITIs has been worked out and animation
bourse will be started in 10 ITIs from the next year. The Committee
appreciate the efforts being made by the Ministry in the development
of lower end skills in animation sector through the introduction of
animation courses in the ITIs. The Committee are, however, concerned
that not much is being done in the direction of development of higher
39

end skills in the fields of animation, gaming and special effects. This task
can perhaps be achieved with the fructification of the National Centre
of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should singlemindedly pursue
the setting up of the Centre at the earliest, so that skilled manpower is
available in the country for the high end requirements of these sectors
as well.
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry has noted the observation of the Standing Committee that
the Ministry should single mindedly pursue the matter of setting up of
the Centre. The consultant is expected to submit its report in July, 2008.
Thereafter, based on the recommendations of the consultant, DPR of the
Scheme will be prepared and the approval of the Competent Authority
will be sought.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 110/7/2008-FI, dated 15.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 39 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee also desire that the NPC should be asked in clear
cut terms to give its Report by a stipulated early date and Prasar Bharati
should then work out and submit a comprehensive proposal as per the
directions of the GoM to the Ministry so that a permanent solution is
worked out by the Ministry in consultation with the MoF for this vexed
problem. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
in the matter on priority.
Action Taken by the Government
Study on organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati has been
entrusted to the National Productivity Council (NPC). NPC had submitted
an interim report on Organizational Restructuring of Prasar Bharati in
October 2007. The report was examined in AIR and DD and comments
thereon were sent to NPC. Subsequently various meetings were held
with NPC by CEO to incorporate the suggestions made by Prasar Bharati
and expedite the matter.
CEO, Prasar Bharati took a meeting with senior officers of NPC
on 25-04-2008 where senior officers of Prasar Bharati were also present
to discuss the draft report prepared by NPC and to give it a final shape.
40

The report was submitted by NPC in the meeting. It was decided that
NPC should discuss their draft report with senior officers of Programme
and Engineering wings of AIR and DD. It is learnt that the NPC has
started the exercise of holding meetings with AIR and DD officials. As
desired by the Standing Committee, NPC has been asked to submit the
final report by a stipulated date.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 45 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Prasar Bharati Board had, as on 18 February, 2008, seven
vacancies including that of the Chairman, two part time Members, two
ex-officio  vacancies of DG, AIR and DG, Doordarshan and two
representatives of the Prasar Bharati employees. The Committee have
been given to understand by the Ministry that action has been initiated
to fill up the vacancies of the Chairman and two part time Members and
the selection process is in advance stage for the posts DG: AIR and
DG: DD. In the opinion of the Committee, non filling up of the key
posts for a long time also contributes immensely to the underperformance
of the organization concerned. While impressing upon the Ministry to
fill-up all these vacancies at the earliest in order to keep adhocism at
bay, the Committee expect that the Ministry will ensure that the
Prasar Bharati Board is manned by persons of eminence with vision and
immense professional expertise who are capable of steering the
organization to newer heights with proper guidance and directional
support.
Action Taken by the Government
The vacancy of Chairman, Prasar Bharati has since been filled up.
Shri Arun Bhatnagar has been appointed as Chairman, Prasar Bharati
w.e.f. 01.5.2008. The process for filling up the two vacant posts of part
time Members has been initiated. The selection process for filling up the
post of DG: AIR and DG: Doordarshan has begun.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 48 of the Chapter I)
41

Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee in their 47th Report on ‘The Role of Prasar Bharati
and its Future Status’ have recommended several measures for the capital
and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati. The Committee note that
their recommendations are being considered by the GoM and the GoM
have wished that the Ministry should discuss the proposal with the
Ministry of Finance. They have also been given to understand that the
representatives of the Ministry would be having a session with the Finance
Minister in early April, 2008. Prasar Bharati has been in existence for
more than a decade now and it is unfortunate that this Organization is
yet to have its way for undertaking its capital and financial restructuring.
The Ministry should not forget that apart from being the Public Service
Broadcaster, the Organization is also a commercial entity. The Committee,
therefore, expect the Ministry to act with the desired alacrity in the matter
to facilitate the capital and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati without
any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been
considered by the GOM. GOM has decided in its meeting held on
03 April 2008 that:—
(a) Non-cash proposals including waiver of interest of loan in
perpetuity interest on capital loan and penal interest should
be accepted, and loan in perpetuity and capital loan be
converted into grants;
(b) 50% of the operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be
met by Prasar Bharati from its internal resources in 10 years
time. Prasar Bharati shall prepare and circulate a road map
for the same.
(c) The Ministry of l&B and Finance Ministry are to come
up with a proposal as to how the remaining 50% of the
operating expenses and the capital requirements are to be
funded.
(d) Levying of licence fee or other means of revenue generation
is also to be explored.
(e) Public Broadcasting Content to be paid for by Govern-
ment through the Ministries and programmes are to be
publicized.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
42

Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee note that though the North East Special Package
‘entailed a provision of Rs. 25.00 crore during the year 2007-08, a sum
of Rs. 0.78 crore only has been spent upto December 2007. Several Schemes
of the Special Package like commissioning of 19 FM Stations, Silchar,
5 KW transmitter, Gangtok 10 KW FM transmitter, Chinsura 1000 KW MW
transmitter, DSNG/MSS terminal, C-Band RN Terminal (19 Nos.), Studio
Transmitter Programme Links for Silchar and Gangtok and 100 Watt FM
Relay Centres in remote locations (100 places) are all still at various
stages of execution. The delays in execution and the consequent non-
utilisation of funds is mainly due to the problems being faced in
acquisition of land from the State Governments and also due to the difficult
circumstances in the North East. The Committee note that Prasar Bharati
management has now taken a fresh initiative in the matter by writing
to the Chief Ministers and the Chief Secretaries in regard to allotment
of land for its projects. The Committee expect that these matters will be
vigorously pursued at appropriate levels by Prasar Bharati and if need
be by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to ensure that the
implementation of the Projects does not suffer because of non-availability
of lands and other routine administrative problems.
Action Taken by the Government
The allocation of Rs. 25 crore during the year 2007-08 for North
East special package was revised to Rs. 5.00 crore at RE stage and against
Rs. 5.00 crore, tentative expenditure upto March, 2008 is Rs. 4.77 crore.
In BE 2008-09 an amount of Rs. 39.03 crore has been allocated for the
special package.
In order to achieve the financial target during 2008-09, tender process
has been started and purchase proposals are under process. Details of
progress to achieve the targets are as under:—
(1) 1 KWFM station-19 Nos.
• Out of 19 number of FM stations with 1 KW FM
transmitters, sites have been taken over at four places at
Changlang, Goalpara, Tuipang and Udaipur. Preliminary
Estimates for civil works in respect of Changlang,
Goalpara and Udaipur are under scrutiny.
• At Nutan Bazar, instead of handing over the site originally
finalized, the District administration has now offered an
alternate site on 30.04.2008 this would result in delay in
executing the project. Matter is being taken up with State
Government.
43

• Also six other sites already finalized at Tamenglong,
Bomdila, Kilasib, Karimaganj, Daporijo and Khonsa are
yet to be handed over by State Governments. Matter is
being pursued with the respective State Government.
• Demand for Champhai site sanctioned and payment is
being sent to DC, Champhai for expending handing over
of site. Demand for Phek also received and is under
process. Demand notes for Lumding and Ukhrul are
awaited from the State Governments.
• As no suitable site at Dawki (Meghalaya) could be offered
by the State Government, approval of the Ministry for
change of location of Dawki to Cherrapunjee in
Meghalaya has been accorded.
• Order placed for procurement of 1 KW FM Transmitters
and transmitters are likely to be received by August, 2008.
(2) Silchar 5 KW FM Tr. and Gangtok 10 KW FM Tr.:— Civil
works for the FM transmitter at Silchar are near completion
and for Gangtok tender action is in process. Order for FM
transmitter at Silchar has been placed. FM Tr. for Gangtok
is being procured as part of the purchase proposal for
42 transmitters, which is under process for placing the
order.
(3) 100 W FM relay centres:— A tentative list of 100 places for
100 W FM relay centers has been finalized and State
Governments approached for suitable location, power supply,
etc. for installing these transmitter. Transmitters have been
ordered and have reached Guwahati.
(4) Chinsurah 1000 KW MW Tr.:— Purchase proposal for 1000
KW MW transmitter at Chinsurah is under process.
(5) Kavaratti 10 KW MW Tr.:— Additional piece of land for
installation of 10 KW MW transmitter at Kavaratti has now
been allotted by the local administration. Order for Tr. has
been placed.
(6) Digital Satellite News Gathering Systems/MMS terminals :—
Advance AT has been placed for MMS Terminals . For DSNG
Systems, technical evaluation of tenders is over and Firms
have been asked to confirm validation of offers.
(7) C-Band RN Terminals (19 Nos.):— Technical Evaluation of
the bids completed and commercials bids have been opened.
The L-1 firm has been asked to extend offer validity.
44

(8) Studio Transmitters Programme Links for Silchar and
Gangtok:— NIT has been issued and tenders are due for
opening on 22.5.2008.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee note that the objective of this Scheme is installation
of SW DRM Transmitter for nationwide coverage in digital mode, FM
expansion, studio digitisation and connectivity. A sum of Rs. 4.08 crore
was allocated for the Scheme in 2007-08. For 2008-09, an amount of
Rs. 63.88 crore has been earmarked for the Scheme entailing procurement
of 6 Nos. of 10 KW MW DRM Transmitters and 44 Nos. of C-Band
Terminals. The Ministry have already initiated action for procurement
of transmitters and studio transmitters links so as to ensure timely
completion of the Scheme. The digitisation of transmitters, studios,
connectivity and DTH Channel, in the opinion of the Committee would
go a long way in ushering a technological revolution in the quality of
broadcasting in the country. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry
to follow-up the implementation of this important Scheme on a regular
basis and also ensure that sufficient funds are available without any delay
for the Scheme to facilitate its timely completion.
Action Taken by the Government
The following Schemes have already been approved under this
scheme:—
(a) 6 Nos. 10 Kw MW DRM transmitters,
(b) 44 Nos C-band RN Terminals, and
(c) Digitalization of Studio Transmitters Links.
Purchase action has already been initiated and procurement of
equipments is expected to materialize during 2008-09.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The objective of Phase-I of J&K Special Package was improvement
of DD transmition coverage in J&K while in Phase-II of the Package,
emphasis has been on improvement of content. The Phase-I of the Package
has been implemented except the tower work at Amritsar. The Committee
during the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants last year
45

had been informed by the Ministry that the tower at Amritsar would be
completed in 2007-08. The completion date of tower has, however, been
staggered to Quarter-3 of 2008-09. The Committee find that the Project
has been delayed due to non-procurement of a special type of steel
required for the tower. Doordarshan has been regularly pursuing the
matter with the firm executing the Project and it is expected that the
tower will be completed by end of this year. The tower at Amritsar,
which is the last pending item of Phase-I of the J&K Special Package has
already been inordinately delayed. The Committee, therefore, desire that
a constant follow-up of the Project should be maintained by Doordarshan
so that it is completed by the revised deadline of end 2008 by all means.
The Phase-II of the package for which a sum of Rs. 3.00 crore had been
earmarked for 2007-08, had no spendings till December, 2007 because the
Scheme was approved only in September, 2007. This is another instance
where the implementation of a Scheme has suffered for want of timely
approvals. The Committee expect that the implementation of the Special
Package during the Annual Plan 2008-09 for which a combined allocation
of Rs. 35.99 crore has been made for Phases-I and II would not suffer
from such glitches and the funds will be utilized optimally and as per
prescribed timelines.
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding the work of erection of 300 M tower at Amritsar,
foundation work of the tower has been completed. Part material for the
tower (about 300 MT out of total approximate 1200 MT) has been supplied
at the site. Erection of tower is expected to commence very shortly. The
project is being monitored continuously and regular interaction is being
held with the representative of the firm. Close monitoring and follow
up action is regularly being taken every fortnight at the Zonal Office
level and every month at Directorate level. It is expected that the tower
work is likely to be completed by end of 2008.
Prasar Bharati has also informed that the implementation of the
J&K Special Package (Phase-II) is being monitored closely. Progress of
different scheme is as under:—
(1) Upgradation of Earth Station Jammu is likely to be completed
in the year 2008-09.
(2) 10000 numbers DTH set and TV set in J&K have been handed
over to the State Government for distribution.
(3) The procurement of UPS (40 Nos.) for Doordarshan
transmitters in J&K is in progress and is likely to be completed
by December 2008.
46

(4) Guidelines for Kashir Channel have been finalized and
empanellment of Producers is under process.
The amount allocated for J&K Special Package will be fully
utilized.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The International Channel Scheme has been launched with the
objective of projecting India’s position and viewpoint on sensitive global
issues in as many countries as possible by introduction of international
news and programming through the existing DD-News Channel with
simulcasting on DD-India which has a footprint in large number of
countries. The Committee have been given to understand that the Channel
would air the Indian position globally in the same way as channels like
Al-Jazeera, BBC, CNN, CCT, etc. The financial implications of the Project
are roughly of the order of Rs. 100.00 crore and Prasar Bharati has been
asked to firm up a detailed proposal including engagement of satellite
for augmenting the footprint of DD-lndia and development of additional
international news and programming content and arrangement for
distribution of contents. Since the proposal is at the formulation stage,
a provision of Rs. 1.00 crore has been made in the BE 2008-09 for this
Scheme. The Committee feel that the proposal for an international Channel
airing India’s views on globally, has been mooted not a day soon. As an
emerging international power, it is but imperative that the voice of India
is heard and appreciated by the global community. The Committee
recommend that the Scheme is followed up in right earnest.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has informed that DD-News is in the process
of revising daily fixed-point chart, and has projected four distinct
slots for international content per day. These slots will cater to
America, Europe, Africa, West Asia, Asia Pacific Region, and SAARC
respectively.
Steps have been taken to enhance international content on the
channel. A weekly half-four round up of international events —
“Prime Meridian”, is being telecast at 9.30 PM on Sunday every week.
This provides comprehensive inputs on news developments across the
world.
A monthly News Report focusing on developments in the SAARC
region, including discussion with an expert on relevant issues, is telecast
47

at 3 PM, on the last Saturday of every month. These discussions take into
account the Indian position on SAARC issues.
DD News bulletins in both English and Hindi, carry latest updates
on the news happenings of the day. This is being done on a daily basis,
round the clock. Our most important Prime-Time bulletin, Samachar Plus,
often carries discussions on major international events, which take into
account the Indian position on these issues.
Special inputs are taken over phone form Prasar Bharati
correspondents posted abroad, in West Asia, Afghanistan, Nepal,
Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, in case of Breaking News situation. In important
breaking news situation, inputs are also being form PTI correspondents
based across the world.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 5.06.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The induction of High Definition TV will mark a paradigm shift
in the broadcasting quality of Doordarshan. Keeping the immense value
of this technological development and its usefulness in connection with
the Commonwealth Games, 2010, the Committee had in their 43rd Report
asked the Ministry a year ago that the Scheme be taken up and
implemented promptly. They are, however, distressed to notice that no
progress has been made in the implementation of the Scheme during the
entire last year due to non-receipt of the necessary approvals. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Scheme should be implemented
with the urgency it deserves after obtaining all necessary clearances on
priority basis.
Action Taken by the Government
Doordarshan’s pilot project for HDTV has already been approved.
The pilot project envisages provision of an EFP (Electronic Field
Production) van, ENG camcorders and associated postproduction facilities
at Delhi. Tenders for the EFP van have been received and are under
technical evaluation. Specifications for camcorders and VCRs are under
revision.
The Scheme for establishment of HDTV studios at Delhi and
Mumbai and provision of OB and post production facility at Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, besides satellite uplink for HDTV at Delhi
(for putting HDTV channel on DTH Platform) and digital transmitter at
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai for terrestrial relay of HDTV
programmes has been included for implementation during the Xlth Plan.
48

The DPR and EFC memo for the above Scheme has already been circulated
among the concerned Ministries and Planning Commission for their
approval and comments.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
The Committee note that an Electronic Media Monitoring Centre
is being set up with the laudable objective of monitoring the contents
of telecast to keep a track of the violations of the Cable Television Networks
(Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules framed thereunder. It will also
monitor the content of private FM radio stations, DTH, etc. When
functional, the EMMC would be able to perform automated recording
of 100 TV Channels simultaneously based on pre-defined recording
schedule. It will also be capable of online retrieval and browsing of logged
footage and content and archiving and recall of content for future
reference. The Committee find it most unfortunate that this very important
Scheme is yet to see the light of the day inspite of having been started
in the Tenth Plan. The Ministry’s explanation that the change of location
of the Centre because of refusal of CPWD to install antennas, etc. at the
first location appears at best specious to the Committee. Such routine
things ought to have been sorted out at the very outset when the first
location was identified. The Committee cannot but disapprove the failure
on the part of the Ministry in basic planning. The Committee desire that
in view of the widespread complaints about controversial and offensive
contents and the crying need for having an appropriate system of
monitoring, the EMMC should be commissioned in the first quarter-of
2008-09 as assured by the Ministry.
Action Taken by the Government
It is a fact that there is delay in commissioning the project due to
the reasons beyond the control of the Ministry. It would also be relevant
to mention here that CPWD was reluctant to allot the said space to this
Ministry with the please that it should explore its own space in Soochna
Bhawan or elsewhere. However, there was no space available in Soochna
Bhawan. The space was allotted after negotiations at very senior level.
Again CPWD denied permission to install antennae on the rooftop of
Pushpa Bhawan with the plea, amongst others, that the same will disturb
aesthetic look of the building. This was conveyed after the renovation
work started at the CPWD site. In fact, the matter was taken up by
Additional Secretary, Ministry of I&B with the Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development for the permission buy CPWD insisted
on the denial. Therefore, this Ministry had no alternative but to explore
49

alternate site for the project. Finally some space at IP Estate was selected
in March, 2007. Subsequently, work of the project had begun. During the
last one year, civil and electrical work was completed. AC system was
also installed. Orders for equipments were placed following clearance
from the Consultancy Evaluation Committee. Posting of staff has also
been decided. The progress of the project is being monitored by
Consultancy Evaluation Committee chaired by joint Secretary
(Broadcasting) and Project Monitoring Committee headed by Director
(BC). As per the report given by the Project Executing Agency, Broadcast
Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd. (BECIL), the EMMC has been set
up and started functioning with effect from 09.06.2008 following its
inauguration by the then Secretary, I&B.
[Ministry of I&B, O.M. No. 6/2/2008-B-IV(Part), dated 04.07.2008]
50

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
In order to have a holistic view of the systemic shortcomings and
the problems besetting the financial planning of the Ministry, the
Committee conducted an in-depth analysis of the performance of the
Ministry in handling the allocations made to them in the successive
Demands for Grants in the Tenth Plan and the year 2007-08 i.e. the First
Year of the Eleventh Plan. In the Tenth Plan, as against Rs. 6067.40 crore
sought by the Ministry, a sum of Rs. 4381.00 crore was allocated at the
BE stages. The cumulative allocation at the RE stages of the five Annual
Plans stood reduced to Rs. 3328.70 crore. The Ministry were, however,
able to spend Rs. 2808.22 crore only which is about 46% of the allocation
sought and 64% and 84% respectively of the funds that were at the disposal
of the Ministry at the BE and RE stages. In the first year of the Eleventh
Plan viz. 2007-08, the Ministry had sought Rs. 1777.90 crore as allocation.
They were allocated a sum of Rs. 475.00 crore at the BE stage which was
further reduced to Rs. 400.00 crore at the RE stage. The actual expenditure
of Rs. 372.31 crore as on 29 February, 2008 was hardly 21% of the allocation
sought, 78.38% of the BE and 93% of the RE. In the year 2008-09, against
the proposed allocation of Rs. 1072.00 crore, the Ministry have been
allocated Rs. 700.00 crore, which includes a sum of Rs. 99.00 crore for
the Commonwealth Games, 2010. The amount allocated is 56% of the
amount sought. In the Tenth Plan a major cause of the reduction in
allocation at the RE stages and the-underutilization of funds was due to
the inability of the Ministry to plan implementation of Schemes in a
judicious manner. In the First Year of the Eleventh Plan, the delay in
finalization of Plan proposals both for the Eleventh Plan and the Annual
Plan have been the main contributory factor for reduction in allocation
at the RE stage from Rs. 475.00 crore to Rs. 400.00 crore. Though the
Ministry have stated that they expect the entire amount to be utilized
by the end of the fiscal, the fact remains that till September, 2007 hardly
31% of the BE was spent leading to reduction of the BE amount by
Rs. 75.00 crore at the RE stage. Apart from that, even the RE allocation
has been utilized by re-appropriating and diverting funds to other Heads/
51

Schemes as the Schemes for which these were meant for did not have
the requisite clearances/approvals for funds release. All these clearly show
the highly unprofessional approach of the Ministry in the budget and
financial management. The Committee find such a situation as totally
unacceptable particularly when they lead to not only waste of precious
funds but also stagger and delay the developmental process. They,
therefore, desire that the Government should come out with a clear cut
and precise set of guidelines for the Ministries/Departments regarding
how they should go about with regard to the conceptualization and
planning stages of their proposals for the Plan allocations so that all
related formalities are complied with and completed well in time and
before the Plan concerned. Considering the pressing need for such a
policy, the Committee expect an urgent response from the Government
in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The matter regarding process of approval of the Schemes is being
reviewed by Secretary (l&B) every week in the Senior Officers’ meeting.
The periodical review taken by Secretary (l&B) has resulted in perceptible
improvement in utilization of budgetary provisions, as seen from the
statement given below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Year BE RE Actual Expdr . Percentage of expdr. w.r.t.
 (approx.) BE RE
2006-07 538 475 356.68 66.67 75.51
2007-08 475 400 398.15* 83.82 99.54
*As per PAO’s figure as on 28.04.08
It is expected that regular review by Secretary (l&B) will
yield results expediting the process of approval during the current
year.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 15.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the Ministry
to some inconsistencies in the information furnished by them with regards
to the demands of DFP. In the Outcome Budget 2008-09, a sum of
Rs. 2.00 crore has been shown as BE for the Organization. In the Demands
for Grants and the Budget Brief this amount has been shown as Rs. 0.49
crore. The Committee would like the Ministry to reconcile these
inconsistencies in figures.
52

Action Taken by the Government
For the current financial year 2008-09, DFP has been given an amount
of Rs. 2.00 crore for its two Plan Schemes. The amount of Rs. 0.49 crore
as mentioned in Demands for Grants and the Budget Brief is the amount
meant only for one Scheme of DFP i.e.  Conducted Tours/ Skill
Upgradation.
(Rs. in crore)
SI. No. Name of the Plan Scheme Total Projected
Expenditure
1. Conducted Tours/ Skill Upgradation 0.49
2. Modernisation and Upgradation of Hardware and
Software at ROs and FPUs 1.51
Total 2.00
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 20/15/2008-IP&MC, dated 9.05.2008]
53

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee would also like to be furnished with the details
about the exact status of all the Schemes, both ongoing ones and the new
ones, figuring in the Eleventh Plan and the Annual Plan 2008-09 on the
day the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry were presented to
the Parliament, within one month of presentation of this Report to the
Parliament. The Committee also desire that the Scheme-wise details
including inter alia  the date of commencement and the expenditure till
date on all the 43 Schemes dropped by the Planning Commission be
furnished to them.
Action Taken by the Government
A copy of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) (tentatively fixing
at Rs. 5529.00 crore) is placed at Annexure ‘A’ and Approved Annual Plan
2008-09 at Annexure ‘B’.
As regards 43 ongoing Schemes of Tenth Five Year Plan, these were
dropped at the time of finalization of Annual Plan 2007-08. Therefore,
question of incurring of expenditure on these 43 dropped Schemes in the
year 2007-08 does not arise. A list of these 43 dropped Schemes is also
enclosed at Annexure ‘C’.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 4/10/2008-PC (Vol. IV), dated 30.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 8 and 9 of the Chapter-I)
54

ANNEXURE-A
As on 30.01.2008
Ministry/Department : Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
Eleventh Plan (2007-08 to 2011-2012)
Rs. in Crore
Sl. Name of the Media units Proposed Outlay for XI Plan with year-wise phasing
No. at current prices (Rs. 5529 crore)
(A) PC Central Sector Schemes Nature Total Total Total Total Total Total
Code of the Outlay Outlay Outlay Outlay Outlay Outlay
(Given Sche-  Propo- Pr opo- Propo- Propo- Propo- Propo-
by Plg. mes sed for sed for sed for sed for sed for sed for
Comm. 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Xth
for AP Plan
2007-08)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
A. Information Sector
I. Press Information Bureau
1. 1153 Setting up of the National
Press Centre at New Delhi
2. 100 Media Outreach (New
Programme Scheme)
3. 101 International Film Festival (New
of India Scheme)
4. 102 Pravasi Bhartiya Diwas (New
Samaroh Scheme)
5. 103 Media Management and (New
Facilitation Proposal for Scheme)
Commonwealth Games
2010
6. 104 Media Exchange (New
Programme Scheme)
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 2 to 6
1. 1153 Setting up of the National 10.00 5.00 13.00 0.00 0.00 28.00
Press Centre at New Delhi
2. Media Outreach Programme (New 10.50 11.00 9.50 9.50 8.50 49.00
(Sl. No. 2 to 6) Scheme)
3. Publicity for special Events (New 0.92 1.18 1.40 2.42 1.03 6.95
(Newly proposed Scheme) Scheme)
(Rs. 0.04 cr. taken out of
Sl. No. 2 to 6 above)
Total: 21.42 17.18 23.90 11.92 9.53 83.95
55

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
II. Publications Division
1. 105 Digitisation of past issues (New
of Yojana & Kurukeshetra Scheme)
2. 105 Creating a website of (New
Yojana Scheme)
3. 105 Computerisation and (New
modernisation of Yojana Scheme)
offices
4. 105 Modernisation of business (New
offices and sales emporia Scheme)
5. 105 Modernisation of (New
Employment News Scheme)
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 1 to 4
1. Modernisation of (New 0.81 0.43 0.29 0.33 0.33 2.19
Publications Division Scheme)
2. 105 Modernisation of (New 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.30
Employment News Scheme)
Total: 0.88 0.49 0.35 0.39 0.38 2.49
III. Directorate of Advertising
and Visual Publicity
1. 1157 Development Publicity 19.61 20.00 3.13 3.13 3.13 49.00
Programme: Conception
and Dissemination
(Rs. 8.13 cr. reappropriated
to other schemes — Please
see Col. 7)
2. 107 Modernisation of DAVP (New 1.15 2.80 2.80 0.50 0.70 7.95
Scheme)
Total: 20.76 22.80 5.93 3.63 3.83 56.95
(No Clubbing of Schemes)
IV. Indian Institutes of Mass
Communication
(Grant-in-aid)
1. 108 Conve rting IIMC into Inter- (New 0.91 6.86 4.36 17.11 14.79 44.03
national Media University Scheme)
Total: 0.91 6.86 4.36 17.11 14.79 44.03
(No Clubbing of Schemes)
V. Photo Division
1. 109 National Centre of (New 0.50 0.65 0.65 0.60 0.65 3.05
Photography Scheme)
2. 110 Special Drive for N.E., J&K, (New 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.25
A&N Island, Lakshadweep Scheme)
Total: 0.55 0.70 0.70 0.65 0.70 3.30
(No Clubbing of Schemes)
56

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
VI. Directorate of Field
Publicity
1. 111 Conducted Tours/Skill (New
Upgradation Scheme)
2. 112 Computerisation of (New
Regional Officers/Field Scheme)
Units
3. 113 Upgradation of Audio (New
Visual, Hardware/Purchase Scheme)
of Data, Projector/DVD
Players/Wireless Public
Address Systems
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 2 & 3
1. 111 Conducted Tours/Skill (New 0.10 0.55 0.55 0.55 0.55 2.30
Upgradation Scheme)
2. Modernisation and (New 1.02 1.71 0.94 0.38 0.45 4.50
Upgradation of Hardware Scheme)
& Software at Regional
Offices and Field Publicity
Offices of DFP
Total: 1.12 2.26 1.49 0.93 1.00 6.80
VII. Song & Drama Division
1. 114 Live Arts & Culture for (New
rural India—Restructured Scheme)
from ICT Scheme 4.00 4.30 4.50 4.70 4.90 22.40
Total: 4.00 4.30 4.50 4.70 4.90 22.40
(No Clubbing of Schemes)
VIII. Research, Reference and
Training Division
1. 115 Research Unit (Media (New
Research) Scheme)
2. 116 Reference Unit (Media (New
Library) Scheme)
3. National Media Awards
(Newly proposed)
Total:
Position after clubbing
1. Research, Reference and (New 1.56 1.21 1.51 1.61 1.61 7.50
Media Awards  Scheme)
Total: 1.56 1.21 1.51 1.61 1.61 7.50
57

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
IX. Registrar of Newspapers
for India
1. 1167 Modernisation of RNI
Head-Qrs
2. 117 Strengthening of RNI- (New
Scheme)
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 1 & 2
1. 117 Strengthening of RNI (New 0.20 0.39 0.30 0.32 0.33 1.54
Scheme)
Total: 0.20 0.39 0.30 0.32 0.33 1.54
X. Main Secretariat Schemes
1. 1168 Construction of Soochna Alr eady
Bhawan (Phase IV)  comple-
ted
2. 118 Construction of Soochna (New
Bhawan (Phase V) Scheme)
3. 141 Economic Analysis of (New
Growth initiatives Scheme)
4. Training for Human Dropped
Resource Development in scheme
Institutions located abroad but
again
proposed
5. In-service Train ing for IIS Previo-
Officers u sly an
RR & TD
Schemes
and
transfe-
rred to
non -Plan.
Again
being
proposed
to be
operated
as Main
Sectt.
Scheme
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 4 & 5
1. 118 Construction of Soochna 0.94 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.94
Bhawan (Phase IV)
2. 1168 Construction of Soochna (New 2.80 12.70 21.50 23.61 14.99 75.60
Bhawan (Phase V) Scheme)
58

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
3. 141 Economic Analysis of (New 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00
Growth Initiatives Scheme)
4. Training for Human Dropped 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 3.50
Resource Development in /Trans-
Institutions located abroad ferred
with In-services Training to Non-
for IIS Officers Plan
but
again
proposed
Total: 5.44 14.40 23.20 25.31 16.69 85.04
Total: Information Sector 56.84 70.59 66.24 66.57 53.76 314.00
B. Film Sector
I. Films Division
1. 1170 International Documentary,
Short & Animation Film
Festival
2. 1172 Museum of Moving
Images (MOMI)
3. 1191 Digitalisation and
Webcasting of FD Films
4. 119 Production of documentary (New
films for North East Scheme)
Region & J&K
5. 120 Setting up of Institute of (New
Mass Media Studies Scheme)
6. 121 Setting up of Regional (New
Film Production Centre in Scheme)
the North East
7. 122 Setting up of Regional (New
Film Production Centre in Scheme)
J&K
8. 123 Production of Video/ (New
Digital Text Books Scheme)
Total:
Only Schemes Nos. 1, 2, 3
and 4 retained (Scheme
Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 dropped
and the saving of
Rs. 0.13 cr. out of this
allotted to the Film Divi-
sion Scheme at Sl. no. 1)
1. 1170 International Documentary, 1.00 0.10 1.65 0.15 1.80 4.70
Short & Animation Film
Festival
2. 1172 Museum of Moving 5.00 9.25 9.25 9.25 9.25 42.00
Images (MOMI)
59

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
3. 1191 Webcasting and 3.50 12.65 0.00 0.00 0.00 16.15
Digitalisation of FD Films
4. 119 Production of documentary (New 0.01 5.00 5.00 5.00 4.99 20.00
films for North East Scheme)
Region & J&K
Total: 9.51 27.00 15.90 14.40 16.04 82.85
II. National Film Archives
of India
1. 1173 Acquisition and Exhibition
of Archieve Films
2. 124 Publication of periodicals, (New
catalogues etc. Scheme)
Total
Position after clubbing
Sl. Nos. 1 & 2
1. 1173 Acquisition and Exhibition
of Archieval Films
2. 124 Publication of periodicals, (New
catalogues etc. Scheme)
Total
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 1 & 2
1. 1173 Acquisition and Exhibition 1.01 7.25 7.25 7.25 7.24 30.00
of Archieval Films
Total: 1.01 7.25 7.25 7.25 7.24 30.00
III. Directorate of Film
Festivals
1. 1174 Film Festival Complex— 3.40 4.00 3.90 3.85 3.85 19.00
Alteration and additions
2. 1193 Export Promotion through 3.82 4.05 4.27 4.50 4.70 21.34
Film Festivals
3. 125 Upgradation of Print Unit (New 0.10 1.30 1.25 1.15 1.20 5.00
Scheme)
No Clubbing Suggested
Total 7.32 9.35 9.42 9.50 9.75 45.34
IV. Children’s Film Society,
India
(Grant-in-aid)
1. 1175 Film Production
2. 1176 Exhibition of Childrens’
Films in Municipal Schools
3. 1177 Childrens’ Film Complex
at Hyderadbad
60

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
4. 1189 Digitalisation & Web
casting of films
5. Film Festival and National New
Digital Film Festival for Scheme
Children now
proposed
which
were
transfe-
rred to
Non
6. Modernisation and New
Augmentation Scheme
now
proposed
which
were
transfe-
rred to
Non
7. Animation and Film New
making workshop Scheme
now
proposed
which
were
transfe-
rred to
Non
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7
1. Grant in Aid to CFSI 0.86 5.07 4.87 5.02 4.95 20.77
2. Childerens’ Film Complex
at Hyderabad
Total: 0.86 5.07 4.87 5.02 4.95 20.77
V. Central Board of Film
Certification
1. 1178 Establishment of
Computerised Manage-
ment/Upgradation of
Infrastructure in CBFC
2. 1179 Opening of Regional
Offices at Hyderabad/
New Delhi/Cuttack/
Guwahati
3. 1185 Monitoring and
modernisation of
Certification process
61

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
4. 126 Creation of Separate (New
Digital Video Certification Scheme)
Units in Regional Offices
Total:
Position after clubbing
Sl. Nos. 1 & 4
1. 1178 Establishment of Compu- 0.51 0.73 0.82 0.72 0.72 3.50
& 1 terised Management/
Upgradation of Infrastruc-
ture in CBFC
2. 1179 Opening of Regional 0.50 0.70 0.85 0.95 1.00 4.00
Offices at Hyderabad/
New Delhi/Cuttack/
Guwahati
3. 1185 Monitoring and 0.60 1.10 1.10 1.10 1.10 5.00
modernisation of
Certification process
Total: 1.61 2.53 2.77 2.77 2.82 12.50
VI. National Film Develop-
ment Corporation Ltd.
1. 127 Film Production in (New 4.00 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 30.0
various regional languages Scheme)
(Grant-in-aid to NFDC)
2. Equity participation (New 0.10 8.00 8.13 0.00 0.00 16.23
Scheme)
Total: 4.10 14.50 14.63 6.50 6.50 46.23
(No Clubbing)
VII. Film and T elevisionInstitute
of India, Pune (Grant in Aid)
1. 1186 HRD Aspects/Scholarship/
Exchange Programme
2. 1188 Upgradation and
Modernisation
3. 128 Global Film School (New
Scheme)
4. Setting up of C aptive Dropped
TV Channel  Scheme
but
again
proposed
5. Setting up of Community Dropped
Radio Station  Scheme
but
again
proposed
Total:
62

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Position after clubbing
Sl. No. 1, 2, 4 & 5
1. Grant in Aid to Film & 6.20 10.64 9.35 7.45 3.67 37.31
Television Institute of India
2. Global Film School 0.01 3.50 23.50 18.50 6.49 52.00
Total: 6.21 14.14 32.85 25.95 10.16 89.31
VII. Satyajit Ray Film and
Television Institute of
India, Kolkata (Grant-in-
Aid)
1. 1184 Training and Skill
Development
2. 1187 HRD A spects/Scholarship/ To be
Exchange Programme merged
with
Scheme
No. 6
3. 1192 Computerisation and
Modernisation
4. 129 Department of Production (New
Management in Films and Scheme)
Television
5. 130 Department of Animation (New
and Electronic Imaging Scheme)
6. 131 Scholarship, student/faculty (New
exchange programme Scheme)
7. Captive TV software Dropped
production centre scheme
but
again
proposed
8. Community Radio Station Dropped
scheme
but
again
proposed
Total
Position after clubbing
Sl. Nos. 1 to 8
1. Grant in Aid to 7.77 11.60 12.33 16.10 12.20 60.00
Satyajit Ray Film and
Television Institute of
India, Kolkata
Total: 7.77 11.60 12.33 16.10 12.20 60.00
IX. Main Secretariat Scheme
(Film Wing)
1. 1194 P articipation in Film Market 2.20 2.20 2.20 2.20 2.20 11.00
in India and Abroad
63

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
2. 132 Setting up of National (New 0.10 3.50 17.71 17.71 12.98 52.00
Centre of excellence for Scheme)
animation, Gaming and
Special effects
No Clubbing Suggested
Total: 2.30 5.70 19.91 19.91 15.18 63.00
Total Films Sector 40.69 97.14 119.93 107.40 84.84 450.00
C. Broadcasting Sector
I. All India Radio
Continuing Schemes
1. 1203 J&K Special package 4.16 9.54 4.00 4.00 4.00 25.70
2. 1205 Expansion of MW Services 1.87 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00
3. 1206 Expansion of FM Services 32.74 60.00 42.26 45.00 0.00 180.00
4. 1207 Digitalisation of 4.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00
Production Facilities
5. 1208 Automation of Studio 43.10 40.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 83.10
Facilities & Miscl. Schemes
6. 1213 North East Special  Package 25.00 60.00 45.00 15.00 5.00 150.00
7. 1215 Accommodation for staff 10.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.00
Total of Continuing 120.87 181.67 91.26 64.00 9.00 466.80
schemes
New Schemes
8. 1220 Software Acquisition 92.41 7.59 0.00 0.00 0.00 100.00
(AIR News)*
9. 133 Digitalisation of (New 4.00 98.20 295.00 307.00 310.00 1014.20
transmitters, studios, Scheme)
connectivity and
DTH channel (with
following sub-schemes)
(a) MW DRM Transmitters
(i) Replacement of old MW
Transmitters by new
DRM MW Transmitters
at Existing Stations
(ii) Upgrading and Provi-
sion of MW DRM Tr.
with Captive Power Plant
(iii) Replacement of 6 Nos.
10 KW MW Mobile
by MW DRM
Transmitters
(iv) Conversion of Existing
DRM compatible MW
Tr. to DRM
64

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(b) FM DRM + Transmitters
(i) Border Area/TV Site
(ii) Replacement of FM
Transmitters by higher
power at Existing
Stations
(iii) New FM
(iv) Provision of 100 Nos
of 100 Watt new FM
Transmitters
(c) SW DRM TRs.
Regional New
(d) Studios
(i) Replacement
(ii) New Proposals
(iii)News Room Automation
(e) Digital Connectivity
(i) Replacement of STL
(Studio Transmitters
Link)
(ii) New proposals of CES
(Control Exit Station)
STL, DSNG (Digital
Satellite News
Gathering)
(iii) Provision of C-Band
RNT
(f) Augmentation of
DTH Channel
10. 134 Strengthening of External (New 1.71 7.29 1.00 0.00 0.00 10.00
services by Digital Scheme)
Conversion of External
Services SW Trs To DRM
11. 135 E-Governance, training, (New 0.06 2.00 55.00 32.00 7.94 97.00
Commonwealth Games, Scheme)
Resources, Security, Addl.
Office accommodation Staff
Quarters etc.
(a) E-Governance and up
gradation of IT facilities
(b) Augmentation of STI (T)
and STI (P) including
regional training
institutes
65

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(c) Strengthening of
security measures
(d) Strengthening of AIR
Resources and
Marketing Wing
(e) Improvement of
Facility at Existing
Centre
(f) Diesel Generator for
Coastal Area Tr. and
IVRS for Disaster
Management
(g) Addl. Office
Accommodation
(h) Welfare activity and
Staff Quarters
(i) Unforeseen schemes
12. 136 New Technology and (New 3.30 3.01 5.71 7.00 0.98 20.00
Science and Technology Scheme)
(R&D)
(a) Multimedia Broad-
casting in Satellite and
Terresation Board
(b) Web casting Pod Casting
(c) Research and
Development
Total of New Sche mes 101.48 118.09 356.71 346.00 318.92 1241.20
* Earlier continuing
schemes but now showing
as new scheme
Total of All India Radio 222.35 299.76 447.97 410.00 327.92 1708.00
II. Doordarshan
Continuing Schemes
1. 1225 J&K Special Plan 74.26 75.68 55.00 55.00 54.23 314.17
2. 1230 Digitalisation & Moder- 77.82 85.83 1.35 0.00 0.00 165.00
nisation of production
facilities (Studio/OS)
3. 1237 North East Special  Package 54.83 60.00 55.00 25.00 25.00 219.83
4. 1241 DTH 9.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00
5. 1242 HDTV 13.50 1.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.00
6. 1245 Other spill over X Plan 183.00 102.75 9.25 0.00 0.00 295.00
approved scheme (Earlier
approved as Accommoda-
tion for staff, augmentation
infrastructure & Security)
66

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(a) Accommodation for staff,
augmetation of infrast-
ructure and security
(b) Automation of existing
studio facility
(c) Replacement of
existing production
equipment (Studio/OB)
due to fault/aging/
obsolescence etc.
(d) New Production
Facilities 9 nos. (2 nos.
completed, 7 nos. under
installation)
(e) Permanent setup of
HPts — 7 locations
(f) Expansion of terrestrial
coverage by existing
transmitters as well as
establishment of new
transmitters in respect
of DD-I
(g) Expansion of terrestrial
coverage by upgradation
of existing transmitters
as well as establishment
of new transmitters in
respect of DD-II
(h) Automation of Trans-
mitters (LPTs & VLPTs)
(i) Replacement of existing
transmitters due to
fault/aging/obsolescence
etc.
(j) DTT [Broadcasting to
handheld (DVB-H)]
(k) Satellite Related
Schemes (Digitali-
sation & Modernisation
of Satellite Broadcasting
Equipment, Replacement
of existing satellite
broadcasting equipment
due to fault/aging/
obsolescence etc. New
Satellite Broadcast
equipment
7. 1249 Software acquisition/prod- 60.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 60.00
uction (Normal & Misc.)
Total of Continuing schemes 472.41 325.76 120.60 80.00 79.23 1078.00
67

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
New Schemes
1. 138 Digitalisation of transmitters (New 2.10 51.40 117.50 87.50 99.50 358.00
(with following components) Scheme)
(a) Digitalization of
Transmitter
(b) Modernisation, Aug-
mentation and replac-
ement of transmitters
equipments
(c) Disaster management
emergency requirement
2. 139 Commonwealth Games (New 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
(No outlay proposed for Scheme)
XI Plan as outlay for the
scheme is being procured
separately from Planning
Commission)
3. 1230 Studio digitalisation : 2.20 50.80 194.00 176.00 138.00 561.00
Digitalisation, Augmenta-
tion, Replacement of
Studio/OB Equipments
(a) Digitalization of Studio
(b) Digitalization, Augmen-
tation and replacement
of Studio equipments
(c) E-Governance IT related
Schemes
(d) R&D and Training
4. 1241 DTH: Modernisation, Aug., 5.95 30.00 75.00 55.00 44.05 210.00
Replacement of Satellite
Broadcast Equipment (with
following components)
(a) DTH
(b) Digitalization, Augmen-
tation and replacement
of satellite broadcast
equipments
5. 1242 HDTV 1.00 20.00 55.00 47.00 42.00 165.00
6. 1245 Staff Quarters, other 0.10 0.90 30.00 30.00 14.00 75.00
miscl. Works
7. 1249 Software acquisition/prod- 27.11 110.00 110.00 110.00 127.89 485.00
uction (Normal & Miscl.)
(with  following components)
(a) Indian Classics
(b) DD Urdu
(c) DD News
68

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(d) RLSS
(e) DD Archive
(f) DD India
(g) DD Bharti
(h) North east satellite
service
(i) Other Misc. software
Schemes
Total of New Schemes 38.46 263.10 581.50 505.50 465.44 1854.00
Total of Doordarhan 510.87 588.86 702.10 585.50 544.67 2932.00
Total: Prasar Bharti 733.22 888.62 1150.07 995.50 872.59 4640.00
Main Sectt. (Broadcasting
Sector) Schemes
1. 1250 Electronic Media 2.90 7.85 2.00 2.00 2.00 16.75
Monitoring Centre (EMMC)
2. 1251 Private FM Radio (Phase II) 2.50 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.50
3. 142 International Channel (New 0.97 5.00 31.33 31.33 31.37 100.00
Scheme)
4. IEC activities for (New 0.55 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80 3.75
Community Radio Scheme)
Total: 6.92 15.65 34.13 34.13 34.17 125.00
Total: Broadcasting Sector 740.14 904.27 1184.20 1029.63 906.76 4765.00
Total : Ministry of I&B 837.67 1072.00 1370.37 1203.60 1045.36 5529.00
DBS 837.67 1072.00 1370.37 1203.60 1045.36 5529.00
IEBR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
69

ANNEXURE B
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
(Plan Coordination Cell)
Subject:— Approved Annual Plan 2008-09 — Regarding
The Annual Plan 2008-09 in respect of Ministry of I&B has been
fixed at Rs. 700.00 crores (Gross Budgetary Support) by the Planning
Commission. The Sectorial break-up has been approved as under:—
(Figures in crores of Rupees)
SI. No. Sector GBS IEBR Total
1. Information sect or 50.00 0.00 50.00
2. Film Sector 67. 00 0.00 67.00
3. Broadcasting Sector 484.00 0.00 484.00
4. Commonwealth  Games & Related Programmes 99.00 0.00 99.00
Total: 700.00 0.00 700.00
2. The approved Media Unit-Wise allocation of Annual Plan
2008-09, duly signed by the representatives of the Ministry of I & B and
Planning Commission and the Scheme-wise break-up shown in Annexure II
are sent herewith. It may be noted that many new schemes have been
introduced in Annual Plan 2008-09. Mere inclusion of the schemes in the
Annual Plan does not mean formal approval. Before incurring expenditure
out of Plan budget, the following steps should be completed:
(i) In respect of the new schemes introduced in Annual Plan 2008-
09, necessary “in-principle” approval of the Planning Commission
should be obtained latest by 31.03.2008. The total requirement of
funds for Eleventh Plan in respect of the new schemes should be
assessed and indicated while seeking such “in principle” approval.
(ii) N ecessary approval of SFC/EFC should be obtained at the
earliest so that the implementation starts in time.
2.1 Relevant orders in this regard are contained under Rule 18 of
the DFPRs, 1978 and other instructions in this regard.
3. All the Media Units/Organizations should incur expenditure of
an amount exceeding 2-3% of their Budget for initiatives relating to
furthering the use of Information Technology, including training,
acquisition of hardware, software as well as development and maintenance
of software. Media Units/Organizations are, therefore, requested to work
out Action Plan for IT and forward the same to the concerned
Administrative Divisions in the Ministry with a copy to Plan Coordination
70

Cell latest by 15.3.2008. The progress in this regard will be monitored
by the Planning Commission through the Half Yearly Performance Review
reports. To facilitate monitoring of progress made in this regard, schematic
break up of the outlays allocated for IT may be maintained/shown
separately in the HPRs to be submitted in prescribed proforma at the
end of each half-year.
4. As Heads of Departments/Media Units are aware, instructions
have been repeatedly circulated to ensure phased and balanced Plan
expenditure. In this connection their attention Is drawn to Ministry of
Finance guidelines that only 1/3"1 of the Annual allocation can be spent
in the last quarter of the financial year and reiterated to ensure that
expenditure during 2008-09 is evenly spread over the financial year and
release/expenditure are closely monitored. This will also help in
monitoring the progress of outcomes of Plan expenditure in Half Yearly
Performance Review (HPR) for which meetings are held in Planning
Commission. All concerned are cautioned to take timely SFC/EFC approval
of Annual Plan 2008-09 and ensure timely achievement of the physical
and financial targets of Annual Plan 2008-09. Delay/failure on this account
will be viewed seriously.
5. Head of Departments/Media Units are also aware of the
instructions relating to Outcome Budget 2008-09 which should be finalized
quickly and scrupulously monitored and implemented.
sd/–
Encl.: As above (H P SHARMA)
Under Secretary (EA)
Heads of All Media Units/Organisations [As per list attached]
Ministry of I&B ID No. 4/64/2007-PC (Vol. II), dated 13/02/2008
Copy forwarded to:—
1. PS to MIB/PS to MSIB
2. Sr. PPS to Secretary (I&B)/PPS to AS/PPS to AS&FA.
3. JS(P&A)/JS(B)/JS(F)/Economic Adv iser.
4. All Directors/Deputy Secretaries
5. All Under Secretaries/Desk Officers/Section Officers,
Administrative Sections with the request to furnish Head-
wise details of Plan allocation to SO. B & A Section
immediately latest by today evening.
6. Technical Director, NIC for putting on the Ministry of I &
B’s website (along with soft copy).
sd/–
(H P SHARMA)
Under Secretary (EA)
71

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
Approved Annual Plan 2008-09
Media Unit-wise Position
(Rs. in crore)
S.No. Name of the Media units Annual Plan 2007-08 O utlay A nnual Plan 2007-08  Outlay Annual Plan 2008-09 O utlay
(BE) Earmar- (RE) Earmar- (BE) Earmar-
ked for ked for ked for
North- North- North-
East East East
2007-08 2007-08 2008-09
(BE) (RE) (BE)
A Central Sector Scheme Plan Outlay Plan Outlay Plan Outlay
GBS IEBR Total GBS IEBR Total GBS IEBR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
I Information Sector
1. PIB 10.13 0.00 10.13 9.43 0.00 9.43 0.01 15.00 0.00 15.00
2. Publication Division 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.88 0.00 0.88 0.49 0.00 0.49
3. DAVP 26.01 0.00 26.01 18.41 0.00 18.41 2.60 21.76 0.00 21.76
4. IIMC 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.01 0.00 0.01 1.00 0.00 1.00
5. Photo Division 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.55 0.00 0.55 0.55 0.00 0.55
6. DFP 0.12 0.00 0.12 0.44 0.00 0.44 2.00 0.00 2.00
7. Song & Drama Division 4.00 0.00 4.00 4.00 0.00 4.00 0.40 4.00 0.00 4.00 0.40
8. RR & TD 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.19 0.00 0.19 1.00 0.00 1.00
9. RNI 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.06 0.00 0.06 0.20 0.00 0.20
72

Main Sectt. (Information Wing) Schemes
10. Construction of Soochna Bhawan (Phase IV) 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.95 0.00 0.95 0.00 0.00 0.00
11. Construction of Soochna Bhawan (Phase V) 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 3.53 0.00 3.53
12. Economic Analysis of Growth Initiatives 0.08 0.00 0.08 0.08 0.00 0.08 0.28 0.00 0.28
13. Trg. For HRD 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.00 0.19
Information Sector (I) : Total: 42.55 0.00 42.55 36.00 0.00 36.00 3.01 50.00 0.00 50.00 0.40
II Film Sector
1. Films Division 9.64 0.00 9.64 6.15 0.00 6.15 0.01 16.00 0.00 16.00
2. NFAI 1.01 0.00 1.01 1.01 0.00 1.01 3.00 0.00 3.00
3. DFEF 7.23 0.00 7.23 6.63 0.00 6.63 8.30 0.00 8.30
4. CFSI 2.71 0.00 2.71 2.71 0.00 2.71 4.00 0.00 4.00
5. CBFC 2.01 0.00 2.01 1.12 0.00 1.12 2.00 0.00 2.00
6. National Film Development Corporation 3.10 0.00 3.10 0.10 0.00 0.10 14.50 0.00 14.50
7. FTII, Pune 6.21 0.00 6.21 6.21 0.00 6.21 8.00 0.00 8.00
8. SRFTI, Kolkata 7.77 0.00 7.77 3.77 0.00 3.77 8.00 0.00 8.00
Main Sett. (Film Wing) Schemes
9. Participation in Film Market in I ndia & Abroad 2.20 0.00 2.20 2.20 0.00 2.20 2.20 0.00 2.20
10. Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.10 0.00 0.10 1.00 0.00 1.00
Gaming and Special effects
Film Sector (II) : Total: 41.98 0.00 41.98 30.00 0.00 30.00 0.01 67.00 0.00 67.00
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
73

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
III Broadcasting Sector
1. All India Radio 78.95 0.00 78.95 25.00 67.56 0.00 67.56 5.00 195.00 0.00 195.00 39.03
2. Doordarshan 306.64 0.00 306.64 40.00 262.33 0.00 262.33 55.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 28.53
Total: Prasar Bharti 385.59 0.00 385.59 65.00 329.89 0.00 329.89 60.00 475.00 0.00 475.00 67.56
Main Sectt. (Broadcasting Sector) Schemes
1. Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) 2.90 0.00 2.90 2.90 0.00 2.90 7.50 0.00 7.50
2. Private FM Radio 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.10 0.00 0.10
3. International Channel 0.97 0.00 0.97 0.01 0.00 0.01 1.00 0.00 1.00
4. IEC activities for Community Radio 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.20 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.00 0.40
Total: Broadcasting Sector (III) 390.47 0.00 390.47 65. 00 334.00 0.00 334.00 60.00 484.00 0.00 484.00 67.56
IV Commonwealth Games and Related Programmes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 99.00 0.00 99.00
Total M/o I & B 475.00 0.00 475.00 65.00 400.00 0.00 400.00 63.02 700.00 0.00 700.00 67.96
DBS 475.00 0.00 475.00 65.00 400.00 0.00 400.00 63.02 700.00 0.00 700.00 67.96
IEBR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
74

ANNEXURE II
Ministry/Department : Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09 Rs. in crore
S.No. Name of the Media units
(A) Central Sector Schemes Nature of the A pproved
scheme Outlay
for Annual
Plan 2008-09
(1) (2) (3) (4)
A Information Sector
Press Information Bureau
1. Setting up of the National Press Centre at New Delhi 4.37
2. Media Outreach Programmes (Sl. N os. 2 to 6) (New Scheme) 9.60
3. Publicity for Special Events (Newly proposed Scheme) (New Scheme) 1.03
Total: 15.00
II. Publications Division
1. Modernisation of Publications Division (New Scheme) 0.43
2. Modernisation of Employment News (New Scheme) 0.06
Total : 0.49
III. Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
1. Development Publicity Programme: Conception and 19.09
Dissemination
2. Modernisation of DAVP (New Scheme) 2.67
Total: 21.76
IV. Indian Institute of Mass Communication
(Grant-in-Aid)
1. Conv erting IIMC into International Media University ( New Scheme) 1.00
Total: 1.00
V. Photo Division
1. National Centre of Photography (New Scheme) 0.51
2. Special Drive for N.E., J&K, A&N Islands, Lakshadweep (New Scheme) 0.04
Total: 0.55
VI. Directorate of Field Publicity
1. Conducted Tours/Skill Upgradation (New Scheme) 0.49
2. Modernisation and Updgradation of Hardware & Software (New Scheme) 1.51
at Regional Officers and Field Publicity Offices of DEP
Total: 2.00
VII. Song & Drama Division
1. Live Arts & Culture for rural India — Restructured from ( New Scheme) 4.00
ICT Scheme
Total: 4.00
75

VIII. Research, Reference and Training Division
1. Research, Reference and Media Awards (New Scheme) 1.00
Total: 1.00
IX. Registrar of Newspapers for India
1. Strengthening of RNI (New Scheme) 0.20
Total: 0.20
X. Main Secretariat schemes
1. Construction of Soochna Bhawan (Phase IV) (Completed) 0.00
2. Construction of Soochna Bhawan (Phase V) (New Scheme) 3.53
3. Economic Analysis of Growth Initiatives (New Scheme) 0.28
4. Training for Human Resources Development in Institutions Dropped/ 0.19
located abroad with In-se rvice Training for IIS Officers Transferred to
 Non-Plan but
 again proposed
Total: 4.00
Total: Information Sector 50.00
B Film Sector
I. Films Division
1. International Documentary, Short & Animation Film Festival 3.00
2. Museum of Moving Images (MOMI) 5.00
3. Webcasting and Digitalisation of ED Films 3.00
4. Production of documentary films for North-East Region (New Scheme) 5.00
and J&K
Total: 16.00
II. National Film Archives of India
1. Acuisition and Exhib ition of Archiev al Films 3.00
Total 3.00
III. Directorate of Film Festivals
1. Film Festival Complex — Alteration and additions 4.00
2. Export Promoption through Film Festivals 4.00
3. Upgradation of P rint Unit (New Scheme) 0.30
Total: 8.30
IV. Childern’s Film Society, India
(Grant-in-Aid)
1. Grant-in-Aid to CFSI 4.00
Total: 4.00
V. Central Board of Film Certification
1. Establishment of Computerised Management/Upgradation 0.58
of Infrastructure in CBFC
2. Opening of Regional Offices at Hyderabad/New Delhi/ 0.56
Cuttack/Guwahati
(1) (2) (3) (4)
76

(1) (2) (3) (4)
3. Monitoring and modernisation of Certification process 0.86
Total: 2.00
VI. National Film Development Corporation Ltd.
1. Film production in various regional languages (New Scheme) 6.50
2. Equity participation (New Scheme) 8.00
Total 14.50
VII. Film and Television Institute of India, Pune
(Grant-in-Aid)
1. Grant-in-Aid to Film & Television Institute of India 5.44
2. Global Film School (New Scheme) 2.56
Total: 8.00
VIII. Satya jit Ray Film and Television Institute of India, Kolkata
(Grant-in-Aid)
1. Grant-in-Aid to Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute 8.00
of India, Kolkata
Total: 8.00
IX. Main Secretariat Scheme (Film Wing)
1. Participation in Film M arket in India and A broad 2.20
2. Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, (New Scheme) 1.00
Gaming and Special Effects
Total: 3.20
Total Film Sector 67.00
C Broadcasting Sector
I. All India Radio
Continuing schemes
1. J&K Special Package 6.21
2. Expansion of MW Services 0.08
3. Expansion of FM Services 39.03
4. Digitalisation of Production Facilities 1.30
5. Automation of Studio Facilities & Miscl. Schemes 26.02
6. North-East Special Package 39.03
7. Accommodation for staff 6.51
Total of Continuing schemes 118.18
New Schemes
8. Software Acquisition (AIR News)* 4.94
9. Digitalisation of transmitters, studios, connectivity and (New Scheme) 63.88
DTH channel (with following sub-schemes)
(a) MW DRM Transmitters
(i) Replacement of old MW Transmitters by new DRM MW
Transmitters at Existing Stations
77

(1) (2) (3) (4)
(ii) Upgrading and Provision of MW DRM Tr. With
Captive Power Plant
(iii) Replacement of 6 Nos. 10 KW MW Mobile by
MW DRM Transmitters
(iv) Conversion of Existing DRM compatible MW Tr. to DRM
(b) FM DRM + Transmitters
(i) Border Area/TV Site
(ii) Replacement of FM Transmitters by higher power at
Existing Stations
(iii) New FM
(iv) Provision of  100 Nos. of 100 Watt new FM Transmitters
(c) SW DRM Trs.
Regional New
(d) Studios
(i) Replacement
(ii) New Proposals
(iii) News Room Automation
(e) Digital Connectivity
(i) Replacement of STL (Studio Transmitter Link)
(ii) New proposals of CES (Capital Earth Station), STL,
DSNG (Digital Satellite News Gathering)
(iii) Provision of C-Band RNT
(f) Augmentation of DTH Channel
10 Strenthening of External services by Digital (New Scheme) 4.74
Conversion of External Services SW Trs. to DRM
11 E-Governance, training, Commonw ealth Games, Resources, (New Scheme) 1.30
security, Addl. Office accommodation Staff Quarters etc.
(a) E-Governance and upgradation of IT facilities
(b) Augmentation of STI (T) and STI (P) including regional
training institutes
(c) Strengthening of security measures
(d) Strengthening of AIR Resources and Marketing Wing
(e) Improvement of Facility at Existing Center
(f) Diesel Generator for Coastal Area Tr. and IVRS for
Disaster Management
(g) Addl. Office Accommodation
(h) Welfare activity and Staff Quarters
(i) Unforeseen schemes
12 New Technology and Sci ence and Techonology (R&D) (New Scheme) 1.96
(a) Multimedia Broadcasting in Satellite and Terrestrial Mode
78

(1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Web casting Pod Casting
(c) Research and Development
Total of New Schemes 76.82
Total of All India Radio 195.00
II. Doordarshan
Continuing schemes
1. J&K Special Plan 35.99
2. Digitalisation & Modernisation of production facilities (Studio/OB) 40.81
3. North-East Special Package 28.53
4. DTH 0.00
5. HDTV 0.71
6. Other spill over X Plan approved scheme (Earlier approved 48.86
as Accommodation for staff, augmentation of infrastructure
& Security)
(a) Accommodation for staff, augmetation of infrastructure
and security
(b) Automation of existing studio facility
(c) Replacement of existing production equipment (Studio/
OB) due to fault/aging/obsolescence etc.
(d) New Production Facilities 9 Nos. (2 Nos. completed,
7 Nos. under installation)
(e) Permanent set up of HPTs — 7 locations
(f) Expansion of terrestrial coverage by existing
transmitters as well as establishment of new transmitters
in respect of DD-I
(g) Expansion of terrestrial coverage by upgradation of
existing transmitters as well as establishment of new
transmitters in respect of DD-II
(h) Automation of Transmitters (LPTs & VLPTs)
(i) Replacement of existing transmitters due to fault/
aging/obsolescence etc.
(j) DTT [Broadcasting to handheld (DVB-H)]
(k) Satallite Related Schemes (Digitalisation &
Modernisation of Satellite Broadcast Equipment,
Replacement of existing satellite broadcast equipment
due to fault/aging/obsolescence etc. New Satellite
Broadcast Equipment
7. Software acquisiti on/production (Normal & Misc.) 0.00
Total of Continuing schemes 154.90
New Schemes
1. Digitalisation of transmitters (with following components) (New Scheme) 24.44
(a) Digitalization of Transmitter
(b) Modernisation, Augmentation and replacement of
transmitters equipments
79

(1) (2) (3) (4)
(c) Disaster management, emergency requirement
2. Studio Digitalisation : Di gitalisation, Augmentation, 24.16
Replacement of Studio/OB Equipments
(a) Digitalization of Studio
(b) Digitalization, Augmentation and replacement of studio
equipments
(c) E-Governance, IT  related Schemes
(d) R&D and Training
3. DTH: Modernisation, Aug., Repl acement of Satellite 14.26
Broadcast Equipment (with following components)
(a) DTH
(b) Digitalization, Augm entation and Replacement of
satellite broadcast equipments
4. HDTV 9.51
5. Staff Quarters, other miscl. Works 0.43
6. Software Acuisition/Production (Normal & Miscl.) (with 52.30
following components)
(a) Indian Classics
(b) DD Urdu
(c) DD News
(d) RLSS
(e) DD Archive
(f) DD India
(g) DD Bharati
(h) North East satellite service
(i) Other Misc. software Schemes
Total of New Schemes 125.10
Total of Doordarshan 280.00
Total: Prasar Bharati 475. 00
Main Sectt. (Broadcasting Sector) Schemes
1. Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) 7.50
2. Private FM Radio (Phase II) 0.10
3. International Channel (New Scheme) 1.00
4. IEC activities for Community Radio (New Scheme) 0.40
Total: 9.00
Total: Broadcasting Sector 484.00
D Commonwealth Games ant Related Programmes 99.00
Total: Ministry of I&B 700.00
DBS 700.00
IEBR 0.00
80

ANNEXURE C
Schemes Dropped by Planning Commission and Accepted by Ministry
Rupees in crore
Sl. PC Name of the Scheme 2007-08 Rem arks
No  Code GBS IEBR EAP Outlay
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
(A) Continuing scheme
INFORMATION SECTOR
Press Information Bureau
1. 1155 Construction of building for PIB 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
offices in the North-East and
where land has been allotted by
the Government
2. Publications Division
3. 1156 Publication Programme of DPD 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Directorate of Advertising and
Visual Publicity
Indian Institute of Mass
Communication
4. 1158 Building and Housing Project 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
5. 1159 Research & Evaluation St udies 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
6. 1160 Modernisation and Expansion of 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
facilities for electronic/print/Radio
& TV Journalism
7. 1161 Collaboration with regi onal centres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
 of learning
Photo Division
8. 1162 Modernisation of Photo Divi sion 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Directorate of Field Publicity
9. 1163 Purchase of films/cassettes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
10. 1164 Modernisation and upgradation of 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Capital Stock
Song & Drama Division
11. 1165 Information, Communication, 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Technology (ICT) activities in
Hilly/Tribal/Desert/Sensitive &
Border areas
12. 1169 Training for Human Resource 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Development
Sub-total Information continuing 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Films Sector
Films Division
81

13. 1171 Modernisation and Replacement of 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
obsolete equipment of Films Division
Central Board of Film Certification
14. 1180 (a) Captive TV Channel Schemes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(FTII, Pune)
15. 1181 (b) Setting up of Community Radio 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(FTII, Pune)
16. 1182 (c) Captive TV Channel Schemes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(SRFTI, KoIkata)
17. 1183 (d) Setting up of Community Radio 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(SRFTI, KoIkata)
18. 1190 (e) Construction of Phase-II NFAI 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
building (NFAI)
19. 1195 Grant-in-Aid to FFSI & NGOs 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
engaged in anti-piracy work
(Main Sectt.)
Sub-total Film continuing 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Broadcasting Sector (Prasar Bharati)
All India Radio
Continuing Schemes
20. 1196 (a) Expansion of MW services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
 to 10th plan)
21. 1197 (b) Expansion of FM services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
22. 1198 (c) Staff Quarters & Office 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
accommodation to 10th plan)
23. 1199 (d) Expansion of SW services 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
24. 1200 (e) Archives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
28. 1201 (f) Misc. Charges 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
26. 1202 (g) Miscellaneous Schemes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
(including replacement of  to 10th plan)
Amplifiers, CD Players,
microphones other unforeseen
replacement etc.)
27. 1204 (i) Establishment Charges 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
New Schemes
28. 1214 (b) New Technologies like Internet 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Radio Broadcasting, Digital (Unapproved)
B’casting etc.
29. 1216 (c) Establishment Charges 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(Unapproved)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
82

30. 1217 (d) Strengthening & Upgradalion of 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
 Training facilities ( Unapproved)
31. 1218 (e) Security measures etc. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(Unapproved)
32. 1219 (f) Improvement of facilities etc. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(Unapproved)
Misc. Charges
Doordarshan
Continuing Schemes
33. 1221 (a) Terrestrial Transmitters 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
34. 1222 (b) Production facilities (Studio/OB) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
35. 1223 (c) Satellite Broadcast equipment 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
36. 1224 (d) Establishment Charges 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped (prior
to 10th plan)
37. 1226 (f) Revenue Miscellaneous 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Upgradation/Expansion schemes
Modernisation schemes
38. 1240 (d) DTT 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(Unapproved)
39. 1243 (g) IT enabled multimedia 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
(Unapproved)
40. 1244 (h) Research & Development/ 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
Marketing (Unapproved)
41. 1246 (j) Augmentation of Training 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
facilities (Unapproved)
42. 1247 (k) Establishment of service centres/ 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
workshops for digitial equipment ( Unapproved)
43. 1248 (l) Establishment (CCW  & Zonal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dropped
offices) & Arbitration (Unapproved)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Films Division (FD) has played a stellar role in disseminating
information and messages of social importance for decades together. With
the advent of the television, the role of Films Division has considerably
diminished. The Committee note that the Films Division was allocated
a sum of Rs. 4.62 crore as BE for the year 2007-08. This was enhanced
to Rs. 5.13 crore at the RE stage. The actual expenditure upto 31 January,
2008 was Rs. 2.86 crore. A sum of Rs. 11.00 crore has been earmarked
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
83

as BE for the Films Division for 2008-09. The Committee were, therefore,
naturally curious to know whether the Ministry was contemplating
assigning some new role to the Organisation in the coming years. The
Committee note that the Ministry are planning to utilize the services of
FD for developing short, socially relevant messages and for producing
documentaries which can be suitably slotted on television. The Committee
have also been given to understand that the Films Division has started
digitizing its entire stock of audio-visual archives but as of now they
cannot be downloaded. The Committee feel that the huge stock of the
precious audio-visual archives with the FD ought to be digitised and
downloading arrangements be made for an appropriate price in order
to create some sort of revenue model for the Organization.
Action Taken by the Government
Though it is a fact that only Rs. 2.86 crore had been expended up
to 31 January, 2008, major expenditure occurring during Feb.-Mar., 2008
was due to the following reasons:
The 10th Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF) was successfully
organized from 3rd to 9th February, 2008. Because of this, a major portion
of the funds earmarked for this Scheme was utilised in the months of
February and March, 2008.
In the Webcasting and Digitalisation Scheme, the Final Grant was
Rs. 5.35 crore, whereas BE was Rs. 3.50 crore. During the year, a total
of 1,291 films were digitized. Thus, a total of 6.204 films out of the
8,131 films in Films Division’s archives have been digitized as on 31 March,
2008. The agency outsourced for the work, submitted the bills during
Feb.-March, 2008 and hence, expenditure on this account could be incurred
during that period only.
During the Eleventh Plan, a new Scheme namely ‘Production of
Documentary Films’ has been introduced with the objective of giving a
boost to the documentary film movement in the country. This Scheme
aims to tap the talent available in the private sector as also talented
individuals. For this, funds to the tune of Rs. 5.00 crore have been allocated
during the current Financial Year.
Further, as the work on finalization of the Scheme viz. Museum
of Moving Images (MoMI) for which a budget provision of Rs. 5 crore
has been made, is proceeding at a rapid pace which includes preparing
an organizational structure for the Museum, creation of posts to man the
Museum, obtaining EFC approval and ensuring that the physical work
84

on the Museum begins, it is hoped that the funds earmarked for the year
2008-09 will be utilised in full and physical progress will also be made
accordingly.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/04/2008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 and 24 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that CFSI was allocated an amount of Rs. 2.71
crore for the year 2007-08. A sum of Rs. 0.45 crore was spent by the
Society till 31 January, 2008. Out of the remaining balance, Rs. 2.18 crore
were spent between 1 February, 2008 and 15 March, 2008. This virtually
last moment release of a major chunk of funds was necessitated by the
fact that Rs. 2.00 crore out of BE Rs. 2.71 crore were earmarked for the
proposed CFSI Film Complex at Hyderabad, and work on the other activity
of CFSI viz. Production of Films commenced only after a sum of Rs. 1.95
crore was reappropriated from Film Complex Head to the relevant Head
after December, 2007. It has also come to the notice of the Committee
that prior to that though target for production of films was fixed, no
funds were allocated for the purpose. The Committee find this entire
chain of events and actions disconcerting. The Committee cannot but
conclude, that this mismanagement had ended up in defeating the very
objective for which the Society has been setup.
Action Taken by the Government
At the beginning of the 11th Plan. CFSI’s Plan Scheme ‘Film
Production’ was not allocated any sum of money. Therefore, when the
State Government of Andhra Pradesh cancelled the allocation of land
made in favour of CFSI in December, 2007 and funds were available,
the matter of approval of the Scheme ‘Film Production’ was taken
up with Planning Commission. Planning Commission conveyed Its
approval on 31.01.2008 for utilization of Rs. 1.95 crore out of this amount
towards ‘Film Production’ and hence the funds could be released only
in February, 2008 and hence expenditure had been done subsequent to
that.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. H-11013/04/2008-F(A), dated 14.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of the Chapter I)
85

Recommendation (Para No. 34)
Prasar Bharati came into being on 23 November, 1997 with a
mandate to organize and conduct Public Broadcasting Services in India.
Even after a decade of its establishment, the Organisation is still in a state
of transition in several crucial matters relating to its organizational
restructuring, financing and funding patterns, capital and financial
restructuring, personnel policy, etc. The Committee have been
recommending suitable measures to the Government in regard to these
issues from time to time in their Reports. Coming to organisational
restructuring, the Committee note that the National Productivity Council
has been engaged by Prasar Bharati to go into the matter. The NPC has
been asked to expedite its Report. It may be pertinent to mention here
that Prasar Bharati has already communicated 10415 vacant posts to the
Ministry for filling up and an additional requirement of posts sanctioned
for the projects sanctioned is 6799 as per SIU norms. This brings the total
number of vacancies in the Organization to 17214. The Committee note
that the GoM, which is seized of matters pertaining to Prasar Bharati,
having recognized the need for urgently filling up the vacancies has
desired the Ministry to work out a comprehensive proposal in consultation
with the MoF. However, the comprehensive proposal is stuck in view of
the non-receipt of the Report from NPC. The Committee find the entire
scenario in a situation of flux with a solution still not in sight. The Ministry
should appreciate the problems that Prasasr Bharati would be facing in
view of such a huge shortage of manpower and till a permanent solution
is worked out, some relief ought to be provided to Prasar Bharati
immediately, so that it is able to augment its staff strength through some
short term measures.
[Para 34 of Chapter-II of Fifty-Fifth Report of Standing Committee on
Information Technology (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As regards filling up of vacant posts in Prasar Bharati, Prasar Bharati
is not able to fill up direct recruitment posts as it has not set up recruitment
boards for this purpose as laid down in Section 10 (1) of the Prasar
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. No doubt, Prasar
Bharati is facing severe shortage of staff due to which the commissioned
Stations/Offices are not fully operational. The requisite staff for new
projects has not been sanctioned. However, Stations and offices are being
run by redeployment of staff from the existing offices. The matter has
86

been referred to the Group of Ministers for their consideration and
recommendations. The manpower requirement could not be discussed
in the meeting of GoM held on 03.04.2008.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 42 of the Chapter I)
87

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The National Film Development Corporation aims at promoting
new talent and developing the Cinema in India by fostering excellence
in concerned fields. The Committee note that the increased cost of film
production adversely affected the performance of NFDC leading to a
progressive erosion of its paid-up cap ital of Rs. 14.00 crore to Rs. 28.75
lakh at the end of 2006-07. This resulted in an absolute collapse of the
networth of the Company. The Ministry in a bid to revive the Corporation
have adopted a two-pronged strategy now. A proposal has been mooted
for the Cabinet for conversion of Rs. 19.77 crore of working capital loan
from Government of India into equity and infusion of fresh equity or
Rs. 16.23 crore. This will increase the equity base of the Corporation to
Rs. 50.00 crore. There is another proposal for a one time grant of Rs. 30.00
crore to NFDC for production of 15 films in regional languages over the
period of Eleventh Plan. It is expected that after the financial revamping,
the Company will be earning a profit of Rs. 7.39 crore and attaining a
networth of Rs. 41.26 crore at the end of 2011-12. The Committee have
been given to understand that the Cabinet note has been approved by
the Minister and is being circulated to the concerned Ministries/
Departments for comments. The NFDC has played a crucial role in
promoting the Indian cinema and is still an ideal grooming ground for
the budding talent in the Film Industry. The Committee, therefore,
appreciate the steps being taken by the Ministry in their bid to revive
the Corporation. They further desire that the proposal may be got decided
upon expeditiously so that the revival plan of the Corporation commences
without any delay.
Action Taken by the Government
As regards the proposal for conversion of Government loan of
Rs. 19.77 crore of the National Film Development Corporation into paid-up
equity and infusion of fresh equity of Rs. 16.23 crore in two phases of
Rs. 8.00 crore in 2008-09 and Rs. 8.23 crore in 2009-10, the Draft Cabinet
Note proposing the same has been circulated to the Planning Commission,
88

Department of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Finance
(D/o Expenditure - PF-ll) on 20.3.2008 for comments. While their comments
are awaited, the Planning Commission had requested for a presentation
on the measures proposed for turning around National Film Development
Corporation (NFDC) on 24.4.2008 before giving their comments.
Accordingly, a Presentation was made by the Managing Director, NFDC
before the Officers of Planning Commission on 21.4.2008 on the Strategic
Blue Print to revamp the Corporation and improve its financial
performance. The written comments of the Planning Commission and
the Department of Expenditure are awaited.
The Plan Scheme of Production of films in various regional
languages is a Main Secretariat Scheme of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting. It is proposed to produce 15 films in various regional
languages to promote new talent and good cinema through the National
Film Development Corporation with an investment of Rs. 30 crore during
the 11th Plan period. The said Plan Scheme proposing an expenditure
of Rs. 30 crore during the 11th Plan period with the annual phasing of
expenditure for 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 at Rs. 6.50 crore,
Rs. 7.84 crore, Rs. 7.83 crore and Rs. 7.83 crore respectively, was placed
before the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) of the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting on 21.05.2008 for their consideration. The
proposal was considered and appraised by the SFC in their meeting dated
21.05.2008. The Plan Scheme is now under submission for seeking the
approval of the Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting before
the same is implemented.
NFDC have exhibited in their strategic blue print that as a result
of the above measures they will be able to earn profit after the investment
phase of 2008-09 and 2009-2010 on a sustained basis and the balance-
sheet position would improve with reversal of the trend of erosion of
the Corporation’s paid-up capital and consequent improvements in its
net-worth position.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 207/3/2008-F(PSU), dated 12.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The National Film Archives of India was allocated an amount of
Rs. 1.01 crore for 2007-08. The same amount was retained at the RE stage
and the Committee have been informed that the entire amount has been
spent during the year. For the year 2008-09, a sum of Rs. 3.00 crore has
been allocated to the Organization. It may be worthwhile to mention that
the NFAI had sought an allocation of Rs. 7.50 crore for the year. The
89

Committee are of the firm opinion that the restoration, acquisition and
digitisation of archival works of immense political and cultural importance
is a highly time-bound task. Delays of any kind only lead to permanent
loss of materials of incalculable heritage value. The Committee have been
informed that with the present allocation, hardly 200 films could be
processed by NFAI. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order
to enable NFAI to complete its mandated task at the earliest, suitable
enhancements in its Plan Outlay should be considered by the
Ministry.
Action Taken by the Government
Though Rs. 3 crore have been allocated to NFAI for the Plan Scheme
“ Acquisition and Exhibition of Archival Films” during the Annual Plan
2008-09, allocation of additional funds may be considered at the stage
of Revised Estimates if NFAI is able to utilize the allocation of Rs. 3 crore
by September, 2008.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 812/3/2008-F(C), dated 26.05.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
In the opinion of the Committee, the switchover from Analog
Terrestrial to Digital Terrestrial is a technological compulsion and has to
be undertaken so that the standards of broadcasting services in the country
are maintained at par with the best in the world. It will also ensure
compatibility with the networks in other countries for the purpose of
feed sharing and broadcasting, more so with our International Channel
being in the offing. It goes without saying that the viewers will also
benefit immensely from this technology shift with vastly improved quality
of transmission. The Committee are, therefore, highly disappointed to
observe that no headway could be made in the implementation of this
Scheme during the year 2007-08 as the requisite approvals were pending.
Keeping in view the tremendous value addition implications of this
Scheme, the Committee desire that all necessary approvals should be got
expedited by the Ministry and it should steadfastly strive towards the
expeditious implementation of this Scheme.
Action Taken by the Government
The DPR and EFC Memo for the Eleventh Plan Scheme of
Digitalisation has been examined in the Ministry and Prasar Bharati has
been asked to forward their clarification on the comments of Internal
Finance Division. The response of Prasar Bharati is awaited. As desired
90

by Planning Commission, Prasar Bharati has been asked to reformulate
the Grand Plan for digitalization of the network of Doordarshan in the
light of observations of Planning Commission in the meeting held on
23.04.08.
[Min. of I&B, O.M. No. 2/6/2008-B (Finance), dated 22.05.2008]
NEW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
27 August, 2008 Chairman,
5  Bhadrapada, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
91

APPENDIX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th August, 2008 from
1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
7. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri Tathagata Sathpathy
Rajya Sabha
11. Dr. C. P . Thakur
12. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
14. Shri Shyam Benegal
92

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P . C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D. R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
*** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representives of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information Technology) to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the
Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. The Committee, then, took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:—
(i) ** ** ** ** **  **
(ii) Draft Report on A ction Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Fifty-Fifth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-
2009)’ of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
(iii) ** ** ** ** **  **
* Matters not related to this Report.
93

(iv) ** ** ** ** ** **
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above
Draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned
* Matters not related to this Report.
94

ANNEXURE
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 1-7, 9-10, 12-19, 21, 23-25,
27, 28, 31-33, 35-42 & 44 Total : 35
Percentage : 79.55
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Replies of the Government:
Paragraph No.: 11 & 20 Total : 02
Percentage : 4.55
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 22, 26 & 34 Total : 04
Percentage : 9.10
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos.: 29, 30 & 43 Total : 03
Percentage : 6.82
95