67
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
TELEVISION AUDIENCE MEASUREMENT
IN INDIA
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
TELEVISION AUDIENCE MEASUREMENT
IN INDIA
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15 December, 2008
Laid  on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 200
Price : Rs. 100.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory ............................................................................... 1
II. Aims and Objectives of Television Viewership Ratings ... 2
III. Players in the Ratings Business ........................................... 4
IV . Coverage ..................................................................................... 4
V. Methodology and Sample ...................................................... 5
VI. Compatibility of extant Rating Tools with the emerging
TV viewing Technologies ....................................................... 15
VII. Monopoly ................................................................................... 16
VIII. T ransparency/Reliability/Authenticity of the Ratings
System ......................................................................................... 18
IX. In-house Research in Prasar Bharti ..................................... 19
(i) Doordarshan Audience Ratings (DART) .................. 19
(ii) Methodology of DART ................................................. 20
(iii) Tie-up with Private Agencies ..................................... 21
(iv) Status of DART .............................................................. 25
(v) Advertisements for Doordarshan ............................... 26
(vi) Quality of Programmes ................................................ 27
(vii) DART—Fund Allocation and Utilisation.................. 28
(viii) Staff Strength ................................................................... 28
X. Formation of an Oversight and Control Body by
Industry Associations .............................................................. 29
XI. Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) ................. 34
XII. International Practices ............................................................. 36

PAGE N O.
XIII. Registration of Rating Agencies ........................................... 39
XIV . Independent Audit System .................................................... 40
XV . Grievances Redressal Forum ................................................. 42
XVI. Government Intervention ....................................................... 42
XVII. Reference to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(TRAI) ......................................................................................... 45
XVIII. Performance of the Ministry ................................................. 48
(i) Policy Guidelines ............................................................ 48
(ii) Broadcasting Legislation ................................................ 49
(iii) Content Code ................................................................... 50
(iv) Invoking Legal Provisions ............................................ 52
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ........................................................ 56
A
PPENDICES
I. Composition of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2007-08) ................................................................... 79
II. Minutes of the 14th Sitting of the Committee (2007-2008)
held on 29 January, 2008 .......................................................... 81
III. Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee (2007-2008)
held on 19 June, 2008 ................................................................ 83
IV . Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the Committee (2007-2008)
held on 16 July, 2008 ................................................................. 86
V. Minutes of the 10th Sitting of the Committee (2008-2009)
held on 10 December, 2008 ...................................................... 88
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-09)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Col. G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. Rubab Sayda
17. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
18. Shri P .C. Thomas
19. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
**20. Shri Errabelli Dayakar Rao
21. Vacant
  * Vice Shri Badiga Ramakrishna, M.P . ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.
26 August, 2008.
 **Nominated w.e.f. 6 October, 2008.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Dr. C.P . Thakur
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009), having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-seventh Report on ‘Television
audience measurement in India’ relating to the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting.
2. The Committee had a briefing on the subject from the
representatives of the Ministry on 29 January, 2008. The Committee
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on 16 July ,
2008. The Committee also received extensive inputs in the form of
suggestions/write-ups from the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(TRAI), various stakeholders and the industry and heard their views
at the sittings of the Committee held on 19 June, 2008.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10 December, 2008.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry, TRAI, stakeholders and the industry for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the information in connection
with the examination of the subject.
5. Last but not the least, the Committee would like to place on
record their deep appreciation of the substantial spade work done by
their predecessor Committee (2007-08) (Appendix-I) for and in
connection with the examination of the subject. The Committee
benefitted a lot from the hard work put in by their predecessor
Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Part-II of the Report.
    N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
The television, which made a modest beginning in India on
15 September, 1959 is the most vital component of the Indian
Entertainment and Media (E&M) Industry today. From a single
Government owned channel it has expanded exponentially to
360 channels (as on June, 2008) in the last five decades. By the time
the Eleventh Plan is over (2012), the number of channels is expected
to shoot upto 465. The latest industry estimates have pegged the size
of the E&M Industry at Rs. 53000 crore in 2007. This is expected to
reach Rs. 115700 crore in 2012. Television as the largest segment of
E&M Industry accounted for about Rs. 22600 crore in 2007 that is
about 40 per cent of the total. With a plethora of delivery platforms
and new technologies being introduced, the television will inarguably
continue to garner the largest chunk of revenue for the E&M Industry
in the years to come.
2. With about 120 million TV homes in the Country, the gadget
provides a huge information dissemination platform, which is ideally
suited for advertisement purposes. As per industry estimates the
number of advertisers on TV increased by a phenomenal 29 percent
during the period 2003 to 2007. Likewise, the number of brands
advertised by these advertisers showed a quantum jump of 23 percent
in 2007 over the figures of 2003. The revenue from television
advertising, which was in the vicinity of Rs. 8000 crore in 2007, is
projected to touch Rs. 20000 crore in 2012.
3. With such high stakes involved in the TV advertising industry
and the rush amongst broadcasts, advertisers and advertising agencies
for showcasing products on this potent medium, the viewers ratings
of programmes has acquired added significance.
4. Television audience measurement/television rating points
(TRPs), as the rating systems are commonly called, have been in
existence in India since 1993 and are used extensively by the
advertisers, broadcasters and production houses. Broadcasters and
media agencies are constantly competing with each other as well as
amongst themselves for higher ratings, for on these rides the ad spend
and programme scheduling. Very often the content too gets determined,
taking ratings as an indication of the viewers likes and dislikes. Not

2
only that, ratings often influence the pricing of channels. But with the
impact of visual media on the social fabric through content creation
and programme scheduling, issues of accountability, transparency and
objectivity in ratings assume greater significance as false and misleading
ratings can hurt not only the broadcasters and the advertisers but
more importantly the viewing public.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject
‘Television audience measurement in India’ for detailed examination
and report. As a preliminary examination of the subject, the Committee
undertook on-the-spot study visits to various places and got some
first hand information on several aspects of rating issues from eminent
TV and film personalities, field agencies and stakeholders. Thereafter,
the Committee heard the views of the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India (TRAI) who had received a reference on the subject from the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MoI&B), the Prasar Bharati
Broadcasting Corporation, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF)
and the rating agencies involved in television audience measurement.
The Committee also held discussions with the MoI&B to get
clarifications on various points relating to the subject. As a result of
such interactions/discussions with TRAI, the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting and the organisations/agencies involved in rating
issues, several loopholes/shortcomings have come to the notice of the
Committee in the present television audience measurement system.
Such failings include lack of transparency, authenticity, credibility and
competition and the serious limitations of a small sample size and
their impact on the content and scheduling of programmes with scant
regard to the choice and sensitivities of the viewers. Taking all the
above factors into account including the inaction on the part of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to come out with a concrete
and enabling policy/guidelines to deal with the television viewership
ratings regime, the Committee, in this Report, have made an attempt
to review the existing system of television audience measurement and
given their considered, recommendations to make the system
transparent, authentic, accountable, professional and truly reflective of
the viewers’ choice.
II. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF TELEVISION VIEWERSHIP
RATINGS
6. The main objectives of the television viewership ratings have
been stated to be to indicate the popularity of a TV channel; provide
information about the TV watching habits of viewers from different
socio-economic background and to help advertisers and corporate media
planners in selecting the right media at the right time to reach the
targeted audience.

3
7. When asked whether the viewership ratings carried out by the
rating agencies conformed to the aims and objectives for which the
system was evolved/introduced, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated that the ratings carried out by the agencies did
not appear to conform to the aims and objectives of television
viewership ratings as the following shortcomings were noticed:—
(i) Limitations of sample size: Inadequate representation of the
plurality of the platforms, regions, rural and small towns to
reflect correctly the viewership.
(ii) Reliability of the ratings: A lack of transparency in the
method adopted for selection of the households and
confidentiality of the names of the panel households so as
to exclude all possibilities of ‘induced’ viewership as well
as tampering with the data.
(iii) Lack of validations: The ratings are not subjected to any
validity tests. There is no independent audit carried out on
the methodology adopted by the rating agencies for
determining the sample and the procedures followed for
arriving at the final results.
(iv) Measurement methods: Inadequacy of the measurement
methods to capture viewing across different platforms and
availability of real time ratings through unobtrusive means
rather than weekly.
(v) Inadequate competition: There is little or no competition in
the rating services. Although the sector is unregulated, it
could only bring in the second agency in 2004, which
brought in a higher coverage.
(vi) Ownership issues: Biased ratings on account of the presence
of the interested parties in the ownership of rating agencies.
8. It was also stated that the advertisers’ decisions, programme
scheduling, and even programmes available to the public were well
affected by the ratings based on a small sample. Viewer’s likes and
dislikes and interests largely remained un-addressed. Given the
implications on scope, schedule, and even content of programmes, the
larger perspective of audience could not be ignored.
9. Expressing their views in the same context, the Indian
Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) stated that the existing ratings systems
suffered from inadequate non-coverage of below one lakh populated
cities/towns as well as new delivery platforms such as DTH, IPTV

4
and Digital Cable. Further, existing vendors had only enlarged their
samples where they were confident of covering the incremental costs
with incremental revenues. If a future expansion of any audience
measurement system happened at the specific instance of a particular
broadcaster, or any other stakeholder, the broadcaster/stakeholder
would have to be prepared to defray the entire incremental costs.
III. PLAYERS IN THE RATINGS BUSINESS
10. Initially, the only data available and followed for television
viewership ratings was Doordarshan Audience Ratings (DART),
collected by DD’s audience research unit through its 40 Kendras and
100 All India Radio Stations. Starting with general viewing survey
upto 1988, the panel diary system was introduced by DD in 1989 and
continued upto 2001. They were later revived in 2004 covering 3600
TV homes in rural and 1600 TV homes in urban India.
11. In 1994, ORG-MARG’s INTAM (Indian National Television
Audience Measurement) was established for conducting television
viewership ratings. While INTAM was in operation, a second rating
i.e. TAM Media Research was formed in 1998. In 2001, both INTAM
and TAM were formally merged. TAM is a joint venture Company
between A.C. Nielson and Kantar Media Research/IMRB.
12. It was only in 2004 that another ratings agency  i.e. Audience
Measurement and Analytics Limited (a-Map) came into existence in
India. Its commercial operations, however, started only in February,
2007. Thus, TV ratings on a commercial basis are now being done in
India by the two agencies—TAM Media Research and a-Map.
IV . COVERAGE
13. The Committee were apprised that TAM Media Research
measured in-home minute-to-minute TV viewing for all TV owning
households in urban India in towns having population of more than
one lakh. Sample was collected across 148 towns comprising 6917
people meters and responses from more than 30,000 individuals every
minute, 365 days of the year about what they watched was taken into
account and the viewing monitored for 300 plus channels to arrive at
television ratings. These ratings were released on a weekly basis.
14. Audience Measurement and Analytics Limited (a-Map)
provided data on multiple dimensions like demographics, ownership,
viewership etc. These were released on a daily basis unlike TAM Media
Research, which released the data on weekly basis. Their meters/devices
were installed in 87 towns on population exceeding one lakh.

5
15. The Committee desired to know the exact number and name
of the cities/States covered by TAM Media Research and a-Map for
collecting the viewership details. In reply, it was stated that the total
number of cities/towns covered by TAM Media Research was 148,
which included the six Metro cities of Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai,
Bangalore and Hyderabad. The States/UTs covered by TAM Media
Research were stated to be Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana,
Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. The number of towns covered
by a-Map was stated to be 87 and included the States of Bihar,
Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Assam apart from the States covered
by TAM Media Research.
16. Asked to state whether the rating system carried out by TAM
Media Research and a-Map truly reflected the choice of the viewers as
it was confined to major urban areas only, MoI&B stated that no
ratings could be foolproof without covering all the States and reflecting
rural India. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, the Prasar
Bharati Broadcasting Corporation and the Indian Broadcasting
Foundation echoed the same view. One of the rating agencies i.e.
a-Map also agreed that both the systems, TAM Media Research and
a-Map left a large part of India, particularly rural India, uncovered.
17. In the same context, the representative of TAM Media Research
submitted during evidence,
“We would love to do it (go to rural areas). But we have been
constrained by the resources that we have…………… we had had
couple of interactions with the Standing Committee (IT). The first
thing we did after the November interaction was to revaluate
whether we could go into Bihar and Assam……….”
18. In a subsequent evidence, the Secretary , Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting stated as under,
“I think, because of the concern that has been voiced in a number
of quarters now, TAM has recently in a meeting with us informed
that they are going to start ratings in Bihar, Assam and Jharkhand.
Probably, there is a pressure on them to expand their
operations………………..”
V. METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLE
19. Regarding the methodology adopted in conducting the
viewership ratings, that Committee were informed that TAM Media

6
Research deployed people meter system technology which is an
electronic device attached to TV set which automatically recorded:—
(i) The time that the TV is switched on/off.
(ii) The channel that the set is tuned to at any point of time.
(iii) Channel changed.
20. The Committee were also informed that a handset was
provided to the household by which members of the household could
register commencement and end of TV viewing. TAM Media Research
employed the concept of people meter panel in which a fixed sample
of individuals was taken which provided responses across time and
the concept was best adapted to measure the change since data was
collected from the same set of respondent.
21. The sample consisted of individuals of different educational
qualifications, who were the chief wage earners of households,
belonging to various social-economic groups such as unskilled workers,
skilled workers, traders, self-employed professionals, etc. Every
individual was given weightage depending upon how many individuals
he/she represented. During selection of samples household/TV related
information (number of TV sets owned, number of rooms in the house),
demographics (household size, social-economic classification), TV
viewing habits i.e., time spent on watching, TV channels watched and
city relating aspects such as power cuts, cable operators charges, etc.,
were taken into account. For selection of towns, socio-cultural regions
of each State, cable and satellite channel penetration, terrestrial channel
availability were also taken into account.
22. As regards the methodology adopted by a-Map in carrying
out the television ratings, it was stated that under a license from
Swiss Broadcasting Corporation, a-Map collected viewership data using
Telecontrol VIII data collection units sourced from Telecontrol AG, and
wireless connections using GSM modems. a-Map used Telecontrol VIII
data recording units to collect TV viewership data from TVs in the
sample homes. The Telecontrol unit was connected to the television
receiver and it automatically registered/stored the information about
the channel to which the TV set was tuned. This device could store
up to approximately seven days’ viewership information. The
Committee were further apprised that a-Map had installed a pan-India
panel of 6000 homes which was the largest overnight ratings panel
anywhere in the world.

7
23. A comparative data indicating the areas/towns covered, the
number of people meters, the technology used etc. by TAM Media
Research & a-Map was stated to be as follows:—
Particulars TAM (TAM Media a-Map (Audience
Research) Measurement and
Analytics)
Year 1998 (year of commencement) 2004 (year of commencement)
Area Covered All States except J&K, N.E., All States except J&K
Bihar and Jharkhand and N.E. 1
Towns Covered 148 towns having 87 towns, population >
population > 1 Lakh 1 Lakh
People Meter About 7000 About 6000
Technology Electronic Analog meters Electronic Telecontrol VIII
upgraded to TVM5 digital (Telecontrol AG) imported
meters. A technology from Swiss Broadcasting
imported from Nielson Corporation
Capability of Analog as well as Digital Analog as well as Digital
Technology to signals.
cover various
platforms
Reporting* Weekly, with a four Overnight
day lag
Cost of the Rs. 75,000 -1 lakh Approx. Rs. 30,000
meter
conveyed
orally
*a-Map has also covered Jammu and Guwahati as additional market.
24. The Committee asked about the criteria followed by TAM Media
Research and a-Map for the purpose of television viewership ratings. In
reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated that as per
the information available on TAM Media Research website, just as in
the case of town selection, homes across selected towns were picked up
to be the representative of the stratum of a particular market. Initially,
a statistical analysis was conducted to understand which factors
explained television viewing the most. These factors were used as control
factors when selecting homes. Primary controls were those factors that
most explain TV viewing and were maintained at an interlocking level
basis. Secondary controls were those that were maintained at an overall
stratum level basis. The Committee were informed that such information
had not been made available by a-Map.

8
25. The Committee then desired to know for how long the people
meters were set up in a household and the parameters for changing
the households. In reply, it was stated that so far as TAM Media
Research was concerned, the required information was not available
with the Ministry. However, in a-Map rating, twenty percent of panel
homes were replaced with new homes every year and sample rotation
activity was distributed across the year.
26.  During evidence, when the Committee desired to have the
views of TAM Media Research on the above issue, the representative
of TAM Media Research submitted,
“……… .on an average, it may remain for close to an year or year
and a half. But it can change, depending upon the kind of
demographic changes. If the key member of the home goes abroad,
the profile of the home changes accordingly.”
27. The representative of a-Map in the same context stated:
“In our case when we have the meters, we keep on rotating the
meters and keep on changing the homes periodically so that the
panel does not remain the same. We make sure that every six
months at least 10 per cent of the panel keeps on changing
everywhere. As a result of the rotation over a prescribed period,
the entire hundred percent of the households are changed”.
28. The Committee then desired to know from the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting whether the sample studies carried out
by the rating agencies truly reflected the viewers’ choice/preference as
such studies were conducted only in a few selected cities/towns. In
reply, it was stated that the present system might result in
disproportionate weightage being given to viewership pattern of a small
sample of viewers. Since, there were only two agencies in India and
their sample size was limited to about 7000 (TAM Media Research)
and 6000 (a-Map) metered homes, roughly 30,000 respondents from
large urban centres represented about 120 million viewers assuming
5 members per household. As such, the rural areas and towns with a
population less than a lakh, which constituted over half the population
having access to Cable & Satellite channels and three-fourths of those
getting DD channels, did not get measured at all. The effects of such
ratings could be:—
(i) The broadcasters focus more on producing content which is
popular in their perception. The perception of broadcasters
is based on the TRP . However, if the ratings are biased
towards urban areas, then such a system would promote

9
production of content which may not necessarily be popular
across different regions.
(ii) The broadcasters fix the rates for advertisement spots for
different programmes based on the popularity of such
programmes as reflected by TRP . A non representative rating
system may result in advertisement rates for more popular
programmes being less than the advertisement rates for less
popular programmes.
(iii) The advertisers devise their media strategies based on the
Television Rating Points. If the ratings do not reflect the
viewership pattern accurately, then there is a likelihood of
the advertising campaign missing its target viewers.
29. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting therefore felt
that such studies did not appear to reflect the real choice of the viewers
for the following reasons:—
(i) From the statistical theories, the larger the sample size
nearing to the population, the greater would be the accuracy
of the information/data generated. However, increasing the
sample size has implications of the cost. The people meter
is stated to be costing around Rs. one lakh. Nonetheless,
the small sample has serious limitations of not reflecting
the plurality of the platforms, regions, rural and small towns,
etc. So the sample size should be such, which should set
off the increased cost by the benefits it will produce through
results that are more reliable. It can be reasonably expected
that wider coverage would mean increased number of
meters resulting in economies of scale lowering the costs.
(ii) W ith the emergence of newer technologies/delivery
platforms, television programmes can be made available to
the viewers through different platforms. Inadequacy of the
measurement methods to capture new television viewing
such as digital TV , HDTV , interactive television and Digital
Video Recorders could distort the TRPs. Consequently, the
measurement methods used for rating purposes need to be
compatible with the emerging technologies. The data
regarding the viewership is presently collected weekly.
Availability of real time ratings through unobtrusive means
is also of interest.
(iii) As with any industry , the monopoly player is bound to
reap undue profits and advantages and will attempt to create

10
the entry barriers and use various unfair and anticompetitive
measures to distort the competition. If there is inadequate
competition in the television rating points, concerns of
monopolistic behavior are bound to arise. Although the
sector is unregulated, it could only bring in the second rating
agency in 2004, which brought about a higher coverage.
Increased competition improves the quality, reduces costs,
provides additional services and better customer care etc.
India is a large and diverse Country stratified into several
socio-economic categories and regions. Competition is
required because one system may not be able to capture
the enormity and complexity of the Country. The main
advantage of the increased competition and level playing
field would be the increased coverage, better pricing and
free play of the market forces.
30.  When the Committee desired to hear the views of Prasar
Bharati on the extant system of television audience measurement/TRP
system with regard to the sample choice and size, reliability of data,
transparency and the authenticity of the rating results, it was replied
that in the extant scenario, broadcasters, advertisers and corporate
media planners could not get the true picture of TV viewing in the
Country as the rating systems did not adequately represent the actual
television viewing pattern of the Indian TV homes. It was categorically
stated that 62 million of 112 million TV homes were outside the ambit
of television audience measurement ratings as they were in rural areas.
31.  Prasar Bharati further stated that besides the size and non-
representation of the sample, other factors affecting the reliability of
TAM Media Research data were the release of data on weekly basis,
lack of transparency in the method of selection of households and the
confidentiality of the names of panel homes, which prevented
verification. Further, induced viewership and tampering with data could
not be ruled out as ratings were not subjected to validation or
independent audit.
32.  Asked to state the measures ought to be taken to make the
television rating system truly reflective of Indian viewers’ choice and
taste, Prasar Bharati replied that the system had to reflect the socio-
economic, demographic and geographic plurality of the Indian TV
viewership which necessarily meant that rural India, small towns and
a large part of the Country should not be left out of the ambit of the
rating system. Further, the sample size had to be proportionately
increased so as to adequately represent different socio-economic classes
and regions of the Country. The ratings system should be made open
to audit by an independent agency and data should be released in
real time so that broadcasters could utilize the data in planning and

11
scheduling their programme content for diverse audiences. Moreover,
there should be provision for carrying out reliability and validity tests
of rating data.
33.  As would be seen from the comparative data referred to
above, the system of television audience measurement/TRP system
presently in vogue furnished results after a time lag ranging from a
day to a week. Citing opinions expressed in various quarter that in
order to make the viewership ratings results truly indicative of the
viewers’ choices, a transparent and instantaneous system of ratings,
which was real time, and through unobtrusive means would be really
helpful, the Committee desired to hear the views of the TRAI. In
reply, it was stated that worldwide it was understood that only two
countries (Brazil & Chile) were reporting in near real time. Most
countries reported audiences overnight, typically, viewing for the
previous day up to 2 in the morning being available from 9 a.m.
onwards. While the technology was capable of providing real time
reporting, the use of the data might have its limitations in as much as
part day’s data and might produce slightly different results from the
full day’s data.
34. The statement of the reporting followed elsewhere was stated
to be as under:
Sl.No. Name of Country Frequency
1. China (Parts) Overnight
2. Poland Overnight
3. Philippines Overnight
4. Romania Overnight
5. Hungary Overnight
6. Serbia Overnight
7. Venezuela Overnight
8. Thailand Weekly
9. Slovenia Overnight
10. UK Overnight
11. Dominican Republic Overnight
12. South Africa Overnight
13. Indonesia Weekly
14. Greece Overnight
15. Italy Overnight
16. Turkey Overnight
17. Cyprus Overnight
18. Malaysia Next three days
19. Croatia Overnight
20. USA Overnight

12
35. In the same context, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation, stated
that ratings provided a tool to the advertiser and media planner to
plan their TV advertising spends and to the broadcasters to price their
advertising inventory. Both these processes would not be real time. It
was further stated that even if a system generated ratings in real time,
there was no technology available that would enable advertising to be
scheduled and aired, or for that matter, prices to be set, in real time.
Real time ratings would, however, help in shortening the entire media
planning and execution cycle and perhaps provide the impetus for the
development of real time advertisement scheduling and pricing tools.
36. During evidence, the Chairman, TRAI, replying to a specific
query on the above issue, stated,
“ ....internationally one of the preliminary requirement is that such
technology should be used which has the capability to deliver
rating services overnight. That is, it should not be seven days.”
37. He further stated,
“ ......such reporting on weekly basis leaves a lot of scope for
manipulation. It should be instantaneously conveyed to a Central
Point. Spontaneous reporting must happen. It is happening
worldwide.”
38. Asked to state whether it was because of the technology being
used by TAM Media Research that they were taking a week for
reporting, the Chairman, TRAI stated that in fact, earlier TAM Media
Research was taking a longer period. When they realised all this debate
was happening, they were reporting within a week.
39. In reply to a specific query, the Chairman, TRAI emphatically
stated that both the rating agencies i.e. TAM Media Research and
a-Map had to improve their technologies for instantaneous reporting.
40. In view of the above opinion of the Chairman, TRAI, the
Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure
that the rating agencies maintained the international standard
particularly in respect of the technology used by them. In reply, it was
stated that the Ministry believed in fair competition and standardisation
of both sample as well as equipment. However, as the television
audience measurement system was completely unregulated, it was left
to the market players to devise the system and use the technology
they felt appropriate. It was further stated that the Government had
made a reference to TRAI for giving its recommendations on several

13
issues including the types of equipment used and the cost thereof
internationally.
41. The Committee then desired to have detailed information from
the Ministry indicating the type of technology, the cost per household
particularly the cost of the meter used for carrying out television ratings
etc. In reply, it was stated that no such data was available with the
Ministry, which had in fact made a reference to TRAI to inter alia
study the above aspects.
42. Asked to state the reasons for not making any efforts to collect/
compile data in this regard, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated that the TV audience measurement system was
completely unregulated and it was left to the market players to devise
the system and use the technology they felt appropriate.
43. TRAI, when asked to comment on the above issues, replied
that the reported cost of a people meter used by TAM Media Research
was between Rs. 75000/- to Rs. 100000/- whereas the cost of a meter
used by a-Map was about Rs. 30000/-. It was also stated that although
the issue of cost of meters was not raised specifically in the
Consultation Paper, comments were received stating that reduction in
import duty would bring down the cost of people meters. At the
same time, TRAI emphasized that hardware cost was only one of the
inputs in the overall ratings service.
44. The Committee queried whether the cost factor of the
technology used by the rating agencies would not be a deterrent
towards increasing the sample size. In reply, the Chairman TRAI
submitted during evidence,
“The expenditure involved no doubt is there and we just briefly
calculated that even for the 7000 people meter at the cost at which
they have been procured, the cost would be Rs. 70 crore to 90
crore apart from all other related expenditure.”
45. When the Committee desired to hear the views of IBF on the
cost factor of the technology used for ratings system, a representative
of IBF during evidence, stated,
“A meter is a very expensive business. While it is okay for us to
criticize them and say that they are unrepresentative, today as a
vendor led product, supposing he (service provider) is to increase
his sample size by ten times, will I pay ten times what I am
paying.....”

14
46. Asked to indicate the options available, another representative
of IBF stated,
“Sir, today, as a user, I have two options—either I use an available
measurement system or I guess.”
47. Not convinced, the Committee specifically desired to know
whether IBF was satisfied with the existing technologies and if not,
the measures taken by it to put a robust system in place. In reply, a
representative of IBF stated during evidence,
“....the current system is inadequate for today’s needs and the
way the things have changed in the last several years The research
design itself is old. It goes back to several years, when the market
was simpler, when advertisers were fewer and more homogenous.
Today, we have complex markets, complex media. So, this system
is not sensitive enough to actually and reliably track viewership of
different kinds of audiences. The second very important reason as
to why it is inadequate is that it is vendor driven. The vendor
would decide what to do. So, users have no control over this
research We are just buying it, because that is the only thing,
which is available......”
48. The representative of IBF further stated that that was why the
three bodies i.e. the broadcasters, the advertising agencies and the
advertisers took the initiative to come together and look for a way to
do audience measurement in a representative and robust manner.
49. Asked to indicate the exact steps taken by IBF towards that
direction, the representative of IBF replied that they were going to
start an establishment survey, which would determine the actual
requirement of meters and the quality thereof.
50. When the Committee desired to know the views of a-Map on
the above issues, a representative of a-Map stated during evidence,
“......An increase in the size of the panel is absolutely
needed.....However, this notion has been spread in India for a very
long time that we cannot afford the rating systems that are cost
efficient, representative and robust because the meter costs are
extremely high.”
51. He further stated,
“These meters are still manufactured abroad. We are moving
towards how to generate these meters in the Country itself. Till

15
now there has been a single monopoly in the world which has
been supplying these meters. These monopolies are having a
stranglehold on our Country also.”
52. The Committee then desired to have the views of TAM Media
Research on the criteria fixed for determination of the sample/panel
size and its adequacy. In reply, the representative of TAM Media
Research stated,
“.....The sample size is determined by the kind of information that
is wanted by the user at the end of the day. For example, like a
market in Mumbai, the three dominant factors are one, in terms of
the kind of language in which people watch TV , second, the amount
of time they spend watching TV alongwith the kind of TV sets
they have, third in terms of the location in which they are actually
based in the entire city itself. These three become the key
parameters. Besides them, there are demographic parameters like
the age, gender and whether you have a terrestrial home etc.”
53. Asked to state the number of meters installed in Mumbai by
TAM Media Research for undertaking the ratings the representative,
TAM Media Research stated that 500 meters were installed in Mumbai
for the purpose. When the Committee asked whether the number of
meters installed in particular homes justified the case study vis-a-vis
the population, the representative, TAM Media Research responded,
“.....We actually count the individuals and not the homes......There
is enough homogeneity to allow you to have a sample.”
54. Not satisfied with the reasonings, the Committee categorically
desired to know whether TAM Media Research was making any efforts
to increase the people meters. In reply, the representative, TAM Media
Research stated that they were planning to increase the number of
people meters to 12,000 from the existing 7,000 meters.
VI. COMPATIBILITY OF RATING TOOLS WITH THE EMERGING
TV VIEWING TECHNOLOGIES
55. During the course of the examination of the subject, the
Committee were informed that with the emergence of new
technologies/delivery platforms, TV programmes could be made
available to the viewers through different platforms. Inadequacy of
the measurement methods to capture new television viewing such as
digital TV , HDTV , interactive TV and digital video recorders could
distort the ratings. Thus, in view of the pressing need for making
measurement methods used for rating purposes compatible with the

16
emerging technologies, the Committee desired to know from the rating
agencies about the efforts made by them to upgrade their technologies.
In reply, a-Map stated that their proprietary technology could handle
free-to-air, cable, CAS and DTH modes of television reception. It was
further stated that apart from the existing technology, a-Map had the
capability to respond to the changing technology space wand viewing
habits.
56. Responding to the above observation of the Committee, the
IBF stated that they totally agreed with the view that the technology
for ratings should be compatible with the new technologies emerging
and able to take digital TV , HDTV , interactive TV , IPTV , Mobile TV
etc.
57. In the same context, Prasar Bharati opined that the rating
systems presently in vogue with both TAM Media Research and
a-Map were inadequate to capture new/emerging technologies.
Especially TAM Media Research would need to be replaced with a
rating agency capable of monitoring new technologies such as Digital
TV , HDTV , IPTV etc. It was further stated that the Broadcasting
Audience Research Council (BARC) or another body modelled on the
ratings system used in the UK would also help in this regard as that
ratings system would be able to offer real time access of data from
new technologies.
58. When the Committee desired to know whether TRAI had
conducted any studies in this regard, it was replied that the existing
standard was the fixed people meter for audience measurement. It
was also stated that new technologies like portable people meter and
Return Path Data were getting introduced to measure the emerging
technologies/delivery platforms. Views of TRAI in this matter were
reportedly being finalised as the issue was a part of the Consultation
Paper.
VII. MONOPOLY
59. The Committee were informed that there was a virtual
monopoly of TAM Media Research in the TV audience measurement
in India. The Committee were also informed that a Country of one
billion plus population could not afford to have such a monopolistic
ratings regime which ignored rural India and many important States
and influenced the TV programme in a disproportionately unfair
manner.
60. In the above context, the Committee asked about the precise
action taken by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to put

17
an end to the monopolistic ratings regime of the TV programmes and
ensure a viewer friendly fair ratings system encompassing the whole
of India, including the rural areas. In reply, it was stated that TAM
Media Research enjoyed monopoly in the ratings business for a long
time but one more player a-Map had recently entered the market thus
ending the monopoly. It was further stated that improvements in the
ratings system would be considered on receipt of the TRAI’s
recommendation.
61. Asked to state the basic reasons for more private players not
coming in the field of television ratings, it was replied that apart from
the prohibitive cost of equipment/rating meters, the other major reasons
for more private agencies not coming in the field of television
viewership ratings appeared to be entry barriers, use of various unfair
and anti-competitive measures by the existing players, apprehensions
in the minds of broadcasters etc.
62. Asked to comment on the above reasons, IBF stated that
broadcasters themselves were not satisfied with the existing system
and to overcome the situation, the Industry Bodies were in the process
of formation of BARC. It was further stated that IBF totally believed
that there should not be any monopoly in the ratings system nor
restriction upon other players to enter the rating system.
63. In the same context, Prasar Bharati was of the opinion that the
industry had so far not been inclined to encourage new players or
any sort of changes in the existing ratings system. It was also stated
that the manner in which TAM Media Research ratings were being
done restricted the sample to selected urban pockets and left out small
towns and rural areas. It proved beneficial to all cable and satellite
networks other than Doordarshan. The skewed picture helped the
satellite channels in getting a larger share of the advertising pie. It
was further stated by Prasar Bharati that the stakeholders (with cross
holdings in the bodies that make up the rating agencies) were also in
a position to utilise the present system to tailor things to their
advantage, if they chose to do so. This was another reason why new
players were likely to face unfair barriers.
64. When the Committee desired to hear the views of TRAI on
the above issues, it was replied that television ratings in India had not
been regulated so far and as such there was no restriction which
prohibited entry of new agencies to undertake rating of TV viewership.
It was also stated that the details of the outcome of the deliberations
on these issues would be forming a part of the recommendations to
be made by TRAI on the subject.

18
65. The Committee then asked the Ministry about the proactive
measures taken by them to motivate the new agencies to come in the
field of television viewership ratings. In reply, it was stated that the
Ministry had taken suo moto measures and held a series of meetings
with the stakeholders, which had given it wide publicity. Reference to
TRAI had also been made on 17 January, 2008 based on which a
consultation paper had been floated by the Authority. The Ministry
felt that such initiatives would definitely motivate the new players. It
was further stated that formation of BARC was a direct fallout of the
slew of initiatives taken by the Government.
VIII. TRANSPARENCY/RELIABILITY/AUTHENTICITY OF THE
RATINGS SYSTEM
66. During their study visits to various places, the Committee were
informed by eminent TV and Film personalities and other stakeholders
that the people electronic meter system devised and used by TAM
Media Research was not foolproof as it was secretly placed in a selected
few households in major urban areas. The then Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting while deposing before the Committee,
was also of the same view and further stated that there was no
independent audit being done for the whole system.
67. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear
the views of a-Map, the representative of a-Map submitted during
evidence,
“The disclosure is not about where the particular meter is. The
disclosure is about the entire scheme; how are you doing this
rating, what is your panel, what are the sub-panels, is this
panel representative or not, is some kind of public audit taking
place of this panel and finally as a result of the public audit a
kind of authorisation is proved that this is an acceptable rating
system....”
68. Asked to state categorically whether the system adopted by
a-Map was transparent, the representation of a-Map replied,
“Yes, it is transparent, But it is not known to the outsiders by that
way...... Transparency is not in the sense of each household like
where the meter is kept......”
69. When asked whether a-Map was giving gifts to people to be
able to instal/use the people meter in their households, the
representative a-Map replied in the negative.

19
70. On the transparency issue, the representative of TAM Media
Research submitted during evidence,
“If it is transparency in the sense that we reveal the household
names or household addresses, then that would be difficult. But if
you are looking at transparency from the angle of how our
operation is constituted we are open to complete audit. In fact, the
present auditor who audits our system actually is the TRAI auditor
himself. So, from an operational perspective, if you want to look
at how our operation is done, we are open to any kind of non-
vested interest party in trying to look at our system and investigate
into it. But if it is going to be a vested party who is trying to
know which homes have we placed our samples, we block only
that part of it.”
71. Asked to state specifically whether any Government Body could
inspect the system of ratings carried out by TAM Media Research, the
representative of TAM Media Research replied in the affirmative.
72. The Committee then desired to know whether TAM Media
Research was giving any gifts to the people whose houses were used
for installing the meters. In reply, the representative of TAM Media
Research stated,
“We do give gifts and it is part of every research function to
provide with gifts. It is not an expensive gift......”
73. In view of the alleged lack of transparency reliability and
authenticity of the TRP system adopted by the rating agencies, the
Committee desired to be apprised of the measures taken/contemplated
by the Ministry to make the whole system more encompassing, realistic,
reliable and authentic. In reply, it was stated that whereas the system
of broadcast audience measurement service was totally unregulated in
India, to take a holistic view of the matter, the Government had
requested TRAI to give its recommendations, on the receipt of which
further view would be taken.
IX. IN-HOUSE RESEARCH IN PRASAR BHARATI
(i) Doordarshan Audience Ratings (DART)
74. The Committee were informed that Doordarshan has its own
Audience Research Unit since its inception. In the beginning
Doordarshan was functioning under DG:AIR and therefore its audience
research was carried out by the Audience Research Unit of DG:AIR.
Doordarshan got separated from DG:AIR in the year 1976 as a separate

20
Directorate. Before its separation, some of the Doordarshan Kendras in
the State capitals got their own Audience Research Units.
75. Audience Research Unit of Doordarshan was separated from
AIR in 1984 with the creation of AR Unit at Directorate and a post of
Director, Audience Research (DAR). The main objective of setting up
AR Unit was to provide research inputs to Doordarshan with a view
to planning and broadcasting need-based programmes and make the
programme very effective and useful to the people of the Country.
76. As regards the main functions carried out by the aforesaid
Audience Research Unit, the Committee were apprised that the
main functions of the Unit were to provide research inputs by
conducting:
(i) Pre-telecast surveys viz . Audience Profile and need
assessment.
(ii) Post telecast surveys such as viewership surveys, evaluative/
impact studies as per the requirements at Directorate as
well as Kendra level.
77. The Committee were further apprised that in addition to the
above research work, the unit analysed voluntary feedback received
through viewers’ letters, press comments, etc. It prepared programme
composition and Annual reports of Doordarshan at Kendra as well as
directorate level, provided information for Annual Report of Prasar
Bharati and the Ministry of I&B. The unit also conducted Countrywide
regular programme rating study.
78. In response to a specific query, it was replied that the Research
Unit conducted viewership ratings for only Doordarshan channels in
rural and urban India with representative samples. It was also stated
that Doordarshan was utilising both the in-house Audience Research
as well as private agencies data to meet its requirement relating to
audience research measurement/television rating points.
(ii) Methodology of DART
79. Asked to indicate the procedure followed by the Research Unit
to disseminate the viewership ratings, it was replied that television
viewership rating reports by the in-house research unit were prepared
on weekly basis at Kendra level and submitted to the concerned Kendra
as well Directorate for use by programme planners, producers, policy
makers and marketing managers to plan commercial broadcast and to
improve programme quality. The data were also uploaded in the
Doordarshan website.

21
80. The Committee then desired to know the major difference in
the reliability, authenticity and transparency between the rating
methodology adopted by the Audience Research Unit and the private
rating agencies. In reply, it was stated that the in-house Audience
Research Units carried out rating study through panel diary system.
This system was stated to be cheaper, transparent and reliable. But it
had certain limitations also since measurement was not as accurate as
that of the people meter system, which recorded viewership data
minute by minute. Despite this limitation, the panel diary system gave
results, which was comparable with that of the meter system. From
utility perspective also the panel diary system was as useful as meter
system.
81. The Committee were further apprised that although the rating
by the private agencies was done through electronic meter system
which gave accurate measurement, yet it was not foolproof. It was
also too costly to be acquired by a single broadcaster and too
complicated for the layman’s understanding. It lacked transparency,
reliability and authenticity because the system was not open to the
broadcasters/user agencies or any other agency including the
Government. Moreover, it was alleged that the system promoted misuse
of the television media’s role in the spread of violence, vulgarity, crime,
sex, sensationalisation, blind copying of western culture and this
ignored India’s great cultural traditions, values, diversity etc. All this
was done in order to attract viewership, gain popularity and earn
revenue in a highly competitive market.
82. The Committee were informed that in DART, daily viewership
data was collected through diary from representative panel members
covering both rural and urban audience of the Country and report
was generated on weekly basis, whereas in TAM Media Research/
a-Map, viewership data was collected through electronic meter installed
in representative TV households and processed through latest software
for analyzing and reporting. TAM Media Research was reporting data
on weekly basis through mail whereas a-Map was reporting data
overnight through internet. Both TAM Media Research and a-Map were
covering urban audience only in cities/towns having more than one
lakh population.
(iii)  Tie-up with Private Agencies
83. The Committee desired to know whether any tie-up was made
by Doordarshan Research Unit with the private rating agencies, it was
replied that television ratings was carried out by the staff of the unit
through panel diary system with the assistance of part time casual

22
workers. Also, ratings was obtained from outside private media
agencies viz.  TAM Media Research. It was further stated that
Doordarshan subscribed and paid Rs. 1.60 crore annually to TAM
Media Research for supply of ratings on weekly basis for urban
audience of cities having more than one lakh population in different
States excluding North-East, J&K, Jharkhand and Bihar. Besides TAM
Media Research, DD also engaged other agencies including Government
agencies, Universities, private agencies etc. from time to time for
programme evaluation/impact study.
84. During the on-the-spot study visits of the Committee to various
parts of the Country, they were given to understand by several field
units of Prasar Bharati that the ratings of TAM Media Research were
highly prejudiced towards Doordarshan channels and programmes. In
fact, a collusive element between the rating agencies and some private
channels which proved to be detrimental to the DD channels was also
apprehended.
85. In the above context, the Committee queried about the reasons
behind Prasar Bharati patronizing TAM Media Research especially when
the latter was not covering rural area, some States and even numerous
cities/towns. In reply, Prasar Bharati stated that inspite of the obvious
weaknesses in the extant ratings system, the broadcasters, advertisers
and production houses under the aegis of IBF accepted the ratings of
TAM Media Research as the basis for programme scheduling, content
tailoring and expenditure, budget allocation etc. Prasar Bharati further
stated that this practice had been continuing presumably because TAM
Media Research was the pioneer in the field and had been in existence
since 1998, without any serious competition. Hence, Prasar Bharati
had no alternative other than to use the same system alongwith the
other media industries, channels and broadcasters.
86. In response to another related query, Prasar Bharati stated that
in 2003-2004, TAM Media Research was requested by Prasar Bharati to
increase the number of people meters, so as to cover rural audiences
also. As many affluent houses had more than one television set, the
TAM Media Research sample had a second people meter in
245 households. TAM Media Research was also asked to re-locate the
second people meter to households having no people meter at all.
While TAM Media Research took no action on the second people meter,
it asked for an additional Rs. 7.75 crore, (exclusively from Doordarshan)
to extend its coverage to rural areas. Prasar Bharati was unwilling to
shoulder this financial burden on its own, as it should have been
shared by the industry. In January 2007, TAM Media Research expanded
its coverage from 70 cities to 148 cities. This expansion was strictly

23
urban and restricted to strong cable and satellite homes. It resulted in
significant decrease in the ratings of DD channels/programmes. TAM
Media Research was requested to enlarge the coverage so as to cover
the rural audience (DD’s strength). TAM Media Research expressed
inability to do so, due to scarcity of funds. Prasar Bharati was also
not able to look towards realistic support from within the IBF in this
regard as the manner in which TAM Media Research ratings were
done in selected urban pockets, leaving out small towns and rural
areas was beneficial to all other satellite channels other than
Doordarshan.
87. The Committee then desired to know whether Prasar Bharati
had any tie-up with the other rating agency i.e. a-Map. It was replied
that Prasar Bharati had been approached by a-Map for a customised
rural panel to unlock the true value of Doordarshan. Furthermore,
a-Map and Television Monitoring and Research (TMR) had made
presentations to Prasar Bharati to cover parts of rural areas and for
channel mapping, so as to increase the reach and the effectiveness of
the Doordarshan channels.
88. Asked to explain the contours of the above proposals and the
extent of benefit to the Doordarshan channels, it was replied that a
study on a-Map’s proposal for a customised rural panel catering to
Doordarshan would be conducted among the rural audience in the
Hindi heartland. The sample size would be 2000 homes, the total capital
cost for the project would be approximately Rs. 9.01 crore, and the
annual recurring cost would be Rs. 4.65 crore. The entire cost was to
be borne by DD and a-Map’s remuneration for setting up the panel
would be 10 percent of the capital outlay. a-Map had also proposed
that it should be paid 30 per cent of the annual operating expenses,
to operate this panel on an on-going basis. The proposal envisaged
that while the viewership data and hardware shall remain the property
of Doordarshan, a-MAP would have exclusive rights to sell this data
to others. 20 per cent of this sales amount would go to a-Map and the
rest would be with DD. a-Map estimated that within two years, the
operations would turn cash positive.
89. The Committee were further apprised that the implementation
of the a-Map proposal, could terminate the monopoly of TAM Media
Research as the largest operator of television audience measurement
in India. As a-Map proposed to cover small towns and rural areas, it
would be more representative of the Indian TV audience. It would
also boost DD viewership ratings, resulting in a greater share of the
ad market. It would be difficult for the Indian broadcast industry, to
ignore a-Map’s daily ratings and the significance of the rural data.

24
90. The main features of the proposal received from Television
Monitoring Research (TMR) were stated to be as under:—
(i) TMR technology permits the monitoring of all channels
being broadcast by MSO’s/Cable Operators/DTH etc. It can
also monitor whether channels banned in India are being
broadcast.
(ii) It generates city-wise reports on violation of the Cable Act
and E-mail alerts on shifting of channels by the MSOs. It
also provides customized daily/weekly/monthly reports as
required by the client.
(iii) The TMR proposal envisages a one time meter cost of
Rs.50000/- per set. Additionally, around 100 nodes can be
set up at different places at a monthly cost of Rs.7000/- per
node.
(iv) TMR would enable Doordarshan to monitor and get relevant
data, as to whether cable operators are showing select DD
channels on the required bands, with requisite quality of
signals, as specified in the Cable Television Network
(Regulation) Act 1995. As poor reception of DD channels
translates into loss of viewership and ad revenue, TMR
could help DD to take corrective measures against errant
cable operators and MSOs who are presently flouting the
law. This would translate into higher viewership and
revenues and help the public broadcaster to function better.
(v) TMR has a very wide canvas as it monitors all the channels.
DD’s interest in TMR would be largely limited to data
related to DD and its performance vis-a-vis other major
players.
(vi) However, the monitoring of all 360 channels would be highly
beneficial to the Ministry of I&B/or any other Regulatory
body set up for the purpose. It would help to prevent
banned channels from being broadcast in the Country. It
would also help the Ministry to take action on city-wise
reports of violations of the broadcast code and Cable
Television Network (Regulation) Act by MSOs/Cable
Operators and satellite channels. TMR could help in the
adjudication of complaints lodged by the public against
telecast of programmes. It would be ideal if this proposal is
taken up by a broadcast regulatory body rather than by
Prasar Bharati. However, Prasar Bharati has approved in
principle a pilot project by TMR for monitoring DD channels
in UP , Bihar and Chhattisgarh for 3 months.

25
91. The Committee then asked whether the Audience Research Unit
of Doordarshan would be a part of the scheme of things envisaged. In
reply, it was stated that it would not be feasible for the Audience
Research Unit of Doordarshan to directly be a part of a-Map or TMR.
The role of the Audience Research Unit would be to analyse and
customize data generated by a-Map/TMR so as to support the
Doordarshan programming and scheduling of its various channels. In
addition, the Unit would provide relevant data to Doordarshan’s
marketing divisions.
(iv) Status of DART
92. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that
Doordarshan’s in-house panel diary system known as DART was
cheaper, transparent and reliable, but it had certain limitations since
measurement was not as accurate as that of the people meter system
which recorded viewership data minute by minute. Despite this
limitation, the panel diary system was useful as the people meter
system both in terms of result and utility . The Committee were also
informed that Doordarshan had been exhorted to broadbase its DART
systems.
93. When the Committee desired to hear the views of Prasar
Bharati on the status and efficacy of DART, the CEO, Prasar Bharati
submitted during evidence,
“We do have our own audience research system which was the
only legitimate currency in the 1990s. But somewhere down the
road, we lost track. I would put it very simply to you. Sir, that
our system is mostly non-existent, though we are spending some
money. DART has lost its credibility”.
94. Asked to comment on the fate of DART, the CEO, Prasar
Bharati stated,
“Sir, my own sense of the matter is that perhaps it may not really
be worthwhile to expand the DART experiment. Perhaps, we will
have to invest in more people meters getting installed in the rural
areas. Some kind of a joint venture with somebody will have to
be thought of. I will have to concretise my views on this. But I
think that is the direction which we will have to take.”
95. He further stated,
“I would like to assure you that we have a totally open mind on
this. All avenues are open to us and we will try to have a definite
step very soon on this. We are already in the process of talking to
some people”.

26
96. Taking note of the apparent contradictions in the statements of
the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati on the
status of DART as mentioned above, the Committee desired to have
a clarification on the matter. In reply the Ministry stated that the
material furnished to the Committee by them regarding the status of
DART was based on the inputs earlier received from Prasar Bharati.
It was further stated that Prasar Bharati was an autonomous
organization and the Ministry did not interfere in their functioning.
Prasar Bharati had given its inputs regarding the in-house panel diary
system of Doordarshan known as DART. Based on it, the material was
furnished to the Committee. The CEO, Prasar Bharati was in a better
position to comment on the utility or otherwise of the organisation
within his control and therefore if the Committee had been informed
by him that DART had outlived its utility and was virtually defunct,
the Ministry had no comments to offer.
97. The Committee categorically desired to know whether Prasar
Bharati had suggested any alternatives for the in-house research in
view of the insufficiency of DART. In reply, the Ministry stated that
Prasar Bharati had not given any suggestions regarding an alternative
for the in-house research on programme contents.
98. When the Committee desired to know whether TRAI had made
any evaluation of the reach, spread, sample size, efficiency, transparency
and research quality of DART, TRAI replied that since DART was an
in-house system of Doordarshan for its own use and for its own
channels, TRAI had not made any evaluation of DART. However, TRAI
recognised that the diary based system still prevailed in many countries
to supplement the ratings done through the electronic meters.
(v) Advertisements for Doordarshan
99. In response to the Committee’s query regarding sufficient
advertisements to Doordarshan, a representative of Prasar Bharati
submitted during evidence,
“advertisers know and we can prove it that whatever money they
are paying to Doordarshan, it is much better off than ratings. If
you go by TAM and if you compare two programmes of
Doordarshan, one has a TAM rating of seven and another has a
TAM rating of five, but you will find that this programme which
is lower in ratings gets more advertising. It is because the
advertisers are conscious of Doordarshan’s reach. They know it
and they use it as a leverage.”

27
100. Asked to state categorically whether any study was conducted
by Prasar Bharati/Doordarshan in the context of the above statement,
the representative of Prasar Bharati stated,
“What I am saying is actually reflected by TAM study itself. I am
not saying anything beyond TAM. The only thing is TAM does
not project it. If you have ratings of all homes, at any point of
time, all 50 programmes will be Doordarshan’s programmes, that
is both CS (Cable and Satellite) and non-CS homes. The eyeballs
for Doordarshan’s programme, at any time, will be far, far better
than the nearest rival channel. If you take all homes into
consideration, the next rival channel, be it STAR, SONY , ZEE or
whatever it is, is miles behind.”
101. The Committee desired to know whether Doordarshan was
getting sufficient revenue by way of advertisements when compared
with the private channels. In reply, the CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted,
“This is true that the advertisers focus primarily on that segment
of population which in their view has the surplus funds, so do
the satellite channels because profit is the main concern there. In
our case, since we started with the legacy of public service, we
still believe in that, we have to service the entire spectrum of the
Indian population geographically and demographically, we do not
really consider revenue as a main motive, while the other channels
look at that as their primary driving force.”
(vi) Quality of Programmes
102. The Committee asked whether it was not imperative for
Doordarshan to improve its quality of programmes for attracting more
advertisers and thereby generating substantial revenue. In reply, the
CEO, Prasar Bharati responded,
“It (quality) has gone up to an extent because of some efforts,
though they are initial efforts and we have to do much more. But
there have been some improvement I would say. There is scope
for much more undoubtedly. Secondly , there is also a problem
with us that we have not been promoting ourselves even while
we may have good programmes, we do not spend money on
promotions. That is another area which we are addressing. There
has been some improvement lately but these are early days. We
would take more time but we are appreciating this issue.”

28
(vii) DART—Fund Allocation and Utilisation
103.  As regards the fund allocated and expenditure incurred by
the Audience Research Unit during the years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008
as well as the allocations made for the 2008-2009 fiscal, the following
information was furnished to the Committee:—
Year Sanction Revised Final Expenditure
Budget Estimate Estimate Incurred
Grant
2006-07 Rs. 79.83 Lakhs Rs. 80.00 Lakhs Rs. 80.85 Lakhs Rs. 74.40 Lakhs
2007-08 Rs. 79.83 Lakhs Rs. 79.63 Lakhs Rs. 85.80 Lakhs Rs. 72.11 Lakhs
2008-09 Rs. 1.099 Crore        —         —       —
104. Asked to state the requirement projected in each of the
abovesaid years and whether paucity of funds had affected the
performance of the Audience Research Unit, it was replied that the
funds allocated in 2006-07 and 2007-08 were as per requirement to
conduct rating study, viewership survey on DD Direct Plus and two
evaluative studies viz. impact study on Doordarshan programmes on
the tribals of Maharashtra and on CPG programmes in J&K in the
year 2007-08; and impact study on PAK TV in J&K in the year
2006-07. For the year 2008-09, a proposal for fund allocation of
Rs. 2.206 crore has been made to conduct rating study to increase
samples of the study and to acquire computers and software for data
tabulation and analysis.
105. It was also stated that there was no paucity of funds during
the years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008. The Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting further stated that however a higher allocation under
this head would lead to increase in the advertising revenue.
106. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for shortfalls
in expenditure by the Audience Research Unit during the years
2006-2007 and 2007-2008, it was stated that funds allocated to
Doordarshan Kendra, Srinagar could not be utilised because conducting
survey was not possible due to the non-conducive atmosphere in the
region. Another reason for non-utilisation of funds was reported to be
the staff constraints in Delhi, Mumbai, Nagpur and Bhubaneshwar
Doordarshan Kendras.
(viii) Staff Strength
107. The sanctioned staff strength of Prasar Bharati’s Audience
Research Unit including its 18 Field Units was stated to be 64. However,
the actual staff in position as on 22 May, 2008 was reported to be 34.

29
108. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their written
information stated that in view of the existing workload of the
Audience Research Unit, there was acute staff constraint. The Ministry
further stated that the assigned functions of the Unit were, however,
managed with the existing limited staff, but with difficulty.
109. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the
efforts made by Prasar Bharati/Doordarshan to fill up the vacancies in
the various field units of the Audience Research Unit. In reply,
Prasar Bharati stated that proposals had been sent to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting to fill up the existing vacancies on
promotion for various categories of posts as there was a ban on direct
recruitment. It was also stated that a Committee had been appointed
to do a cadre review of the audience research staff so as to remove
the bottlenecks in the existing structure.
110. The Committee were further informed that the Ministry had
asked for certain clarifications and the proposals were being revised
accordingly by Prasar Bharati. Promotional posts were expected to be
filled up during the 2008-2009 fiscal.
111. In response to a specific query on the plans of Prasar Bharati/
Doordarshan for broadcasting DART despite acute staff shortage in
the field units of the ARU, it was stated that in order to tackle the
acute staff shortage and to strengthen the Audience Research Unit,
Prasar Bharati proposed to combine the present staff of the Audience
Research Units of AIR and DD. This synergy would strengthen the
research team at headquarters and help post sufficient staff in select
regions as per the requirement.
112. It was further stated that DART had a sample of 5200 TV
homes. Its diary method was justifiably considered archaic and was
not accepted by the industry. However, since the extant rating systems
of TAM Media Research and a-MAP did not cover rural India, DART
needed to be used to cover the rural areas, which were excluded by
the other agencies. The sample size could also be increased to 14400.
However, Doordarshan ratings through the diary method could be
used only as an interim measure. It could be discontinued when rating
agencies spread their sample people meters proportionately to represent
the rural TV audience.
X. FORMATION OF AN OVERSIGHT AND CONTROL BODY BY
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS
113. The Committee were informed that the leading industry
associations of the broadcasters, the media and the advertising sector

30
had recently formed the Broadcast Audience Research Council (BARC)
to oversee and control the TV audience measurement system in India.
It was reported that BARC would be a not-for-profit body under Section
25 of the Companies Act, 1956.
114. In the above context, the Committee desired to hear from the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting about their views on this
development and whether BARC had come up with its suggestions
for an effective mechanism to carry out the ratings studies/research.
In reply, it was stated that the Government welcomed such a move,
which endeavoured to provide a transparent system of television
ratings. The recently formed Broadcast Audience Research Council was
a voluntary effort of leading industry associations of the broadcasters,
media and advertising sector.
115.The Ministry further stated that the objective of BARC was to
provide accurate, up-to-date and relevant research relating to television
(to begin with) and other audio/video media in a completely
transparent and objective manner and at a reasonable cost to the users.
The basic thrust of BARC for ratings research was that it should be
truly representative, robust and transparent. The Ministry, however,
also confessed to the Committee that IBF had been in existence since
long and it was only after the Ministry focused attention on the
shortfalls of the rating system that the decision to set up BARC has
been taken by them.
116. BARC was planning to adopt the Broadcasters’ Audience
Research Board (BARB) model of UK and conducting baseline study
to know the size of TV viewer’s universe. After completion of the
baseline study, it would conduct ratings research for its members, by
awarding contract to rating agencies as was being done by the BARB
in UK.
117. Asked about the composition of the Council, the Committee
were informed that it will have an equal representation from the Indian
Society of Advertisers (ISA), Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) and
the Advertising Agencies Association of India (AAAI). The Committee,
however, noted that Prasar Bharati, the Public Service Broadcaster and
undoubtedly the biggest broadcaster in the Country is not represented
amongst the directors of IBF on the BARC Board. Asked to state the
reasons for non-representation of anybody from Prasar Bharati on the
BARC Board despite the Public Broadcaster being a member of IBF, it
was replied that Prasar Bharati had taken up the issue with the IBF
by pointing out that as the Public Broadcaster, Prasar Bharati’s presence

31
on the board of directors of BARC was essential. It was further stated
that Prasar Bharati had already sent the name of one of the senior
level officers of Doordarshan as its nominee.
118. When the Committee desired to know from IBF itself as to
the reasons for non-representation of anybody from Prasar Bharati on
the BARC Board, it was stated that BARC was not yet a registered
entity and the initial members nominated from the three apex
organisations should be seen as a project team that would take the
BARC concept forward, rather than a formally constituted Board of
directors. IBF’s representation on the formal BARC Board would be
decided by the IBF Board meeting. It was further stated that
Doordarshan is a public service broadcaster and one of the biggest
broadcaster in India and IBF is proud to count it amongst its
membership. IBF regularly sought volunteers to represent it at various
fora and would be delighted to nominate a Doordarshan representative
as one of its quota of BARC directors.
119. From the brief background, submitted by IBF on the
representation of Prasar Bharati in IBF since its inception, the
Committee noted that the officials of Ministry of I&B/Prasar Bharati
have been President/Vice-President of IBF between December, 1999 to
June, 2007. By the time the next AGM was held on 21 September,
2007, the new CEO of Prasar Bharati had been appointed. For the
Annual General Meeting of IBF scheduled to be held on that day,
CEO, Prasar Bharati had also sent his nomination for the election. The
nomination was proposed by the Chief Executive of Zee  Telefilms.
However, since the nomination papers of CEO, Prasar Bharati did not
indicate the mandatory Director Identification Number (DIN) and CEO,
Prasar Bharati could not submit the DIN even in the AGM held on
21 September, 2007 he was inducted as a special invitee on the IBF
Board along with a similarly placed Chief Executive of another channel.
Accordingly, all the communications being addressed to the members
of the Board were also sent to both the special invitees.
120. During the evidence, when CEO, Prasar Bharati was asked to
clarify in the matter, he stated,
“CEO of Prasar Bharati used to be the Chairman of IBF but I have
not attended any meeting. There have been 2-3 since the time I
have come”.
121. He further added emphatically,
“I do not even know where the IBF is. I never had any single
meeting. It is true, Sir, that in the past when it started, somebody
from the Prasar Bharati agreed to do so. I have no brief for that
viewpoint. I am very convinced that I am a public service
broadcaster and I will be true to my faith.”

32
122. Elaborating further, he added,
“Actually, Sir, Prasar Bharati or Doordarshan is a member of the
IBF. But it seems to me that we are really at a distance with them
because they are a body of private TV broadcasters and Prasar
Bharati has a different outlook. Actually, the fact of the matter is
that my predecessor was the president of IBF and when he went
away there was an interregnum. There was somebody officiating
as the CEO of Prasar Bharati for seven or eight months. Therefore,
that opportunity was lost. IBF presidentship has gone from Prasar
Bharati in any case, there is a kind of difference in the basic
approach also in more ways than one.”
123. Taking note of the apparent contradictions in the statements
of Prasar Bharati and IBF, the Committee wanted to have the views of
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting regarding the relations
between the public service broadcaster and IBF as well as non-
representation of Prasar Bharati on the BARC Board. The Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, in reply, stated that Prasar Bharati was
autonomous and its affiliation with IBF was within the knowledge of
Prasar Bharati itself as no clearance from the Government had been
sought in this regard. The Ministry further stated that it was a matter
of record that the then CEO of Prasar Bharati was the President of
IBF.
124. Asked to state categorically whether the Ministry would have
any say on the composition/functioning of BARC, it was replied in
the negative. It was further stated that the details of the members of
the BARC Board had not been furnished to the Ministry , hence they
were not in a position to offer any comments regarding the inclusion/
exclusion of Prasar Bharati or the public at large from it.
125. The Committee then desired to know from IBF as to how
BARC would ensure the interest of the viewer, the most important
stakeholder in the broadcasting sector. In reply, IBF stated that the
proposed constitution of the BARC would be adequate for the role
mandated for it as BARC would examine and increase the number of
people meter homes appropriately and their spread in the Country.
This would bring much larger number of viewers within the ratings
system and with this the interest of the viewers would be protected.
126. In the same context, Prasar Bharati stated that BARC seemed
to be broadly modelled on the pattern of BARB i.e. the ratings agency
prevalent in the United Kingdom and its vision document articulated
a transparent and objective measurement system. The success of BARC

33
would, however, depend on its implementation in a proper manner. It
was further stated that Prasar Bharati’s participation and a definite
role to the Public Broadcaster in managing the affairs of BARC would
help in correct implementation of the  stated objectives. Some of the
immediate concerns of Doordarshan in the context of the formation of
BARC were reported to be as follows:—
(i) The initial Board of Directors of BARC will have
12 Directors,—four each from the three groups, which
constitute the JIB— i.e. IBF, AAAI, and ISA. Even though
the three groups have four Directors each, a group has only
one vote. Thus, IBF which represents the broadcast body
will have only one vote, while AAAI and ISA who are
largely similar bodies will have one vote each.
(ii) The initial corpus of Rs. 2 crore for the formation of BARC
is not shared equally by the three groups. It is to be shared
by IBF, AAAI and ASI in the ratio of 80:15:5. However,
since all three associations have equal number of Directors/
voting rights/powers, even if the broadcasters as a whole
have an unanimous view, they can still be outvoted by AAAI
and ISA who contribute only 20 per cent of the corpus.
(iii) IBF’s broadcasters have diverse interests and are in constant
competition with each for TRPs. They need not necessarily
thus have a common view or common interests. There is
thus no guarantee that the four Directors who make up the
IBF should agree on the way that they should vote on/or
conduct the issue of audience measurement.
(iv) As seen from the TAM experience, Doordarshan’s interests
are different from other satellite channels. The manner in
which TAM ratings have been done leaving out small towns
and rural areas (DD strong areas) have been advantageous
to all satellite channels other than Doordarshan. The skewed
picture has helped satellite channels to get a larger share of
ad spent. It would not be unfair if it is said that
Doordarshan’s loss has been the collective gain of the cable
and satellite channels.
(v) In the present voting pattern, even if the Public Broadcaster
is on the Board of Directors, it does not entitle it to a
‘complete/single’ vote, inspite of being the sole
representative of homes with access only to terrestrial
television.

34
(vi) BARC presently envisages that contributors will vary
according to revenue earned by the Broadcaster. Those with
revenue of Rs. 100 crore and more, would pay the maximum
amount of Rs.10 lakh annually. Thus, broadcaster like Prasar
Bharati would be paying additional money without any extra
returns. In the BARB model of UK, all subscribers pay an
equal amount of money and additional amounts are charged
for accessing specific data. BARC however, makes special
allowances for small players in IBF and the other two bodies.
Thus, both small and big stakeholders would have an equal
say without sharing the same financial burden.
(vii) BARC is to have its headquarters in Mumbai with its office
in the premises of STAR TV . It would not be advisable for
the office of the rating agency to be in the premises of any
of the stakeholders. It would be ideal, if the office of BARC
is based in Delhi as the headquarters of IBF are in Delhi.
(viii) BARC envisages that the confidentiality of the audience
whose viewing patterns are being measured will be
maintained. This is on international patterns. However, to
ensure geographical spread of the audience covered and
proportionate sample covering a cross section of the India
TV audience, it may have to be overseen by a regulatory
authority as mentioned earlier.
(ix) The MOA of BARC states that the first rules and regulations
shall be framed by the first Directors of the company. All
or any changes thereafter have to be approved by two thirds
of the Members at the General Meeting. It is important that
the initial rules are framed in a manner that reflects the
commitments made in the vision document and the concerns
expressed above.
XI. ELECTRONIC MEDIA MONITORING CENTRE (EMMC)
127. During the course of the examination of the subject, the
Committee were given to understand that the EMMC had become
operational. It was reported that the EMMC, to begin with would be
able to perform automated recording of atleast 100 TV channels
simultaneously in order to monitor the contents of the programmes
telecast thereby keeping a track of the violation of the Cable Television
Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules made, thereunder.

35
128. During evidence, the Secretary , Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting further apprised the Committee as under,
“ The Ministry has set-up an Electronic Media Monitoring  Centre
in Delhi, which, at present, has the capacity to simultaneously
monitor 120 channels which can be increased to 300 channels. The
staff requirement is being put in place. I believe this is a good
step for monitoring the content of television channels. This method
of monitoring the channels, alongwith a regulatory mechanism in
place would take care of the issue of undesirable content on
Television.”
129. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of
the effectiveness of EMMC in tackling the manipulation of the
programme content by the rating agencies. In reply, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting stated that as per the terms and
conditions of the permission granted to TV channels for their operation
in India, every channel was obliged to maintain a record of its
programming content for a period of 90 days. Many a times complaints
were received against TV channels for the violation of Programme
and Advertising Codes prescribed under the Cable Television Network
(Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder and it became
difficult to get the information/footage from the TV channels as well
as to verify the accuracy thereof thus, remedial action got delayed.
With the setting up of EMMC, the Government would have the entire
footage at its command and any violation by TV channels could be
immediately seen by the authorities entrusted with monitoring these
channels and a report sent to the Government on the basis of which
action could be initiated. However, even the continuous monitoring of
all broadcast content of the channels might not be able to tackle the
alleged manipulation by rating agencies as EMMC was not envisaged
to do an audit of the agencies involved in the rating system.
130. Not satisfied with the reply , the Committee asked during
evidence whether EMMC was adequately equipped to give proper
reports with regard to any violation and whether it had got the capacity
to only monitor the programmes or go into all the details. In reply, a
representative of the Ministry submitted,
“The purpose of the Centre is to be able to monitor the
programmes at random, log them for at least a period of three
months. Then, there will be auditors in the Centre who would be
physically watching it. Where they find that there is, prima facie ,
violation of the programme code or advertising code, that may be
reported to the Ministry.”

36
131. Asked to specifically indicate whether EMMC alone would
be able to monitor the violation of content/programme/advertising
code, another representative of the Ministry stated,
“The Electronic Media Monitoring centre is seen as a part of the
overall vision of the Ministry with respect to content regulation. It
has three main pillars—one, a Regulator, second the Legislation
and the third is the Electronic Media Monitoring Centre. If we are
able to put together all these three pillars in place, then, we have
a really effective system. As of now, without a Legislation and a
Regulator, we have still been able to go ahead with the Electronic
Media Monitoring Centre since we have made the plan provision
and everything.........”
132. Responding to a query of the Committee regarding any
statutory backing for such a monitoring system, the representative of
the Ministry further stated,
“In the proposed Broadcast Services (Regulation) Bill, we have
given adequate powers to the Regulator to act on the basis of the
reports generated. “
XII. INTERNATIONAL PRACTICES
133. As regards the salient features of the system in vogue for
television audience measurement and for working out the viewership
ratings in some of the developed/developing countries in the world,
the Committee were informed that the television ratings business could
broadly be classified into three major forms of organisations i.e. Own
Services (OS), Media Owner Contract (MOC) and Joint Industry
Committee (JIC).
134. Asked to elaborate, it was stated that Own Service (OS)
systems were services which were set up on an entrepreneurial basis
and wholly owned and managed by a research supplier. The
advantages of this type of system were stated to be speed in terms of
both set-up and ongoing charges and improvements and no long term
cost commitment by users since they simply bought the data they
required. Countries like Hungary, Russia, Spain, USA, Brazil, India,
Japan and Thailand followed the OS system.
135. The Media Owner Contract (MOC) was stated to be a system
where one or more broadcasters (and occasionally an agency or
advertiser) commissioned research from a research supplier. The
commissioners owned the data and they made all the decisions

37
although there was usually a technical committee, which represented
other users. Countries like Germany, Norway, France, Canada, Australia
and Hong Kong reportedly followed the MOC system.
136. The Committee were then informed that the Joint Industry
Committee (JIC) was a system where the research was commissioned
by a committee representing all interested parties i.e. broadcasters,
advertisers and media agencies. The committee owned all the data
and made all the decisions regarding it. Countries like United Kingdom,
Finland, Italy, New Zealand and South Africa reportedly followed the
JIC system.
137. In reply to a specific query, it was stated that there was no
fixed structure about the method which audience rating organisation
followed and the choices had been made to suit Country specific
measurement issues and needs. Largely, these were not regulated
though Government bodies. The Broadcasters Audience Research Board
(BARB) in the United Kingdom, the Media Rating Council (MRC) in
the United States of America, the Bureau of Broadcast Measurement
(BBM) in Canada, the Australia Television Audience Measurement
(OZTAM) in Australia and the South African Advertising Research
Foundation (SAARF) in South Africa remained responsible for the
television audience measurement/TRP system in their respective
countries.
138. Asked to compare the television audience measurement in
India with that of the above-mentioned countries, it was replied that
unlike in the United Kingdom where the sample panel of households
was fully representative of all the television households across the
whole of the United Kingdom, in India, the sample households did
not reflect the entire rural areas and the States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
North East and Jammu and Kashmir. Moreover, even urban areas from
where data was collected involved only 148 towns having population
of more than one lakh. Similar was the situation in Australia where
the households were recruited to OZTAM’s panel via a large-scale
establishment survey. The Committee were further informed that in
Italy, the AGCOM (the Italian Communication Independent Authority)
had prescribed guidelines on TV , radio and press audience measurement
which were so far absent in India.
139. When the Committee desired to hear the views of Prasar
Bharati regarding replication of any international practices in India,
they replied that BARB, the existing model in the UK, would be suitable
for India as well as Doordarshan, subject to it being implemented
properly .

38
140. Asked to furnish reasons for the suitability of BARB to Indian
conditions, Prasar Bharati submitted that BARB model could take care
of several of the existing inadequacies in the Indian ratings system
due to the following reasons:—
(i) The design of the BARB panel is proportionate to the
population and sufficient care is taken to avoid any
geographic and demographic disproportionality. The Panel
homes are selected via a ‘multi stage, stratified and
unclustered’ sample design.
(ii) The selected panel ensures representation from different
segments of the society-such as age, social class, sex, working
status, number of people in the household etc.
(iii) BARB conducts an annual establishment survey with
52, 500 interviews. This survey is conducted by random
probability which means that any household in UK has an
equal likelihood of being selected for the interview.
(iv) BARB measures both analogue and digital delivery via cable,
satellite and terrestrial distribution. It covers home viewing
systems like VCRs/DVD players etc. Multiple TV sets are
also measured in the sample homes.
(v) BARB out sources, professional research companies for panel
design and quality control, establishment survey and for
recruiting and metering the panel, data collection and
processing. This ensures that no single agency performs the
complete task and helps to avoid monopoly and potential
manipulation of data.
(vi) BARB provides daily overnight data and weekly
consolidated data. Throughout the day, the meter system
stores all viewing data undertaken in all the sample
households. Each night, between 2 am and 6 am, the data
processing centre automatically downloads the data from
every panel home. Overnight, minute by minute television
viewing data is transferred to the clients by the next day
morning. The weekly data which includes home viewing
systems known as the “BARB Gold consolidated data” is
used by industry and trade.
141. In the same context, IBF stated that it would be better not to
replicate a system operating in a particular Country. The idea of having
a joint industry body of the three contending industries—broadcasters,
advertising agencies and the advertisers had been evolved and IBF

39
supported this idea. However, BARC was expected to benchmark its
organisational and operational plans to global best practices in the
television audience measurement space.
142. When the Committee asked the Ministry to furnish their views
to make the process more broad based and in consonance with the
social ethos, it was replied that the extant system might result in
disproportionate weightage being given to viewership pattern of a small
sample of viewers. Since there were only two agencies in India and
their sample size was limited to about 7000 (TAM Media Research)
and 6000 (a-MAP) metered homes, roughly 30000 respondents from
large urban centres represented about 120 million viewers assuming
5 members per household. As such, the rural areas and towns with a
population less than a lakh, which constituted over half the population
having access to Cable & Satellite channels and three-fourths of those
getting DD channels, did not get measured at all. This has led to a
never-ending race for attracting more eyeballs in the process of which
Doordarshan channels had got relegated to the background. The matter
had, therefore, been referred to TRAI for their recommendations, on
the receipt of which further view would be taken.
XIII. REGISTRATION OF RATING AGENCIES
143. In response to the Committee’s query as to whether there
was any stipulated system of formal registration laid down for the
individuals/agencies carrying out television ratings, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting stated that no such system of registration
existed. It was further stated that the Ministry had felt the need of a
more transparent and credible system and therefore the matter had
been referred to TRAI.
144. When the Committee desired to hear the views of TRAI on
having a well laid down system of registration for the agencies desirous
of/providing ratings services, it was replied that this was one of the
issues posed for consultation. Based on the views expressed, TRAI
will make appropriate recommendations in this regard.
145. Commenting on the issue of registration of rating agencies,
Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation submitted that a well laid out
system of registration and proper guidelines would be required to
ensure transparency and independence of the rating agencies. It was
further stated that the eligibility criteria for registration of rating
agencies should be expertise, experience, plurality of the regions and
viewership, financial stability etc. Further, clients should not be
permitted to have cross holdings with profit making rating agencies.

40
146. In the same context, IBF stated that some of the key
qualifications criteria for a research agency desiring to participate in
any of BARC’s global tenders will be:—
(i) Proven international experience of syndicated television and
other broadcast media audience research.
(ii) Current mandate for such research in at least one significant
market (Measuring a television audience greater than
10 million homes).
(iii) Willingness to submit to BARC’s stringent research design,
oversight and audit requirements.
147. The Joint Industry Committee (JIC) viz. BARC will be
incorporated as a “not-for-profit” organisation, preferably a company
registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act or a society registered
under the provisions of Societies Registration Act.
XIV . INDEPENDENT AUDIT SYSTEM
148. The Committee were informed that the possibility of TV
audience measurement being manipulated could not be fully ruled
out as the data with respect to ‘people meters’ was kept completely
secret by the rating agency. The Committee were further apprised that
due to the monopolistic regime which was prevalent in the extant
viewership ratings system, there was a greater cause for suspicion that
such an eventuality might arise especially when there was no
independent audit of the rating system.
149. Asked to state the feasibility of putting an independent audit
system in place and the role and responsibility of the Ministry in this
regard, it was replied that putting in place an independent audit system
could be one of the mechanisms to check manipulation of the
measurement system as was being done in a number of other
Countries. It was further stated that due to the increasing number of
concerns voiced over the alleged manipulation of the system, the
Government decided to seek the recommendations of TRAI before
formulating any comprehensive policy/guidelines in this regard.
150. The Indian Broadcasting Foundation in their submission to
the Committee stated that none of the two existing private rating
systems passed on the transparency yardstick, as there was no
independent oversight/audit by either the industry or the regulator.

41
151. Asked to state the action taken by the IBF, as the apex body
of the broadcasters, to improve the ratings system, it was replied that
IBF as the apex industry association of the broadcasting industry, played
a critical role in building consensus on major issues across the industry.
It has been in regular touch with the two agencies at the level of the
Secretariat and has also arranged Board level interactions with them.
The expansion of the TAM Media Research’s ratings panel was at
least partly motivated by IBF’s insistence. In the meeting of the Board
of Directors of IBF on 10 January, 2007 it was decided that TAM
Media Research should give a presentation as to how it would cover
mandatory Conditional Access territories. Further, IBF asked TAM
Media Research for rotation of people meter homes at periodic intervals
to have a level of transparency in the system. The other ratings agency
i.e. a-Map was also asked to give a presentation on the same line.
152. The Committee then desired to know from the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting as to whether the rating agencies by
virtue of their holding pattern or by virtue of their interest or activities
in collaboration or partnership with any other stakeholders in the
broadcasting/advertising sectors could be assured as having a vested
interest or stake in these activities. In reply, it was stated that
apprehensions of these nature had been raised time and again regarding
agencies conducting television viewership ratings, their origin and
identity, etc. Certain posers have been made as to where is their head
and tail and whether there is any conflict of interests with their
corporate. TV viewership ratings have generated immense interest
among the people who are the actual stakeholders. The Committee
were further apprised that so far ratings were supposed to be pertinent
only to the business interests of advertisers and TV channels. Today,
it is everybody’s case that the rating of TV viewership should preferably
be done by independent agencies and that the process should be
transparent and that since it was bound to have a say on the scope
and schedules of contents of channels, the perspective of larger public
interest could not be ignored. Further, initiatives were required by an
independent group to examine issues to do with standards, regulation
and technology of ratings, because in the context of fast evolving
technologies at the viewer end and emergence of a second ratings
agency, it was high time that a range of issues involved were further
deliberated by those who have been seriously involved in shaping
national policies as well as by those who were actually using the
ratings. The Ministry concluded that to take a holistic view, the matter
has been referred to TRAI for their recommendations.

42
XV . GRIEV ANCES REDRESSAL FORUM
153. The Committee were informed that there was no system of
redressal of grievances for either the stakeholders in the industry or
for the viewers against the rating agencies.
154. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the
views of Prasar Bharati, it was replied that as there was no specific
forum or regulatory body to redress the grievances and take corrective
measures, Prasar Bharati had taken up the issue directly with TAM
Media Research and had also apprised IBF that the extant ratings
system of TAM Media Research was not representative of the whole
audience. It was further stated that IBF had been urged by Prasar
Bharati to work towards a more broad based rating system.
155. The Committee then desired to hear the views of IBF on the
matter. In reply, it was stated that the system of redressal of grievances
for the stakeholders in the industry as well as for the viewing public
was an issue which the proposed BARC would urgently tackle and
might institute a mechanism, which could be similar to the Consumer
Complaints Council (CCC) of the Advertising Standard Council of India
(ASCI).
156. Asked to comment upon the mechanism proposed by IBF for
the redressal of grievances against the rating agencies, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting stated that IBF had been in existence
since long. However, no view had been taken by it for putting in
place a system for regulating the television audience measurement. It
was only after the issue was taken up by the Ministry and meetings
were called that non-existence of any grievances redressal mechanism
had caught the attention of IBF and the formulation of BARC had
been proposed. This was still at the proposal stage and the details had
not been made available to the Ministry as to what would be the
mechanism by which redressal of grievances against the rating agencies
could be tackled by BARC. The Ministry, therefore, expressed their
inability to make any further comments on the issue.
XVI. GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
157. During the course of the examination of the subject, the
Committee were given to understand that in view of the apparent
lack of transparency, authenticity and credibility of the existing system
of ratings and the striking apathy of these ratings towards the choice
and sensitivities of the viewer, Government’s intervention was needed
to set the matter right. But IBF in their Memorandum submitted to

43
the Committee stated that as the industry was spending close to
Rs. 50 crore on the rating services with broadcasters picking up most
of the costs, there was a burning need for the rating systems to open
up their act and agree to industry oversight either directly or through
an auditor of repute and experience in this domain. As such, the
governmental involvement in regulating the viewership ratings system
was not at all desired. Moreover, due to the ratings, viewers were not
affected but the stakeholders were. IBF, therefore, was of that view
that the Government’s involvement in the television ratings system
might affect the business environment of the stakeholders.
158. The Committee specifically desired to know how the
intervention of Government would affect the business environ of the
stakeholders and whether the viewer had not any significance stake in
the programmes broadcast. In reply, IBF stated that all content was
designed with the viewer in mind. Program content affects ratings
and not the other way around. If a particular variety of content appeals
to a particular type of audience, it will attract members of that
audience, thereby showing high ratings with that audience. It is widely
accepted that cricket and films are the two most popular forms of
entertainment in India. This is regularly reflected in the ratings that
they garner on television. Holding the ratings responsible for audience
taste is an inversion of cause and effect. Advertisers base their
advertising spends on what the ratings tell them about who is watching
what. This expenditure is the principal revenue source for most
broadcasters. Advertising and media agencies draw a sizable portion
of their revenue from commissions earned on such expenditure. Ratings
came into existence to provide an objective yardstick on which the
participants in this value chain could base their price recovery. Thus,
while rating certainly measured what audiences did, its economic effect
was only felt by the three stakeholder communities viz. broadcasters,
advertisers and advertising agencies.
159. The Committee enquired, having not been successful to make
the existing rating system transparent and reliable, how IBF would
ensure to stem the rot by the industry alone and without the
intervention of the Government especially in view of some Court
judgments on the desirability of Government intervention. In reply,
IBF stated that while it was clear that the coverage provided by the
ratings agencies was inadequate to represent all segments of the
television viewing population, there had never been any suggestion of
mischief or delinquency about any aspect of their functioning. Media
research and planning is a science and best left to be handled by
experts. IBF further stated that improved research benefited consumers

44
through better targeting of messages etc. All the stakeholders in the
process: advertisers, advertising agencies and broadcasters, had been
seized of the inadequate coverage, opacity and absence of accountability
in the current system but there had never been any accusation of any
impropriety leveled against them. These three stakeholders, as
represented by the three relevant apex industry bodies, accounted for
almost all the revenue earned by the two agencies. Once they came
together on the common platform of BARC, any ratings agency would
ignore them at its own peril. For rating agencies, present and future,
BARC in effect would yield both a very powerful carrot and a very
big stick: the opportunity of earning or being excluded from
significantly larger revenue from a much expanded future panel. IBF
also stated that audience measurement was one form of syndicated
market research. Its findings were objective, not normative. It did not
form or change audience tastes, it only measured and reported on
them.
160. In the context of the desirability of Government intervention
in the television audience measurement/ratings issues, the Prasar
Bharati, responding to a query of the Committee, opined that the
industry needed to be regulated so as to protect the interest of all the
stakeholders including the viewers.
161. Asked to state categorically the views of Prasar Bharati on
the desirability of Government intervention in the viewership ratings
system, the CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted during evidence,
“I am definitely of the view that there should be some kind of
governmental oversight.”
162. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting on the matter, it was replied that the
Government did not fully agree with the views of IBF that there should
be no Government intervention in the ratings matter and that the
industry should be left to sort out the issue among themselves. It was
further stated that broadcasting services and ratings system were now
more than a decade old in India, yet the deficiencies had not been
addressed which necessitated Government intervention so that the
rating system was made more transparent, representative and
realistically responsive to public opinion. Therefore, TRAI being an
organisation with the expertise in the broadcasting sector, had been
requested to give their recommendation on the matter.
163. Commenting on the matter, TRAI stated that the issue was at
the centre of their consultative process on the subject and the Authority
would soon be finalising the recommendations in this regard.

45
XVII. REFERENCE TO THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA (TRAI)
164. After the Committee took up the subject for examination and
had its first preliminary meeting with the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting on 8 January, 2008 and pursuant to the concerns expressed
by the Parliamentarians, media, consumer groups, broadcasters etc.
the Ministry wrote a letter on 17 January, 2008 to TRAI requesting the
Regulatory Body to give their recommendations on evolving a foolproof
ratings system and various aspects relating thereto which included
minimum sample size, type of equipment, minimum coverage,
international practices, etc.
165. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of
the exclusive or concurrent jurisdiction and the exact role and
responsibility of TRAI over broadcasting and related services in the
Country. In reply, TRAI stated that the TRAI Act as originally enacted
in 1997, covered only telecommunication services. It was only in the
year 2000 that the Act was amended to give the powers to the Central
Government to notify any other service also (including broadcasting
service) as “telecommunication service” to enable TRAI to regulate
that service from the date of such notification. The chronology of events
was stated to be as follows:—
(i) Pursuant to this Amendment, the Central Government issued
a notification on 9th January, 2004, declaring broadcasting
services and cable services as “telecommunication services”,
whereby TRAI got the powers to regulate this sector also.
(II) Section 11 of TRAI Act lists the functions of TRAI. Section
11(1)(a) details the issues on which TRAI can make
recommendations (either suo moto or on request from GoI,
while Sections 11(1)(b) and 11(2) list out the functions which
TRAI has to discharge itself.
The functions which fall within the domain of TRAI are:
(a) Tariff fixation for broadcasting & cable services as well as
telecom services.
(b) Interconnection among service providers.
(c) Quality of Service benchmarks at consumer end.
166. The Committee were further informed that unlike the telecom
sector where TRAI was able to lay down the regulatory roadmap and
nurture the sector right from the time this sector was opened up, the
broadcasting & cable TV sector had proved to be more difficult because
regulatory powers were given quite late only in 2004, by which time

46
substantial legacy problems had taken deep roots. These legacy issues
were mainly the following:—
(i) High level of fragmentation (approximately 50000 cable
operators and approximately 6000 Multi System Operators)
in cable TV segment resulting in inability to generate
sufficient funds for network upgradation.
(ii) Lack of competition in the last mile cable TV operations.
(iii) Lack of addressability leading to uncertainty about subscriber
base, which in turn leads to uncertainty about revenue
streams, thus discouraging fresh investments.
167. Asked to state the action taken by TRAI to overcome the
above legacy problems and effectively discharge their responsibilities,
it was replied that TRAI had embarked upon a three-pronged strategy
to ensure the growth of the broadcasting sector. Such strategy included
bringing the consumer at the centre of the regulatory framework;
encouraging competition within and across different delivery platforms
such as cable TV , DTH, IPTV , mobile TV and HITS; and bringing
about addressibility which would remove the uncertainties about the
business models.
168.The Committee were informed that learning from the telecom
experience, TRAI had several initiatives in the Broadcasting & Cable
TV sector which are expected to result in substantial growth of this
Sector and generate sufficient competition.
169. The Committee then desired to know from TRAI whether the
reference made to them was under any Section of the TRAI Act, 1997.
In reply, the Chairman, TRAI submitted during evidence,
“……In 2004 when the Government said to treat broadcasting also
as telecom, then the carriage aspect; that is how the inter-connection
will come; how the transmission of DTH, Cable TV will come into
home, those aspects like telecom were all part of TRAI. The content
which Government by the advertisement and programme code of
the Cable Act of the Information & Broadcasting Ministry was not
entrusted to us. This subject matter is relating to content....... …..I
would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Government
did not write the letter under any Section of the TRAI Act and for
obvious and correct reason. The reason was that this subject
basically falls in the content domain. TRAI is responsible as per
the Act, for the broadcasting services which primarily mean carriage
aspect of the broadcasting......”

47
170. The Committee asked the Ministry about the rationale behind
seeking the recommendations of TRAI on a matter outside the
Authority’s domain. The Committee also asked whether any legal
opinion was obtained before making the reference. In reply, the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting stated that the television audience
measurement had a direct impact on competition in the broadcasting
sector, which was clearly in the domain of TRAI. Even in the
consultation Paper floated by it, TRAI had specified that Section 11 (i),
(iv) and (vii) of the TRAI Act, 1997 had been invoked for exercising
their powers. Thus, TRAI had domain over the competition issues
and, therefore, the Ministry had rightly made a reference to it.
171. When the Committee drew the attention of TRAI to the above
reply of the Ministry, the Chairman, TRAI responded during evidence,
“The reason for that was, there was a very strong opinion in the
Authority that this reference should be returned to the Government
because it is not our domain. We just examined and thought
perhaps it would not be appropriate. Since, we are an expert body
we must do justice. It is a national cause and somewhere it is
concerned with the consumers, subscribers. We found two sections;
sub-sections (iv) and (vii).”
172. Referring to the Chairman, TRAI’s statement that as the
reference to TRAI was not covered under the provisions of the Act, it
could well have been returned to the Government, the Committee
wanted to hear the views of the Ministry. In response, the Secretary,
of the Ministry stated during evidence,
“.......When we decided to refer the matter to TRAI, when we looked
at the TRAI provisions, we in our judgement, thought that this
would be actually adequate to allow us or to enable us to refer
the matter to TRAI. To the best of my knowledge the TRAI has
not ever formally sought that these are not adequate provisions.
But, we understand that such a thought or suggestion has come.
We definitely would like to look at it. I think we do take your
suggestion into account that we need to look at it so that in future
the TRAI is able to do so without any difficulty.”
173. On the content issue, the Chairman, TRAI stated that all over
the world the telecom regulator remained responsible for both
transmission and content aspects of broadcasting. He further submitted
during the oral evidence,
“.....We have also written to the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, rather than creating a separate regulator to please
give the content also to TRAI “.

48
174. The Committee asked the Ministry whether TRAI should be
entrusted with the content regulation also. In reply, the Secretary of
the Ministry stated,
“Once we bring in this Bill (Broadcasting Bill), once the provisions
of the Draft Bill are in place, we will have a Regulator. That will
bring in clarity on how the content is to be regulated.”
175. Asked to spell out the sanctity and enforceability of TRAI’s
recommendations in view of the grey area on the Act, the Chairman,
TRAI replied during evidence,
“The TRAI Act is very well drafted. There are two sub-sections in
which reference are made. If the Government seeks recommendations
under those sub-sections, the recommendations given by TRAI
generally have to be accepted. If the Government decides to differ
with it, then it is mandatory that the Government will send back
the recommendations to us pointing out the reasons for difference
and it will require that the Authority shall in 15 days time send
its reconsidered recommendations. They (TRAI) can reiterate their
earlier recommendation also. After that the Government is totally
free to decide on it. There is no limit on it. In other sub-sections,
the recommendations are sent to the Government and the
Government is fully competent and no second reference is
required.”
176. On the same issue, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated that so far as the enforceability of the
recommendations of TRAI was concerned, the Government could accept
or reject any of its recommendations after following due procedure. In
any case, this being a policy matter, the Government could always
enforce any such objective to promote competition in the broadcasting
Sector.
XVIII. PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY
(i) Policy Guidelines
177. The Committee were informed that no policy guidelines had
been laid down by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on
the scope, ambit and functions of the agencies involved in the television
viewership ratings. However, a reference had been made to TRAI
seeking their recommendations on the matter.
178. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of
the reasons for not putting in place a comprehensive policy/guidelines
on the issues concerning TV audience measurement in India. In reply,
the Ministry stated that hitherto ratings system remained unregulated
and no policy/guidelines were laid down by the Ministry as the ratings
system was a business activity and the Government did not normally

49
interfere in business activity unless a larger public interest was involved.
The Ministry felt that the industry would take corrective action on its
own to make it more broadbased and representative. The Ministry
further stated that the broadcasting sector had started growing in the
last five to ten years and it was only recently that concerns regarding
the alleged manipulation in TV audience measurement started being
voiced at various fora. Therefore, before coming out with a
comprehensive policy/guidelines on these issues, the Government
thought it prudent to seek the recommendations of an expert body
like TRAI.
179. The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the
statement of IBF that the stakeholders and not the viewers were affected
due to the prevalent rating system which did not form or change
audience tastes. Citing the Ministry’s statement that the Government
did not interfere in business activities unless a larger public interest
was involved, the Committee asked whether the Ministry subscribed
to the IBF’s minimum importance to the viewers and whether the
neglect of the viewers in the viewership ratings system did not involve
larger public interest. In reply, the Ministry stated that the Government
did not agree with the views of IBF and in fact the viewer was the
biggest stakeholder as he was the helpless consumer of the media diet
served to him based on the choice of a very few segmented people
meters. It was further stated that concerns had been voiced over the
increasing violence, obscenity, destruction of Indian culture, value and
system in the programmes being aired by the TV channels. Therefore,
the Government felt it necessary to increase the sample size and bring
some kind of sanity in the ratings system to safeguard the interest of
the viewers. It was in this context that the Ministry requested TRAI
to give its recommendation.
(ii) Broadcasting Legislation
180. During the course of the examination of the subject, the
Committee were informed that although the Ministry had almost
prepared 20 drafts to bring a broadcasting regulatory legislation, yet
somehow the Bill had not seen the light of the day.
181. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised
of the reasons for the Ministry not being able to bring about a
broadcasting legislation and the efforts made by them to ensure a
transparent and an effective oversight of the broadcasting sector. In
reply, it was stated that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
had been examining the issue of introducing a legislation to regulate
the operation of broadcasting services consequent upon the judgement
of the Supreme Court in the Cricket Association of Bengal case
delivered in 1995 that airwaves are public property and have to be
controlled and regulated by public authority in the interest of the
public.

50
182. The Br oadcasting Bill of 1997 was introduced in the Parliament
but lapsed. The Communication Convergence Bill, 2001 was introduced
but even this lapsed due to the dissolution of the Thirteenth Lok Sabha.
In 1995, the Cable Television Networks Act was brought in to regulate
the cable business and their operations. Most of the other required
regulations in the sector were being accomplished by issuing guidelines
such as those for Uplinking TV channels, DTH, FM Radio, Community
Radio and Downlinking etc.
183. Thereafter, attempts have been made to formulate a new draft
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill for which drafts have been
discussed with various stakeholders on a number of occasions and
last such formulation has been made available on the website of this
Ministry (www.mib.nic.in). However, no consensus has been reached
so far. The discussions were reportedly continuing and after the receipt
of comments from States/UTs, a further view would be taken.
184. When the Committee desired to know the details of the
reference and the status of the response of various States/UTs, it was
replied that after the 26th Conference of State and UT Ministers of
Information and Cinematography (SIMCON XXVI) held on
18-19 September, 2007 wherein the proposed Bill was discussed with
the States’ representatives, the Minister of Information and Broadcasting
addressed a letter on 9 October, 2007 to all Chief Ministers of States/
UTs. This was followed by a letter from Secretary MOI&B to Chief
Secretaries of all State/UT on 7 November, 2007 seeking comments of
the States/UTs Governments. Last reminder at the level of Secretary,
MOI&B was reportedly sent on 3 June, 2008.
185. Asked to furnish the response of the States/UTs, it was replied
that so far only 10 States/UTs have sent their comments on the
proposed draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill.
(iii)  Content Code
186. The Committee were informed that there had been a tendency
to use titillating clippings to attract more eyeballs which in turn gave
higher ratings to such programmes which were denigrating the Indian
ethos and culture. The Committee were further informed that the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had constituted a committee
to preview the existing Programme and Advertising Codes and the
draft Content Code formulated by this committee laid significant
emphasis on the above issues in a more stringent manner.
187. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised
of the status and salient features of the proposed Content Code. In
reply, it was stated that the committee constituted to review the existing
Programme and Advertising Codes under the chairmanship of Secretary
(I&B), had submitted its report to the Government in March, 2008, a

51
copy of which was also placed on the website of this Ministry
(www.mib.nic.in). Salient features of the report named Self-Regulation
Guidelines for Broadcasting Sector-2008 were as under:—
(i) These are in the form of principles, guidelines and ethical
practices to guide the Broadcasting Service Provider (BSP).
(ii) It will introduce greater specificity and detail with a view
to facilitate self-regulation.
(iii) Two tiers of self-regulation—BSP and Industry level with
appellate mechanism.
(iv) BSP will categorize each of their programme based on its
theme, subject-matter treatment, language and audio-visual
presentation and slot it accordingly.
(v) BSP will take reasonable steps to protect minors. They
should be vigilant in gaining an understanding of how
material shown on television could impact the development
of minors.
(vi) Categorization of all programmes under ‘U’, ‘UA’ and ‘A’
with “watershed” hours between 11.00 PM to 4.00 AM.
(vii) Themes addressed are: Crime and Violence; Sex, Obscenity
and Nudity; Horror and Occult; Drugs, Smoking, Tobacco,
Solvents and Alcohol; Libel, Slander and Defamation;
Religion and Community; Harm and Offence;
Advertisements; General Restrictions.
(viii) Separate Chapter on News and Current Affairs Programming.
188. Asked to state the efficacy of the Content Code in checking
fictitious television viewership ratings of obscene, vulgar and
objectionable TV programmes and the consequent denigration of the
Indian culture, it was replied that the issue of television ratings was
not addressed in the Content Code, however, when implemented, the
Content Code would, to a large extent, address the issues of obscenity,
vulgarity and denigration of Indian culture in the TV programmes.
189. When the Committee specifically desired to be apprised of
the monitoring mechanism evolved by the Ministry for effective
enforcement of the Content Code, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting replied that the Content Code was envisaged to be a
part of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill which inter alia aimed
to establish an independent regulator for the Broadcasting Sector,
namely, Broadcasting Regulatory Authority of India which could
effectively monitor the enforcement of the Content Code. It was further
stated that a three tier monitoring system was proposed. The first is
at the level of the channel itself. The channel was expected to monitor
content and self-regulate and also address complaints related to content.

52
It was required to appoint a content auditor for this purpose. In case
a complaint was not addressed at the level of the channel itself, the
complainant could go to a peer body to be set up by Broadcasting
Associations like IBF, IMG, NBA, etc. The third level was stated to be
that of the Regulator. The Ministry had also set up a ‘state of the art’
facility in the form of Electronic Media Monitoring Centre to monitor
the content of private TV channels on a 24 hour basis. This set up
had been recently commissioned and was likely to be made fully
functional in the near future. Based on this, the Ministry could
suo moto take action for violation of the Content Code.
(iv) Invoking Legal Provisions
190. In view of the alleged negative impact of the extant television
viewership ratings upon the programme content, the Committee asked
whether the Ministry was contemplating suitable action against the
broadcasters/channels by invoking the Cable Television Networks
(Regulation) Act, 1995. In reply, it was stated that as far as regulation
of content was concerned, the Ministry had been taking action against
the channels under the provisions of Sections 5 and 6 of the Cable TV
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 from time to time for content violation.
However, the broadcast audience measurement services did not get
covered under the aforesaid section of the Act and therefore, it was
mentioned that this sector was unregulated.
191. The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the fact
that apart from the provisions contained in the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, the Government have also been
adequately equipped under various other Acts viz. the Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986; the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986; the Cinematograph Act, 1952; the Drugs and Magic
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954; the Emblems and
Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950; the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954; the Prize Competitions Act, 1955; the Copyright
Act, 1957; the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; and the Pharmacy Act,
1948, etc. to take care of the broadcast content violations of various
types.
192. In light of the above facts, the Committee asked about the
action taken by the Ministry in the last three years under various
extant legal provisions to curb content violation. In reply, it was stated
that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting did not oversee the
implementation of all the Acts mentioned above except the
Cinematograph Act, 1952. However, the Ministry had taken action
under some of the provisions of these Acts which have been
incorporated in the Cable TV Act; for example Rules 6(1)(k) of the
Cable TV Rules, 1994 relating to denigration of women through
depiction of her figure, form or body, etc. was contemporaneous with
the provisions of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)

53
Act, 1986. Similarly Rule 7(1) stated that advertising carried in the
cable service shall be so designed as to conform to the laws of the
country and should not offend morality , decency and religious
susceptibilities of the subscribers. Rule 7(4) of the Cable TV Rules,
1994 referred to Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and Rule 7(5) made
reference to special or miraculous or super natural qualities of products
advertised, which again was contemporaneous with the provisions of
the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.
193. It was further stated that during the years 2005, 2006 and
2007, 221 show cause notices were issued to various channels and
action (orders/advisories/warnings/scrolling of apology) was taken in
67 cases.
194. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
submitted during evidence,
“I would like to mention here that even now, under the present
legislation also, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting does
take cognizance of the content and it does take suo moto  action
under the rules framed under the Cable Act. We have formed an
Inter-Ministerial Committee which takes cognizance of the
complaints that are received and action is taken on the basis of its
recommendations. I would like to report that seven channels have
been taken off the air permanently, four were barred for a specific
period of warning and advisory or scrolling of apology orders
were issued in 78 cases. But we would like to strengthen our
hands. That is why, we have proposed the Content Code which
amplifies or gives more details to the Advertising as well as the
Programme Codes.”
195. She further stated,
“……….We are all concerned with the content being shown on
television and various things are contributing today including the
fact that there is no regulation, there is no content
monitoring……………so, we do feel that there is a need to bring
in some kind of regulation. We have drafted a Content Code and
we have drafted a Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill. It is under
discussion with various stakeholders and we hope that it can be
put into effect soon…………………. The Electronic media
Monitoring Centre will assist us in monitoring and taking action
on whatever we find is not in keeping with the Advertisement
Code and the Programme Code.”
196. The Committee querried about the need for a fresh legislation
when Advertisement, Programme and Content Codes were already
existing. In reply, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated,
“It will further strengthen our hands.”

54
197. Supplementing the Secretary, another representative of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted,
“There are no penal provisions which are backed by the authority
of law. Apart from taking the channel off air, which is a very
extreme step, we are giving them advisories and warnings and
scrolling of apologies, but the trend is, they are going to court and
challenging these things by saying that the Government does not
have the power to do so.”
198. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting added,
“The present Act does provide Clause 5 wherein we have the
provision for Programme Code and under Clause 6 an
Advertisement Code. Under the rules framed under this Act there
is an inter-Ministerial Committee in the Ministry that looks into
complaints or it takes suo moto action. But there are certain
limitations. The Programme Code and the Advertisement Code
are not elaborate enough, do not cover all aspects nor detailed
enough nor specific enough. Moreover, there are limitation on the
penal provisions.”
199. Not convinced, the Committee drew the attention of the
Ministry to Section 16 of the Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995 and asked about the provisions contained therein. The
representative of the Ministry replied,
“It deals with punishment for contravention of provisions of the
Act which is imprisonment and fine.”
200. The Committee, then, pointed out that when there were already
penal provisions in the Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995
itself, what was the need for further penal provisions. The
representative of the Ministry replied,
“Punishment for this contravention or penalty can be enforced
through the court of law only.”
201. Another representative of the Ministry submitted,
“On the limited question of applicability of Section 16, actually,
this whole Act is essentially applicable to the cable operators. The
offence is done by actually the broadcast service providers, that is
the channels. So there is a legal problem in invoking Section 16.”
202. The Committee retorted that the Ministry were not hamstrung
in any way in taking action against the cable operators and would not
the action against the cable operators ultimately affect the broadcasters/
channels. In reply, the representative of the Ministry stated,
“Indirectly, I agree with you.”

55
203. The Committee, then, asked whether the Ministry were trying
to say that the extant penal provision in the Cable TV Act was
inadequate and they were trying to make it more comprehensive
through the Broadcasting Bill. In reply , the Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, submitted,
“Yes. That is the right position. We are making it more
comprehensive.”
204. The Committee enquired whether framing some fresh rules,
till such time the draft Bill was finalised, would not be the easiest
possible method to deal with the contraventions extant of the Content
Code. The Secretary , Ministry of Information and Broadcasting replied
that, it was exactly on the same lines in which the Ministry was
working. Another representative of the Ministry supplemented,
“………………..There are a plethora of Acts, regulations and
guidelines. Some of them have got the strength of the legislation
and law behind them. Many are administrative decisions and
administrative regulations……………. They have an inherent
weakness that they are not legislation, which the Hon. Chairman
has pointed out and we really need to do that. We are actually in
the process of doing this. In fact, we are in the process of notifying
it.”
205. In response to a suggestion of the Committee that while
framing rules the Ministry ought to keep in mind the fact that such
rules were made equally applicable to both big and small broadcasters/
channels/operators, the Secretary of the Ministry stated,
“Well, in any policy that we frame we will definitely keep this in
mind.”
206. The Committee, then, pointed out that although the system of
television audience measurement in India had been in existence in
some form for about one and a half decade, yet no effort had been
made by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to look into
the validity of the system till this Committee decided to examine the
subject. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
responded,
“Sir, we completely agree with your observation and we are
thankful to the Committee.”
207. Asked to state specifically, whether the Ministry should have
taken some action much before, the Secretary, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting admitted,
“I agree, Sir.”

56
PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
I. INTRODUCTORY
1. Amongst the innumerable inventions by mankind, television
with its presence in billions of homes and establishments, is
indisputably serving as the greatest tool for information and
knowledge dissemination and entertainment. In the Indian context
where the Entertainment and Media (E&M) Industry is showing an
overall compoundable growth of 18 per cent, a rate much higher
than the growth rate of economy, the television is the bulwark of
revenue generation, with about 360 channels and 120 million TV
homes (2007 estimates). The Committee note that as per the industry
estimates the size of E&M Industry in India was Rs. 51,300 crore
out of which Rs. 22,600 crore or 40 per cent is the contribution of
television segment. Out of Rs. 22,600 crore, advertising on television
alone contributes Rs. 8,000 crore. The Committee have been given to
understand that as per industry estimation, the E&M Industry would
more than double to Rs. 1,15,700 crore by 2012. The television
advertising figures would also reportedly increase by two and a half
times to Rs. 20,000 crore. With such impressive industry growth
projections, the system of television audience measurement/ television
ratings points called TAM or TRP in common parlance, which have
been in existence on a commercial basis in the country since 1993,
have acquired added significance. This is due to the fact that rightly
or wrongly, the advertisers, the broadcasters and the production
houses i.e. the three key players in the broadcasting services, construe
the television viewership ratings as an indication of the viewers
likes and dislikes. The reported increase of 29 per cent in the number
of advertisers on TV between 2003 and 2007, the increasing number
of channels, the options of various delivery platforms, the
technological innovations and friendly policy environments have
further intensified the competition and clamour to retain the viewers
by the broadcasters and advertisers. As the ratings paradoxically are
now determining the spending pattern on advertisements, programme
scheduling and content besides influencing the pricing of channels,
little heed is being paid to the viewers interest.
2. The Committee find that initially the only data available
and followed for viewership ratings was collected by Doordarshan’s
Audience Research Unit through its 40 Kendras and 100 All India
Radio Stations. This was known as Doordarshan Audience Ratings
(DAR). Such collection of data through DART commenced in 1988,

57
continued upto 2001 and was later revived in 2004. So far as the
entry of private agencies in the field of audience research in India
is concerned, the Indian National Television Audience Measurement
(INTAM) was established in 1994 for conducting television ratings.
Another rating agency called TAM Media Research was formed in
1998. In 2001, both INTAM and TAM Media Research were formally
merged. In 2004, another private rating agency namely the Audience
Measurement and Analytics Limited (a-Map) came into existence but
its commercial operations started only in February, 2007. Thus, TV
ratings on a commercial basis are now being done in India by the
two private agencies i.e. TAM Media Research and a-Map. This very
commercial angle of the ratings has become a subject of much
concern and debate. The Committee’s examination of the subject
through several study visits and a series of interaction with the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India, Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation, the
Indian Broadcasting Foundation, eminent TV and film personalities,
other stakeholders as well as the agencies involved in ratings, has
revealed several grey areas in the extant audience measurement
system that inter-alia  include lack of transparency, authenticity,
credibility, objectivity and competition with scant respect to the likes
and sensitivities of the viewing public. These have been commented
upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
II. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF TELEVISION VIEWERSHIP RATINGS
3. The main aims and objectives of the ratings system are to
indicate the popularity of the TV channels, provide information about
the TV viewing habits of the viewers from different socio-economic
background and to help advertisers and corporate media planners in
selecting the right media at the right time to reach the targeted
audience. But the Committee are highly concerned to note that due
to various shortcomings, which have been explained in detail
subsequently, the extant viewership ratings carried out by the
agencies do not appear to conform to the aims and objectives for
which the system has been evolved. Briefly put, there is inadequate
representation of the plurality of the platforms, regions, rural areas
and small towns to reflect a correct picture. Then, there is lack of
transparency and reliability in the methods adopted by the rating
agencies for selection of the households as they maintain
confidentiality of the ratings data which may promote induced
viewership and data tampering. The Committee also find that there
is every possibility of biased ratings due to the presence of the
interested parties in the ownership of the rating agencies, absolutely
no competition in the rating services and non-availability of real
time ratings through unobtrusive means. The absence of any
independent audit of the methodology adopted by the rating agencies
also acts as a detriment to the aims and objectives of the ratings

58
system. Most importantly, the likes, dislikes and interests of the
viewers largely remain unaddressed by the extant ratings system.
The Committee are surprised to observe that although the extant
ratings system has been in existence for more than a decade and
half, yet it does not conform to the aims and objectives because of
the above said serious lacunae. They, therefore, exhort the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting to put some effective mechanism
in place in consultation with all the stakeholders including the
industry, to overcome the impediments narrated above so that the
extant ratings system takes care of the interests of all the stakeholders
including that of the viewers, complying thereby with the aims and
objectives of TV ratings.
III. COVERAGE
4. In so far as the reach and spread of rating studies is
concerned, the Committee note that TAM Media Research conducts
its rating studies in all the States except Jammu and Kashmir, Bihar,
Jharkhand and the North-Eastern States a-Map covers all the States
barring those in the North-East. So far, TAM Media Research has
covered 148 towns having population of more than one lakh and
a-Map has covered 87 towns on similar population criterion. What
greatly perturbs the Committee is that both the rating agencies have
no coverage whatsoever of the rural areas which account for
70 per cent of India’s population. The Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, Prasar
Bharati and the Indian Broadcasting Foundation in their deposition
before the Committee have also expressed similar concerns. Even
one of the rating agencies has been candid enough to admit that
both of them leave a large part of India, particularly rural India,
uncovered. The other agency has cited resource constraints as a reason
for the non-coverage of all the States and the rural areas. The
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, during the
course of oral evidence has informed the Committee that TAM Media
Research has informed that it is going to shortly commence ratings
in Bihar, Assam and Jharkhand. The Committee feel that the ratings
system can neither be comprehensive nor foolproof without covering
all the States and most importantly without reflecting the preferences
of rural India. Even if all States are covered by the two rating
agencies, their system with its strong urban bias would continue to
remain questionable, as it would not reflect the choice of the rural
audience. The Committee, therefore, recommend that some via media
should be explored by the Ministry to ensure adequate coverage of
the rural areas in the Country by the existing two rating agencies
and those who may join in future. This would not only eliminate
the pronounced urban bias of the sample but also make the ratings
truly reflective of the viewing preferences of a cross section of
viewers of the Country.

59
IV . METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLE
5. The Committee note that as of now the rating data generated
by viewers is collected by the two rating agencies through electronic
devices placed in selected households in a few urban areas of the
Country. This electronic device, which is attached to the television,
automatically records the data required to indicate viewers
preferences. The size and contours of the sample are determined
with the help of educational standards, socio-economic and socio-
cultural groupings, demographics, cable and satellite channel
penetration, availability of terrestrial channel, household size, time
spent on watching television, channels watched, power cuts, cable
operators charges, etc. The devices used by both TAM Media
Research and a-Map are analog and digital technologies compatible.
As of now TAM Media Research has about 7000 devices installed in
households in 148 towns having population of 1 lakh and above.
Similarly, a-map has about 6000 devices in 87 towns with a
population of 1 lakh and above. In the case of TAM Media Research,
some households have two devices installed as they have more than
one TV . As stated previously, both agencies do not cover several
States and the entire rural India. Sample size-wise coverage of the
1.13 billion population of the Country works out to about
0.005 per cent. The Committee can very well imagine how reflective
and truthful such a minuscule sample size can be of a Country as
socio-economically diverse and large as India.
6. Coming to the rotation aspect of the household, in the sample
TAM Media Research does not have any clear cut procedure for
rotation of sample households. a-Map does have a rotation policy of
10 per cent households being rotated every six months. Meaning,
thereby, that they would take atleast 5 years to rotate the original
sample. The Committee are sure that such a situation is not at all
conducive to a vibrant, impartial and comprehensive sampling and
the research data sanctity in such circumstances cannot be ensured.
Apart from it, this very small sample size limits the reflection of
plurality of platforms, regions, rural areas and small towns, etc., by
excluding almost 70 million of the 120 million TV homes. The extant
measurement methods are inadequate to cover the new technologies
like, digital TV , HDTV , interactive television and digital video
recorders. Resultantly, the ratings are distorted, the broadcasters and
others fix with these distorted ratings due to TINA factor has made
the monopolistic tendencies of one of the players flourish
unrestricted. It has also encouraged creation of barriers and use of
various unfair and anticompetitive measures to distort the
competition.
7. The Committee also note a serious drawback in the present
measurement system. The reporting of data by TAM Media Research

60
is on a weekly basis. a-MAP’s reporting is done on overnight basis
and is in consonance with the rating practices in several other
Countries. The Committee also note that the present trend in the
world is way ahead with a system of real time ratings through
unobtrusive means being in vogue. All the above narrated facts lead
to the conclusion that the methodology and sample of the ratings
agencies operating in the Country is deficient on several counts
including abysmally low size of sample, outdated methodology, lack
of representative character, elements of manipulation, lack of
reliability and transparency and a disdain for the socio cultural ethos.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate steps to not only eliminate the shortcomings in the extant
ratings system but also ensure that it is in tune with the best in the
world.
V. COMPATIBILITY OF EXTANT RATING TOOLS WITH THE
EMERGING TV VIEWING TECHNOLOGIES
8. The Committee observe that although a-Map has claimed that
its technology is capable to handle free-to-air, cable, CAS and DTH
modes of television reception, yet according to Prasar Bharati the
rating systems presently being used by TAM Media Research and
a-Map are not in sync with the new/emerging technologies such as
Digital TV , HDTV and IPTV . The Regulatory Authority has also
opined that new technologies like portable people meter and Return
Path Data which are getting introduced, should also be taken
advantage of by the rating agencies to ensure that the emerging
technologies/delivery platforms being made available for television
viewing are also measured. The Committee feel that if the ratings
systems do not keep pace with the emerging new technologies/
delivery platforms, they would not be able to cover the viewers
through different platforms. Such inadequacy of the measurement
methods to capture new television viewing through HDTV , IPTV ,
etc. will only lead to distortion of the ratings system. The Indian
Broadcasting Foundation has also expressed similar views. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that in view of the pressing need
for making the ratings systems compatible with the emerging
technologies, the rating agencies should use such technology, which
is capable of capturing data over different platforms, as mentioned
above so as to ensure a holistic view of the viewers preferences. It
is also imperative that the measurement devices are continuously
upgraded in tune with the changing scenario.
VI.  MONOPOLY
9. The Committee note that the television audience measurement
system in India has not been regulated so far and as such there are
no restrictions on the entry of new agencies to undertake rating of
television viewership. Intriguingly, however, there is a virtual

61
monopoly in the extant ratings industry. According to the Ministry,
apart from the prohibitive cost of equipment/rating meters, the other
major reasons for more entities not entering the system reportedly
appear to be the entry barriers, use of various unfair and anti-
competitive measures by the existing players, apprehensions in the
minds of the broadcasters, etc. Prasar Bharati is of the opinion that
the industry has so far preferred to maintain status quo and not
been inclined to encourage the new players. As a result, there is
always a skewed picture of the ratings done, which helps the cable
and satellite channels in getting a larger share of the advertising
pie. Prasar Bharati has also opined that cross holdings by the stake
holders in the bodies that make up the rating agencies is another
reason why the new players are likely to face unfair barriers.
According to IBF, the broadcasters themselves are not satisfied with
the existing monopoly in the ratings system. The Ministry’s statement
that they have taken suo moto measures to motivate new players to
come in the field of TV ratings does not convince the Committee
because in a span of fifteen years, only two players have entered
the field. Most importantly, the second player started its rating studies
as late as in 2007. The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead
of leaving things to take their own course, the Ministry in tandem
with the industry and all other stakeholders, should resort to effective
measures to address the above said impediments that discourage the
new players to enter the rating studies so that there is sufficient
competition and the system becomes fair and truly reflective of the
viewers’ choice.
VII. TRANSPARENCY/RELIABILITY/AUTHENTICITY OF THE
RATINGS SYSTEM
10. According to some eminent TV and Film personalities, with
whom the Committee interacted during their study visits to different
places, electronic people meter system devised and used by the rating
agencies is not transparent, reliable and authentic as it is secretly
placed in a select few households in major urban areas. The Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting are also of the same view. The two
rating agencies claim that the system adopted by them is transparent
from an operational point of view although they do not reveal the
household names or addresses where the people meter is placed.
Both the rating agencies admitted before the Committee that they
presently do not follow any well laid down system of frequent
rotation of people meter homes. One of the rating agencies agreed
albeit reluctantly before the Committee that it gives inexpensive gifts,
as a token of its gratitude to the people in whose houses meters are
installed. The Committee find that the Ministry, despite in agreement
over the lack of transparency in the extant ratings system, have done
nothing concrete to bring in transparency except referring the matter
to TRAI. The Committee cannot but express their serious displeasure

62
over the lack of transparency, reliability and authenticity persisting
in a system, which has been in vogue since the last one and a half
decade. The Committee feel that although revealing the household
names or household addresses where people meters are installed
may impede the rating studies, yet disclosure of the data and
methodology/process adopted by the agencies for the system, in detail
and in clear terms, to the clients, users and the public is, imperative
for fair and transparent studies. The Committee also desire that
periodical rotation of the panel homes by the rating agencies should
be adhered to for conducting objective and unbiased ratings.
Moreover, in order to bring in transparency and to make the whole
system encompassing, reliable and authentic, the rating agencies,
besides disclosing the sample selection and size, the frequency of
the panel home rotation and the margin of statistically acceptable
error, should also acknowledge and highlight the comments and view
points of the users of the rating data as well as that of the viewing
public.
VIII. IN-HOUSE RESEARCH IN PRASAR BHARATI
(i) Doordarshan Audience Ratings (DART)
11. The Committee note that Doordarshan has its own Audience
Research Unit (ARU) since its inception with the objective of
providing research inputs, planning and broadcasting need-based
programmes and improving the effectiveness and usefulness of these
programmes to the people of the Country. The Unit conducts pre-
telecast and post-telecast studies viz. Audience profile and assessment,
viewership surveys, evaluation/impact studies as per the requirement
at the Directorate and Kendra levels. In addition to the above research
works, the Unit undertakes analysis of voluntary feedback received
through viewer’s letters, press comments, preparation of programme
composition, Annual Reports, etc.. The Committee find that the ARU
conducts television ratings only for Doordarshan channels in both
the rural and urban areas with the help of the representative samples.
Doordarshan is, however, utilising the data of both its in-house
audience research as well as of private agencies to meet its
requirements of ratings. The Committee feel that a greater caution
should be exercised by Doordarshan while utilising the data of the
private agencies in the fulfilment of its own requirement of rating
studies, because the methodology adopted by the private rating
agencies is allegedly not above board and purely commercial in
nature, besides suffering from a number of shortcomings, as
discussed earlier. The onus, therefore, lies with the Ministry and
Prasar Bharati to bring in some kind of synergy to ensure that
Doordarshan is not deceived while utilising the data of the private
agencies and its audience research system becomes broad based.

63
(ii) Methodology of DART
12. The Committee observe that in DART, daily viewership data
is collected through diary from representative panel members
covering both rural and urban audience of the Country. In order to
disseminate the television ratings, the reports by the in-house research
unit are prepared on weekly basis at the Kendra level and submitted
to the concerned Kendras as well as the Directorate for use by the
programme planners, producers, policy makers and marketing
managers to plan commercial broadcast and to improve the quality
of the programmes. This panel diary system is reportedly cheaper,
transparent and reliable and as useful as the people meter system
from utility perspective. So far as the accuracy of the measurement
is concerned, the Committee are informed that the panel diary system
lags behind the people meter system, which records viewership data
minute by minute procured through latest software for analysis and
reporting. However, the Committee find that although the people
meter system gives accurate measurement, yet it is reportedly not
foolproof, too costly to be acquired by a single broadcaster and too
complicated for the layman’s understanding unlike the panel diary
system. As discussed elsewhere, the people meter system lacks
transparency as it is not open to the broadcasters/user agencies or
any other agency including the Government besides promoting
television media’s role for commercial gains. Thus, in nutshell, the
panel diary system adopted by Doordarshan, despite its limitation
in accuracy, is miles ahead of the people meter system on issues of
transparency, reliability and authenticity. The best aspect of the
system is that it penetrates the rural areas and keeps in view the
television media’s role in larger public interest. The Committee are,
therefore, of the view that efforts should be made to explore the
possibility of making the studies of the panel diary system as
accurate as the people meter system, if it is at all so, failing which
Prasar Bharati and the Ministry should chalk out an alternate method
containing all the positive features already existing in DART plus
the accuracy of measurement factor making the ratings system of
Doordarshan the best one.
(iii) Tie-up with the Private Agencies
13. The Committee note that Doordarshan pays Rs. 1.60 crore
annually to TAM Media Research for supply of television ratings on
weekly basis for urban audiences of cities/towns having more than
one lakh population and covered by the agency. Although Prasar
Bharati is on record that the ratings of TAM Media Research are
highly prejudiced against Doordarshan channels and programmes,
yet it has tied up with TAM Media Research for getting feedback
on ratings studies of urban areas. One of the main reasons for the
compulsion on Prasar Bharati to have a tie-up with TAM Media

64
Research, inspite of the obvious weaknesses in the ratings system
and its biased attitude against Doordarshan programmes, has been
stated to be the acceptance of the ratings of the TAM Media Research
as the basis for the programmes scheduling, content tailoring, etc.
by the broadcasters, advertisers and the production houses under
the aegis of IBF. Secondly, in January 2007, TAM Media Research
expanded its coverage from 70 cities to 148 cities. As this expansion
was strictly urban and restricted to Cable and Satellite homes, it
resulted in significant decrease in the ratings of DD channels/
programmes. But surprisingly, when TAM Media Research was
requested by Doordarshan to enlarge the coverage so as to cover the
rural audiences, the private agency expressed its inability to do so
on the plea of scarcity of funds and asked for an additional amount
of
Rs. 7.75 crore from Doordarshan. The Committee, however, find that
Prasar Bharati has been approached by the other private rating agency
i.e. a-MAP for a customized rural panel to unlock the true value of
Doordarshan. a-MAP alongwith another new player in the rating
business i.e. Television Monitoring and Research (TMR) has made
presentations to Prasar Bharati to cover parts of rural areas and for
channel mapping so as to reflect/increase the reach and effectiveness
of the Doordarshan channels. The Committee find that the total
capital cost for the project in the rural areas as per the tie-up made
with a-MAP would be approximately Rs. 9.01 crore with an annual
recurring cost of Rs. 4.65 crore. The entire cost is to be borne by DD
and a-MAP’s remuneration for setting up the panel would be ten
percent of the capital Outlay. The Committee also find that the TMR
proposal envisages a one time meter cost of Rs. 50,000 per set.
Additionally, around 100 nodes can be set up at different places at
a monthly cost of Rs. 7000 per node. The best feature of TMR is
that its technology permits the monitoring of all the channels being
broadcast by MSOs/Cable operators/DTH, etc. which would enable
Doordarshan to see whether the cable operators are showing select
DD channels on the required bands with requisite quality of signals
as specified in the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.
The Committee find much worth in the proposals of a-Map and
TMR, which seem to be economically viable and intend to reflect
Doordarshan’s reach and increase its effectiveness in the rating
studies. As a-MAP proposes to cover small towns and rural areas,
the Committee feel that it would be more representative of the Indian
television audience and boost DD viewership ratings resulting in a
greater share of the advertisement market. Similarly, TMR’s
monitoring of the violation of mandatory showing of DD channels
by the cable operators would help DD to take corrective measures
which would translate into higher viewership and revenue and
facilitate better functioning of the Public Service Broadcaster. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Prasar Bharati should seriously
consider the proposals of a-MAP and TMR, more so when TAM
Media Research has conveyed its inability to correctly reflect the

65
popularity of Doordarshan channels and programmes on the plea of
fund constraints.
(iv) Status of DART
14. The Committee note that according to the Ministry the panel
diary system adopted by Doordarshan for its in-house rating studies
notwithstanding certain limitations, is as useful as the people meter
system adopted by the private rating agencies and DD has been
exhorted to broadbase the DART system. But according to Prasar
Bharati, DART has lost its credibility and it may not be worthwhile
to expand the DART experiment. So much so that Prasar Bharati is
contemplating investment in installation of people meters in rural
areas and some kind of joint venture as an alternative to DART.
The Committee fail to reconcile the apparently contradictory
statements and deprecate the Ministry’s casual response and
unacceptable plea that if Prasar Bharati says DART has outlived its
utility, then the Ministry has no comments to offer as Prasar Bharati
is an autonomous organisation. The Committee are well aware of
the autonomous character of Prasar Bharati. They equally understand
the Ministry’s role and responsibility and desire that at least such
callousness on the part of the Ministry should be avoided while
deposing before any Parliamentary Committee or furnishing written
replies to their questionnaire. The Committee also recommend that
Prasar Bharati, instead of just mentioning that DART has outlived
its utility/credibility, should formulate certain concrete proposals in
consultation with the Ministry so that an alternate rating system can
be worked out. The Committee further find that the diary based
system is still prevalent in many countries to supplement the ratings
done through the electronic meters. As such, the panel diary system
has to co-exist with and supplement the people meter method, as
also recognised by TRAI.
(v) Advertisements for Doordarshan
15. According to Prasar Bharati, if one of Doordarshan
programmes has a television audience measurement rating of seven
and another has a rating of five, the programme which is lower in
rating sometimes gets more advertisement because advertisers are
conscious of Doordarshan’s reach and use it as a leverage. Prasar
Bharati has also submitted that at any given time if ratings of all
cable and satellite and non-cable and satellite homes are taken into
consideration, the eyeballs caught by Doordarshan programmes will
be far more than the private channels. But TAM Media Research
does not project it. Similar apprehensions and concerns about the
credibility of the ratings done by TAM Media Research have been
conveyed to the Committee by eminent cine and TV personalities
and various stakeholders. The Committee while generally in

66
agreement with the above contention of Prasar Bharati would also
like the Broadcasting Corporation to ponder about its own role in
the matter. Had Doordarshan programmes been so popular as
compared to that of the private channels, they would have been
able to attract more advertisers. Such apprehensions of the Committee
have been corroborated by the plea taken by CEO, Prasar Bharati
that Doordarshan does not really consider revenue as the main motive
when he was asked to state whether Doordarshan was getting
sufficient revenue by way of advertisements as compared to the
private channels. The Committee acknowledge that Doordarshan, as
a Public Service Broadcaster, has certain social obligations to fulfil
and has to cater to the entire spectrum of Indian population. But
simultaneously Doordarshan has to find ways and means to generate
adequate resources, which can be effectively utilised to augment the
infrastructure and produce quality programmes enabling it to compete
with the private channels. And getting sufficient advertisements could
be one such effective means. The Committee, therefore, exhort the
Ministry and Prasar Bharati to realise the ground realities and take
all possible measures to ensure that Doordarshan gets adequate
advertisements and its viewership ratings soar.
(vi) Quality of Programmes
16. The Committee note that although the quality of programmes
of Doordarshan has gone up to some extent, as claimed by
Prasar Bharati, yet there is scope for much improvement. The
Committee are particularly concerned to find that despite producing
some good programmes, Doordarshan does not have an effective
marketing strategy to attract the advertisers. They feel that in order
to sustain competition from the private channels and increase the
ratings of Doordarshan programmes, it is imperative that apart from
improving the quality of programmes telecast by Doordarshan to a
marked extent, an effective marketing and promotion strategy also
needs to be evolved. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry and Prasar Bharati should take appropriate measures to
substantially improve the quality of programmes produced/telecast
by Doordarshan and put a vibrant and effective marketing strategy
in place so that more advertisers are attracted enabling Doordarshan
to generate substantial revenue and remain a strong contender in
the television viewership ratings race.
(vii) DART—Fund Allocation and Utilisation
17. The Committee observe that during the years 2006-07 and
2007-08, there were shortfalls in expenditure to the tune of Rs. 6.45
lakh and Rs. 13.69 lakh respectively by Doordarshan Audience
Research Units when compared to the allocations made as per the
final estimates. Such shortfalls have been attributed to not

67
undertaking the surveys by Srinagar DDK due to non-conducive
atmosphere there and staff constraints in Delhi, Mumbai, Nagpur
and Bhubaneshwar DDKs. For the financial year 2008-09, a proposal
for fund allocation of Rs. 2.26 crore has been made to enable the
Audience Research Unit to conduct the rating studies. According to
the Ministry, although there was no paucity of funds during the
years 2006-07 and 2007-08, yet a higher allocation for DART would
lead to increase in the advertising revenue. The Committee do not
agree with the apparently contradictory statements of the Ministry.
They fail to understand the basis on which a higher allocation for
DART would be justified when there have been shortfalls in the
expenditure of the units, as mentioned above. In other words, a
higher allocation for DART will lead to an increase in the advertising
revenue only if the Audience Research Units are able to effectively
and optimally utilise the earmarked amount. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should urgently look towards
removing the impediments like staff constraints that are being faced
by various DDKs and are hampering the rating studies so that they
are able to conduct the required number of studies. Consequently a
higher allocation can be considered to increase the samples of the
study and to acquire computers and software for data tabulation
and analysis for comprehensive rating studies.
(viii) Staff Strength
18. The Committee note that out of the total staff strength of 64
of Prasar Bharati’s Audience Research Unit including its 18 Field
Units, there were 30 vacancies as on 22 May, 2008 as a result of
which the assigned functions of the Unit are managed with much
difficulty. The Committee further note that the proposals of
Prasar Bharati have been sent to the Ministry to fill up the existing
vacancies on promotion for various categories of posts, as there is a
ban on direct recruitment. Prasar Bharati, on the basis of their
proposals hope that the promotional posts would be filled up in the
2008-09 fiscal. Further, a committee has been appointed to do a cadre
review of the audience research staff so as to remove the bottlenecks
in the existing structure. Prasar Bharati also proposes to combine
the present staff of the Audience Research Units of the All India
Radio and Doordarshan to overcome the staff constraints. In view of
almost 50 percent vacancies in the Audience Research Unit including
the Field Units and a ban on direct recruitment, the Committee urge
the Ministry to expedite the approval of the proposals submitted by
Prasar Bharati so that the promotional posts are filled up in the
2008-09 fiscal itself. The Committee also desire that the cadre review
of the audience research staff be completed at an early date in order
to remove the bottlenecks in the existing structure and enable the
ARU to function efficiently. The Committee feel that the proposal to

68
combine the present staff of the ARUs of AIR and DD is a measure
in the right direction as the synergy would strengthen the research
team at the headquarters and help deployment of sufficient staff in
different field units as per the requirement.
19. The Committee would also like to add a word of advice for
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting since they have chosen
to harp on Prasar Bharati being an autonomous body. Like most of
the other problems besetting the Prasar Bharati, the staff strength in
the Audience Research Unit and the consequent shortcomings in its
performance is because the Government have unduly delayed
decisions on the organisational and financial restructuring of the
Public Service Broadcaster. These have been discussed and
recommended upon by the Committee in several of their Reports,
the latest reference being in their 47th, 55th, 60th and 63rd Reports
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha). Notwithstanding the stopgap arrangements
being resorted to by Prasar Bharati to tide over the problem, the
solution to all the hardships being faced by Prasar Bharati would be
a thing of past if the issues pending with the Government are
expeditiously decided upon. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Government to settle all matters pertaining to the Public Sector
Broadcaster without any further delay.
IX. FORMATION OF AN OVERSIGHT AND CONTROL BODY BY
THE INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS
20. The Committee note that the leading industry associations
of the broadcasters, the media and the advertising sector have jointly
formed the Broadcasting Audience Research Council (BARC) to
oversee and control the television ratings system in India. A not-for-
profit-body under the Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 it has
equal representation from the Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA),
the Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) and the Advertising
Agencies Association of India (AAAI). The basic thrust of BARC for
ratings research, purportedly, will be that it should be truly
representative, robust and transparent. For this purpose the Council
is planning to adopt the BARB model of United Kingdom and is in
the process of conducting baseline studies to know the TV viewers
universe. Once these are over, the Council intends to conduct ratings
research for its members by awarding contracts to rating agencies.
While taking note of this development, the Committee have a feeling
that this very belated initiative by the industry associations is
something akin to the reference made by the Ministry to TRAI. As
soon as the Committee commenced the scrutiny of the TV ratings
system, and sensing that the concerns of the Committee, the
parliamentarians, the media, the consumer groups, the public at large
would now compel the Government to take action to regulate the
ratings business, the industries concerned have come up with this

69
idea of having a body of their own. Their insistence on keeping the
Government out of the regulatory mechanism; not nominating the
Public Service Broadcaster amongst the directors of IBF on BARC
Board in the most crucial formative years of the Council; the general
reluctance of the Prasar Bharati management to be a part of IBF
because of ethical issues involved; the Ministry’s admission that they
would not be having any say in the composition/functioning of
BARC; there being no interaction or interface with the Government
pre and post formation of BARC; the cross industry and converging
industries stakes; the asymmetrical voting pattern in BARC, with
four directors of IBF having only one vote being ranged against
four directors each of AAAI and ISA having two votes and the
portends of IBF being outvoted every time on crucial matters; the
asymmetrical voting strengths being compounded by the injudicious
corpus sharing between IBF, AAAI and ISA in the ratio of 80:15:5
when all three have equal rights and powers; the conflict of interest
amongst IBF’s members; there being no clear cut acknowledgement
or demarcation of the role of the Public Service Broadcaster in the
scheme of things inspite of it being the largest in terms of its reach
and spread and also being entrusted with the mandate of public
service, which is quite diverse from the highly commercial interests
of other players involved; the lopsided funds contribution model;
the virtual exclusion of viewers interest by the IBF during their
candid admission before the Committee that ratings do not affect
viewers but the stakeholders, etc., are all pointers towards the fact
that the ‘voluntary’ act of formation of BARC by the industry
associations has everything but public interest in mind. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should consider
these developments very carefully and with a fine toothcomb so
that the ratings business does not continue unregulated and
unfettered and in its present form under a different banner.
Notwithstanding the endeavours of some of the stakeholders, the
Committee desire a comprehensive action plan from the Ministry on
this crucial matter without any further delay.
X. ELECTRONIC MEDIA MONITORING CENTRE (EMMC)
21. The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting have set up an Electronic Media Monitoring Centre in
Delhi which at present has the capacity to simultaneously monitor
120 channels which can be increased to 300 channels. According to
the Ministry, many a times complaints are received against TV
channels for the violation of Programme and Advertising Codes
prescribed under the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995
and the rules framed thereunder and it becomes difficult to get the
information/footage from the TV channels to verify the accuracy
thereof. With the setting up of EMMC, the Government will have

70
the entire footage at their command and any violation by TV
channels can be immediately seen by the authorities entrusted with
monitoring these channels and a report sent to the Government on
the basis of which action can be initiated. But the Committee are
concerned to find that even continuous monitoring of all broadcast
contents of the channels by EMMC is not sufficient to tackle the
alleged manipulation of the rating studies by the agencies as the
Monitoring Centre is not envisaged to do an audit of the agencies
involved in the ratings system. Moreover, the Committee are given
to understand that EMMC alone would not be able to effectively
monitor the violation of the content/programme/advertising codes as
it is just one of the three pillars in the Ministry’s overall vision, the
other two being a Regulator and a Legislation. In other words, if
the Government are able to put all the three pillars in place
simultaneously, then only an effective monitoring system can emerge
to check any violation of the content/programme/advertising codes
as well as manipulation of the rating studies by the agencies. The
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take up the
matter on priority basis at the appropriate fora so as to complete the
envisaged picture and ensure that the aims and objectives for which
EMMC was set up are effectively fulfilled.
XI. INTERNATIONAL PRACTICES
22. The Committee note that internationally the television ratings
business can broadly be classified into three categories i.e. Own
Services (OS), Media Owner Contract (MOC) and Joint Industry
Committee (JIC). Own Services are set up on an entrepreneurial
basis and wholly owned and managed by a research supplier. The
MOC is a system where one or more broadcasters (and occasionally
an agency or advertiser) use to commission research from a research
supplier. JIC is a system where the research is commissioned by a
committee representing all the interested parties i.e. broadcasters,
advertisers and media agencies. At present, countries like India, USA,
Russia and Spain follow the OS system, whereas Germany, France,
Norway and Canada have adopted the MOC system. Similarly,
countries like United Kingdom, Italy, New Zealand and South Africa
follow the JIC system. The Committee find that all the three systems
have their own advantages and disadvantages. As such, there is no
fixed structure about the method, which the international audience
rating organisations follow and the choices have been made to suit
Country specific measurement issues and needs. The Broadcasters
Audience Research Board (BARB) in the United Kingdom, the Media
Rating Council (MRC) in the United States of America, the Bureau
of Broadcast Measurement (BBM) in Canada, the Australia Television
Audience Measurement (OZTAM) in Australia and the South African
Advertising Research Foundation (SAARF) in South Africa remain

71
responsible for the television audience measurement in their
respective countries. According to Prasar Bharati, the existing model
in the UK i.e . BARB will be suitable for India as well as
Doordarshan, subject to it being implemented properly. But IBF in
their submission have opined that it will be better not to replicate
a system operating in a particular country. However, IBF supports
the idea of having a joint industry body of the three contending
industries viz. broadcasters, advertisers and the advertising agencies.
The Committee are of the opinion that instead of blindly following
any particular model, a transparent system in consonance with the
global best practices and the social ethos of the Country should be
evolved to protect the interest of not only the broadcasters, advertisers
and media agencies but more significantly that of the most important
stakeholder i.e. the viewer.
XII. REGISTRATION OF THE RATING AGENCIES
23. The Committee note that till date no stipulated system of
formal registration has been laid down for the agencies carrying out
the rating studies. In view of the need for a more transparent and
credible system, the Ministry have referred the matter to TRAI.
According to Prasar Bharati, a well laid out system of registration
and proper guidelines will be required to ensure transparency and
independence of the rating agencies. The Broadcasting Corporation
has further opined that the eligibility criteria for registration of rating
agencies should be expertise, experience, plurality of the regions
and viewership and financial stability and clients, should not be
permitted to have cross holdings with rating agencies. According to
the Indian Broadcasting Foundation, the key qualifications for a
rating agency should be proven international experience, willingness
to adhere to BARC’s stringent research design, oversight and audit
requirements, etc. The Committee tend to agree with the views
expressed by the Public Service Broadcaster and IBF and recommend
that the Government should work out modalities so that the rating
agencies are registered and fulfil all the eligibility criteria suggested
by Prasar Bharati and IBF, sans proven international experience
proposed by IBF, as it would be a restrictive clause for many aspiring
players. The Committee specifically desire that with a view to
maintaining operational and ethical standards as well as unbiased
reporting, the rating agencies should not have any stakes in the
broadcasters, advertisers and advertising agencies and vice versa .
XIII. INDEPENDENT AUDIT SYSTEM
24. The Committee have a lurking suspicion that due to the
monopolistic regime prevalent in the extant ratings system and in
the absence of any independent audit of the system, the possibility
of TV audience measurement being manipulated cannot be ruled

72
out, especially when the data is kept completely secret by the rating
agencies. The IBF’s admission before the Committee that none of
the two existing private ratings systems passes the transparency
yardstick as there is no independent audit/oversight by either the
industry or the regulator is highly perturbing. The Ministry in their
submission have agreed that putting in place an independent audit
system, as is being done in a number of other countries, can be one
of the mechanisms to check manipulation of the audience
measurement. The Committee feel that the extant system of television
viewership ratings has not become confined only to the business
interests of the broadcasters, advertisers and advertising agencies but
the larger and fundamental public interest has been totally ignored
inspite of the fact that the rating studies have a definite say on the
programme contents and schedules. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that there should be comprehensive, mandatory and
periodical audit of the functioning of the rating agencies/system
carried out by independent, qualified and expert auditing firms to
bring in a semblance of transparency in the ratings system and to
ensure that the manipulations against larger public interest are
eliminated.
XIV . GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL FORUM
25. The Committee are surprised to note that inspite of a plethora
of user/consumer centric measures available to stakeholders in several
industries, there is no specific forum or regulatory body to redress
the grievances of the stakeholders and the viewers against the rating
studies/agencies. In the absence of any grievances redressal forum,
Prasar Bharati has urged IBF to work towards that direction. IBF on
its part has submitted that the proposed BARC will urgently tackle
the issue and may institute a mechanism similar to the Consumer
Complaints Council (CCC) of the Advertising Standard Council of
India (ASCI). The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have
stated that although IBF has been in existence since long, yet it was
only after the issue was taken up by the Ministry and meetings
were called, that non-existence of any grievances redressal mechanism
has caught the attention of IBF and the formulation of BARC has
been proposed. The Ministry have also expressed their inability to
make further comments on the issue as the details of grievances
redressal mechanism have not been made available to them. The
Committee do not appreciate the attitude and statement of the
Ministry as instead of engaging in blame game the Ministry
themselves should have taken some pro-active measures long ago to
facilitate establishment of some complaints/grievances redressal
mechanism. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to
take up the matter urgently at the appropriate fora and ensure that
an effective mechanism is put in place to handle the complaints/

73
grievances against the shortcomings and deficiencies in the ratings
system brought to notice by the viewers, stakeholders, users,
consumer organisations, etc.
XV . GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
26. The Committee note that presently there is no intervention
by the Government in the extant ratings system and the industry is
left to itself to sort out the issue. According to the Ministry, as the
deficiencies of the television viewership ratings system have not
been addressed as yet, despite it being in place for fifteen years, the
intervention by the Government is needed to set the matter right.
Prasar Bharati has also opined that there should be some kind of
governmental oversight of the ratings system and the industry needs
to be regulated so as to protect the interest of all the stakeholders
including the viewers. But according to IBF, any governmental
involvement in regulating the ratings is not at all desired as it may
affect the business environment of the stakeholders. Downplaying
the importance of the viewers, IBF has contended that due to the
ratings, viewers are not affected but the stakeholders are; advertisers
base their advertising spend on what the ratings tell them, this
expenditure is the principal revenue source for most broadcasters;
advertising and media agencies draw a sizable portion of their
revenue from the commissions earned on such expenditure and thus
while ratings certainly measure what the audiences do, it’s economic
effect is only felt by the broadcasters, advertisers and advertising
agencies. The Committee are in absolute disagreement with the
contention of IBF and would like to make it clear in no uncertain
terms that viewers have the largest stake in the ratings system. And
the ratings system in vogue in utter disregard to the viewers’
sensitivities and preferences is promoting misuse of the television’s
platform in the spread of violence, vulgarity, crime, sex,
sensationalisation and blind imitation of the western culture, ignoring
India’s great cultural traditions and values. All this is being done in
order to attract viewership, especially the vulnerable groups, gain
popularity and earn revenue. Thus, IBF’s contention that viewers are
not affected due to ratings is unacceptable to the Committee as
economic interest of certain classes cannot and should not be given
precedence over the social ethos of the masses. The Committee have
a feeling that perhaps this sort of purely commercial attitude of the
apex industry bodies like IBF laced with a striking apathy towards
the viewing public has resulted in the system not improving despite
it being in existence for so many years under industry regulation. It
is, therefore, high time the Government intervened in the matter
and put in place some sort of governmental oversight/regulation on
the television ratings system to make it credible and accountable to
the choice and sensitivities of the viewers and prevent misuse of

74
the television media’s role, protecting thereby the Country’s rich
culture, tradition and social ethos.
XVI. REFERENCE TO THE TELECOM REGULATING AUTHORITY
OF INDIA (TRAI)
27. As stated previously in the Report, the system of television
audience measurement has been in existence in the Country for last
one and a half decade, functioning unrestrained and unchecked in
the interest of a few and with utter disregard to the genuine
preferences and choices of the viewers. Unfortunately, however, the
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting which is mandated with the
task of overseeing broadcasting services in the Country had never
in these past fifteen years thought of any intervention in the matter.
It was only after the Committee had its first personal interaction
with the Ministry on 8 January, 2008 and gave a bit of their mind
on the goings on in the television ratings business, that the Ministry
woke up from slumber and asked TRAI on 17 January, 2008 to give
their recommendations on the system of television audience
measurement in the Country. For all these fifteen years this gross
inaction of the Ministry enabled a single rating agency to have a
virtual free run to monopolise the ratings business. Thus, without
any competition, transparency and accountability, the system of
audience measurement instead of painting the large canvass of
viewers preferences became a tool to have a decisive say in the
content of programmes. The result is that channels have been dishing
out programmes which are neither reflective of the preferences of
common man nor in consonance with the social ethos or the diversity
of a Country like India. The reference to TRAI by the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting, in the opinion of the Committee was a
knee jerk reaction in response to the Committee’s ongoing
examination and the mounting concerns and dissatisfaction being
expressed by media, consumer groups, broadcasters, other stake
holders, etc..
28. The Committee have also pondered over the question of
legality or otherwise of the reference made by the Ministry to the
regulatory body. They tend to agree with the contention of TRAI
that as per the TRAI Act, the Regulatory Body is responsible for the
broadcasting services, which primarily mean carriage aspect of
broadcasting while the subject matter of television audience
measurement falls in the content domain. That the Government did
not invoke any section of the Act while making the reference to
TRAI further strengthens this belief. The Ministry’s subsequent
clarifications about the reference being covered under Section 11 (i),
(iv) and (vii) of TRAI Act, 1997 merely because their invocation had
been mentioned in the context of the reference by TRAI while
floating the Consultation Paper on the subject also does not cut ice.

75
TRAI had categorically informed the Committee during their oral
evidence that there was a very strong opinion in the Authority to
return the reference to the Government, as it did not fall in their
domain. However, they retained the reference considering it a national
cause and because of its presumed linkage with consumers/
subscribers. And in order to facilitate this they had to find out and
invoke sub sections (iv) and (vii) of Section 11 of the Act.
29. The Committee also note with deep regret that TRAI has
written to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting that rather
than creating a separate regulator, the content may also be assigned
to them. But the Ministry, who have with much alacrity referred the
ratings business that has a profound bearing on content to TRAI,
have taken a stand before the Committee that there will be a
regulator for the purpose once the Broadcasting Bill becomes a law.
While there is a lot of merit in the logic of TRAI to have both the
carriage and content aspect under them for a holistic and
comprehensive approach, the Ministry’s stand suffers from several
infirmities and is unnecessarily delaying a well laid out oversight
of content being broadcast. The Ministry’s stand is also in contrast
of their assurance before the Committee that they would look at it
(content related issues) so that in future, TRAI is able to do so
without any difficulty. The Committee, therefore, desire that in view
of the ground situation and till a final view on the draft Broadcasting
Bill emerges, regulation of content, which is governed by the
Advertisement and Programme Code of the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, should be assigned to TRAI without
any further delay.
XVII. PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY
(i) Policy Guidelines
30. The Committee find the callous and indifferent attitude of
the Ministry towards the deleterious effects of the manipulated
viewership ratings of the broadcast content inexplicable. For a decade
and a half, the Government have remained a silent spectator to the
surfeit of violence and obscenity, the gradual denigration of Indian
culture, social ethos and values system under the specious plea that
the ratings system, hitherto, remained unregulated and no policy/
guidelines have been laid down by them as the ratings system is a
business activity and the Government do not normally interfere in
business activity unless a larger public interest is involved. The
Ministry also remained blissfully smug under the notion that industry
would take corrective action on its own to make it more broadbased
and representative. At the cost of sounding repetitive, the Committee
would state that with almost 100 per cent geographical coverage by
TV of a Country having a population of 1.13 billion and 120 million

76
TV homes how larger a public interest is further required to convince
the Ministry that the rating system in vogue is not merely a business
activity. Moreover, the draft Broadcasting Bill which by the Ministry’s
own admission has been drafted twenty times since 1997 and has a
lot to say on broadcast content, ought to have given vital inputs to
the Ministry about the goings on in the ratings business, more than
a decade ago to make them sit back and take appropriate corrective
measures. The Ministry, however, in their micawberish hope felt that
the industry would take corrective steps on its own and did nothing.
The Committee consider this deliberate inaction on the part of the
Ministry a gross failure and would like them to come up with
comprehensive policy/guidelines in the matter without any further
dithering so that something is done to insulate the hapless viewers
from undesirable content being aired by the channels.
(ii) Broadcasting Legislation
31. The Committee are highly perturbed to note that a suitable
legislation on broadcasting is yet to see the light of the day despite
several efforts of the Government during the last eleven years. Way
back in 1995, the Supreme Court pronounced that airwaves are public
property and have to be controlled and regulated by public authority
in the interest of the public. The Broadcasting Bill, 1997 was
accordingly introduced by the Government in the Parliament, but it
lapsed. Another attempt was made when the Convergence Bill, 2001
was introduced but even this lapsed with the dissolution of the
Thirteenth Lok Sabha. With the Governments efforts including
preparation of 20 drafts of the legislation not bearing any fruits, the
ground situation today is that the broadcasting services have a system
of oversight in bits and pieces. We have an Act to regulate Cable
networks and a surfeit of guidelines to regulate uplinking of TV
channels, DTH, FM Radio, Community Radio, downlinking, etc. This
is not at all a happy situation. Isolated legislations and guidelines
on some aspects of a major service cannot be a substitute to a self
enabling and comprehensive legislation covering the entire gamut
of the activities of the concerned service.
32. The Committee, however, have a nagging feeling that the
Ministry’s approach towards this important matter lacks the requisite
seriousness. Such prolonged consultations exceeding more than a
year with various stakeholders on a legislation which is already
hanging fire for more than a decade now are not only delaying the
matter but also proving detrimental to the biggest of all the
stakeholders, the public and the public interest. The Committee,
therefore, exhort the Ministry to complete the consultations with the
various stakeholders immediately and make sincere efforts to fructify
a self enabling, people friendly and comprehensive legislation on
broadcasting services without wasting further time.

77
(iii) Content Code
33. The Committee note that a committee of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting headed by the Secretary of the Ministry
has conducted a preview of the existing Programme and Advertising
Codes and have formulated Self-Regulation Guidelines for the
Broadcasting Sector. These have been submitted to the Government
in March, 2008. These drafts Guidelines reportedly have addressed
to a large extent the issues of obscenity, vulgarity and denigration
of Indian culture in the TV programmes. Though the said committee
of the Ministry did not deliberate upon the system of ratings, but
the Committee feel that if these Guidelines are able to effectively
put a check on obscenity, vulgarity and violence and the denigration
of Indian culture in the broadcast content, the manipulative practices
inherent in the present ratings system will be automatically curbed
to a large extent, flourish as they do primarily on such objectionable
contents. The Committee, therefore, desire that the draft Guidelines
should be processed and finalized by the Government urgently so
that they are in the realm of implementation without any further
loss of time.
(iv) Invoking Legal Provisions
34. Time and again during the examination of the subject by the
Committee, the Ministry took shelter behind the inadequacy of Cable
TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 in not covering the broadcast
measurement services. It was only when the Committee pointed out
that the Act had comprehensive penal provisions for content
regulation and the Ministry could have by the means of content
regulation rendered several malpractices in the ratings system
infructuous, that the Ministry could appreciate the exact scope and
ambit of this Act. Apart from the Cable TV Networks (Regulation)
Act, 1995 the Committee found that there is an array of legislations,
which could have been invoked by the Ministry to regulate content
and advertisements of the channels. These include the Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986; the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986; the Cinematograph Act, 1952; the Drugs and
Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954; the
Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950; the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; the Prize Competitions
Act; the Copyright Act, 1957; the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the
Pharmacy Act, 1948. Sadly, however, during the years 2005, 2006 and
2007, a mere 221 notices were issued to defaulting channels and
action like orders, advisories, warnings, scrolling of apologies, which
don’t count for much, was taken in 67 cases. The Committee are
pained to observe this lack of action or rather will on the part of
the Ministry on a matter of high national importance over the last

78
so many years. Inspite of so many laws, to deal with all types of
violations in the broadcast content, in existence, the Ministry have
abysmally failed to invoke them and take deterrent action against
the violators. The specious pleas that the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting is not the administrative Ministry for these
legislations and the Ministry could act more decisively with their
own legislation, which has remained elusive till date, are totally
untenable. The Committee rank this as another failure of the
Ministry, which facilitated the rot to set within. The Secretary’s
admission before the Committee about not much being done by the
Ministry in the last fifteen years only goes to corroborate this belief
of the Committee. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry should
atleast now act more  purposefully and professionally to have an
effective oversight of the broadcast content within the framework of
the existing laws.
35. To sum up, the Committee find that even after being in
existence for more than one and half decade, the extant television
viewership ratings system suffers from a slew of shortcomings which
include lack of transparency, authenticity, credibility, accountability,
competition and the serious limitations of small sample size and
their impact on content and scheduling of programmes with scant
regard to the choice and sensitivities of the viewers. The purely
commercial attitude of the industry and its exclusive focus on the
interest of only three stakeholders namely the broadcasters,
advertisers and advertising agencies relegating the most important
stakeholder i.e. the viewers to the background has prevented the
ratings industry to address the shortcomings effectively. The inaction
of the Ministry, even after admitting that some governmental
oversight is needed to regulate the industry, has worsened the
situation. The Committee in the preceding paragraphs have dealt
with these shortcomings in detail and hope that their considered
recommendations will receive focussed attention of the Government,
atleast for the sake of the common viewers.
    N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

79
APPENDIX I
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Col. G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
@15. Vacant
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
* Vice Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be a member on being inducted to the Union
Council of Ministers on 7th April, 2008.
@ Vice Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal ceased to be a member on resignation from
Lok Sabha on 7th Jan., 2008. Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal was nominated to the
Committee on 5 October, 2007 vice Vishnu Deo Sai ceased to be member of the
Committee w.e.f. 30 August, 2007.

80
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
$27. Dr. C.P . Thakur
$28. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
$Nominated w.e.f. 21 May, 2008.

81
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-08)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29th January , 2008 from
1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Shri Narhari Mahato
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
10. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
13. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
14. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
15. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary

82
WITNESSES
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
1. Smt. Asha Swaroop — Secretary
2. Shri Uday Kumar Verma — Additional Secretary
3. Smt. Zohra Chatterjee — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Prawin Kumar — Director
Prasar Bharati
Shri L.D. Mandloi — DG, Doordarshan
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati to the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting briefed the Committee on the subject on ‘Television
audience measurement in India’ highlighting various issues and apsects
related to it. The members sought clarifications on several issues relating
to the subject and the representatives of Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati responded to the same. The Committee
also desired that written replies to the unresolved queries be furnished
by the Ministry at an early date.
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

83
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th June, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1950 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Shri Lalmani Prasad
7. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
9. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
10. Dr. C.P . Thakur
11. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
12. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary

84
WITNESSES
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
1. Smt. Nripendra Misra — Chairman, TRAI
2. Shri A.K. Sawhney — Member
3. Smt. Sadhana Dikshit — Pr. Advisor
4. Shri R.N. Chaubey — Pr. Advisor
Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation
1. Shri B.S. Lalli — Chief Executive Officer
2. Ms. Noreen Naqvi — Director General, Doordarshan
3. Shri Ashok Jailkhani — DDG, Doordarshan
Indian Broadcasting Foundation
1. Shri Jawahar  Goel — President, IBF, Zee Telefilms
2. Shri Chintamani Rao — Chief Executing Officer, Times
Global Broadcasting Co. Ltd.
3. Shri Paritosh Joshi — Pr esident (Adv. Sales &
Distribution), Star India Pvt.
Ltd.
4. Shri Sam Balsara — Chairman & Managing
Director, Madison
Communications Pvt. Ltd.
5. Ms. Dyananda Chaudhari — Head-Media Services of
Hindustan Unilever Limited
6. Shri N.P . Nawani — Secretary General, IBF
Audience Measurement and Analytics Limited
Dr. P .R. Shukla — Co-founder, Director
TAM Media Research Pvt. Ltd.
1. Shri L.V . Krishnan — Chief-Executive Officer
2. Shri Pradeep Hejmadi — Sr. VP Mktg. & S-Group
Advisory Services
3. Shri Sharan Sharma — VP Measurement Science &
Analytics
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of various
stakeholders on the subject ‘Television audience measurement in India’.

85
The Chairman, then, introduced  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .,
Rajya Sabha who had been nominated to the Committee, to the
members of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took evidences of the following
organizations/agencies as per time indicated theiragainst:—
Organisations/Agencies From To
1. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 1500 1615
2. Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation 1615 1725
3. Indian Broadcasting Foundation 1725 1815
4. Audience Measurement and Analytics Ltd. 1815 1910
5. TAM Media Research Pvt. Ltd. 1915 1950
Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee,
the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the
witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The representatives deposing before the Committee highlighted
various issues and aspects related to the subject through presentations/
audio-visual presentations. The witnesses also made observations/
suggestions on the issues concerning the industry/stakeholders on the
above subject and about the scope and the need to have a regulator
with a view to regulating television ratings. They also responded to
the various queries raised by the members during the course of their
presentations. The representatives were asked to send written replies
in respect to the unresolved queries to the Secretariat at an early date.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then adjourned.

86
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday , the 16th July, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1720 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Narahari Mahato
6. Col. G. Nizamuddin
7. Shri Sohan Potai
8. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
13. Shri Dara Singh
14. Shri A. Vijayaraghvan
15. Dr. C.P . Thakur
16. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary

87
WITNESSES
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
1. Smt. Sushma Singh — Secretary
2. Shri Uday Kumar Varma — Additional Secretary
3. Ms. Zohra Chatterji — Joint Secretary
4. Shri B. Brahma — Economic Advisor
Prasar Bharati
4. Ms. Noreen Naqvi — DG, Doordarshan
5. Shri U.K. Mishra — DG, DAVP
6. Shri Ashok Jailkhani — DDG, Doordarshan
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
8. Ms. Sadhna Dikshit — Pr. Adv. (FA&IFA), TRAI
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up the subject ‘Television audience
measurement in India’ for further examination and the representatives
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting responded to the
queries of the members on various aspects and issues related to it.
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired
by the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. *** *** *** ***
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

88
APPENDIX V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th December, 2008 from
1700 hrs. to 1820 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Lalmani Prasad
5. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
7. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
8. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
9. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
10. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then took up the Draft Report on ‘Television
audience measurement in India’ for consideration and adopted the
same.
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above
Draft Report in light of the factual verification of the Ministry and
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.