12
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of
the  Committee contained in their Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)
TWELFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of
the  Committee contained in their Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………


C.I.T. No. 134
Price : Rs. 21.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations  which  have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations  which  the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 23
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect  of
which replies of the  Government  have  not
been accepted by the Committee and  which
require reiteration ..................................................... 34
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in  respect  of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 44
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes  of  the  Nineteenth  sitting  of  the  Standing
Committee  on  Information  Technology (2004-05) held
on 20.01.2005.................................................................................. 45
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the  Government  on  the
Recommendations / Observations  contained  in  the
Second  Report   (Fourteenth  Lok  Sabha)   of   the
Committee ...................................................................................... 47

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P . P . Koya
9. Shri P . S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K. V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P . C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N. R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . D. T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K. L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D. R. Shekhar — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twelfth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Demands for Grants (2004-2005)” relating to the Department of
Posts.
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.08.2004
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.8.2004. The Department furnished Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report on
05.01.2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.01.2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1  March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its Second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) pertaining
to Department of Posts (DoP)
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 August,
2004 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 August, 2004.
It contained 12 recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos: 3, 5, 6, 9, 10
Total: 5
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Recommendation Nos: 4, 7, 8, 11
Total: 4
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Recommendation Nos: 1, 2, 12
Total: 3
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Recommendation Nos. Nil.
Total: Nil
Chapter-V
4. The Committee trusts that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desires that Action Taken
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
Chapter-I and the final Action Taken Notes on recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished at an
early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by
Government on some of the recommendations.
A. Gross Expenditure
(Recommendation No. 1)
6. In their Second Report the Committee had noted that the gross
expenditure under the revenue section had been increasing year after
year i.e. Rs. 5476.15 crore in the year 2002-2003, Rs. 5804.79 crore in
the year 2003-2004 and Rs. 6027.31 crore (budgeted) in the year
2004-2005. the reason for the rise was due to profile of work force
which was labour intensive so the increase in the expenditure was
due to the increase in Dearness Allowance and Dearness Relief
sanctioned to them from time to time. The other factor responsible
relating to pension payments which were made to the postal pensioners.
The pension was charged to the operating working expenses of the
Department, whereas in other Ministries/Departments it was charge
to a common level of account.
7. The Committee further noted that the working expense for the
year 2003-2004 was Rs. 5747.72 crore out of which approximately
1/5th i.e. Rs. 1107.22 crore was spent on pension. Again for the year
2004-2005, the working expanses were projected to be Rs. 6030.37 crore
out of which Rs. 1215.00 (approx 1/5th) were spent on pensions.

3
8. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the department
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and the
Planning Commission to treat pension payments as a separate common
head as in the case of other Ministries which would substantially reduce
their working expenses.
9. The Department, in its action taken notes has stated that on the
recommendation of the Committee the matter was taken up with the
Ministry of Finance and the Budget Division of Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance in reply has submitted the
following:
“Department of Posts is functioning as a departmentally run
commercial undertaking and the receipts earned by them through
commercial operations are netted against non-Plan expenditure,
which includes the expenditure on account of ‘pensions’, is being
treated as working expenses of the Department of Posts and netted
against commercial receipts to arrive at ‘Postal Deficit’ which is
funded from the General Revenues. In case of Department of
Telecommunications also, before BSNL was created, pensions paid
to the erstwhile employees of DoT, used to form a part of working
expenditure of the Department of Telecommunications. Since the
expenditure on ‘pensions’ form part of the working expenses of
the of the commercial departments, like Ministry of Railways, the
same principal is applied to the Department of Posts. As such, it
is regretted that it may not be possible to agree to the proposal of
the Department of Posts to bear the expenditure on ‘pensions’ by
General Revenues.”
10. In response to the clarification given by the Ministry of Finance
the Department of Posts had submitted that the Department is treated
as a commercial department for the purpose of pension whereas in
the matter of addressing the deficit it is expected to fulfil the USO
without enjoying the level of autonomy that the Ministry of Railways
or even the earstwhile DoT enjoyed. It is further stated that every
product of Department is in competition with other service providers
and the ‘exclusive privilege’ that it enjoys legally is unenforced. Finally
Department had stated that the services provided by DoP including
Savings Bank facilities are not being offered on a cost plus basis.
11. The Committee are not convinced of the reply forwarded by
the Ministry of Finance, which declined the proposal of the
Department of Posts to bear the expenditure on pensions by general

4
revenues on the ground that the expenditure on ‘pension’ forms
part of the working expenses of the commercial departments, like
Ministry of Railways etc.
12. The Committee endorse the views of the DoP that it is treated
as a commercial department for the purposes of pensions, whereas
in the matter of addressing the deficit etc. it is expected to fulfil the
Universal Service Obligation (USO) without enjoying the level of
autonomy that the Ministry of Railways or the earstwhile DoT enjoy.
Further, the Committee note that ‘exclusive privilege’ legally vested
is unenforced and various services provided including savings bank
facilities are not being offered on a cost plus basis.
13. The Committee in the light of above facts provided by the
DoP , are of the considered view that the Department should take up
the matter once again at the highest level with the Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission to have a re-look into the
whole aspect of treating pension payments of DoP under a separate
common head, as in the case of other Ministries. The Committee
may be apprised periodically of the progress made in this regard.
B. Revenue Sharing
(Recommendation No. 2)
14. In its earlier report Committee had noted that the revenue
earnings which come through recoveries towards commission from
other departments for agency functions was going down. The
Committee attributed to the fact that people go in for insurance from
private fund managers which were more attractive than the insurance
policies of the Department of Posts. The Committee, therefore, had
recommended that the Department should begin looking at practical
solution in insurance sector in order to reduce deficit by generating
healthier revenue by working on commercial lines.
15. The Department in its action taken notes has stated as
under:
“The existing products available in Postal Life Insurance (PLI) are
more attractive than the other service providers because of low
premium and high bonus. For example, bonus in PLI for
Endowment Assurance (EA) policies is Rs. 77 per thousand of
sum assured per annum for a policy whereas the same is

5
Rs. 70 per thousand of sum assured per annum in Life Insurance
Corporation of India (LICI) for a comparable EA policy. Similarly,
the premium rates in PLI are lower by 5% to 20% in various
plans. Thus existing plans in PLI are more attractive in comparison
to similar plans in LICI and other service providers.”
16. PLI is providing life insurance cover to an identified category
of clientele who are regular employees of Government (Centre/State),
undertakings (Centre/State), nationalised banks, Railways, Government-
aided educational institutions, universities, defence and paramilitary
personnel and local bodies etc. who have access to regular medical
facilities. Introduction of various new products are extremely necessary
for such segment of clientele. PLI is currently facing great difficulties
in creating new schemes while facing tough competition from other
service providers who have entered the market with various attractive
products. The LICI has more than one hundred schemes for the public,
whereas there are only five schemes in PLI and RPLI.
17. Before participation of private companies in the insurance sector,
the LICI, under Section 30 of the LIC Act, 1956, had got monopoly to
transact life insurance business in India. However, as laid down in
Section 44(d) of the said Act, the provisions thereof are not applicable
to Post Office Insurance Fund (POIF) run by the Postal Department
(Central Government) who are in charge of its administration.
18. Earlier, the Controller of Insurance in Ministry of Finance used
to function as an actuarial adviser to POIF. Accordingly, the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs vide their letter No. 97
(25) Ins. II/93 dated 20.09.1993 had advised the Department to refer
all policy matters of POIF, e.g., extension of scope so as to cover more
clientele, introduction of new scheme/products etc. to Insurance
Division for concurrence. Accordingly, on the recommendations of RN
Malhotra Committee constituted by the Government on social reforms,
a proposal for introduction of rural Postal Life Insurance in rural sector
for the benefit of weaker sections and women of the villages was sent
to the Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) for concurrence. The
scheme was approved by the Ministry of Finance under their letter
No. 17(2)/Ins. V/94/Vol. II dated 11.04.1994 and the same was
introduce with effect from 24.03.1995.
19. After liberalization of the insurance sector, Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA) has been put in place to regulate

6
the insurance sector since 1999. After the formation of the IRDA, the
control function of the Insurance Division has been transferred from
Ministry of Finance to IRDA. At present, Ministry of Finance, has no
Controller of Insurance to examine new products. Now all new
products of other companies are examined and approved only by IRDA.
Since the PLI is not under IRDA, they have refused to do anything
concerning PLI. As a result, the Department has not been able to
introduce any new product, as Ministry of Finance has washed their
hands off this function and not issued any new guidelines on this
aspect.
20. The Department had referred a case for introduction of Group
Insurance Scheme for the employees of the BSNL to the Ministry of
Finance on 21.07.03. In fact, BSNL themselves approached the
Department to run this scheme for their employees after they came
outside the ambit of the CGEIS on formation of the Corporation.
Ministry of Finance replied on 1.8.2003, asking that approval of IRDA
be taken. This case remained in correspondence with IRDA and
Ministry of Finance for more than a year, but the Department failed
to get any response from Ministry of Finance. A meeting was held
with Chairman of IRDA at Hyderabad on 30.12.2003, and after much
persuasion, the IRDA wrote to Ministry of Finance on 25.03.2004 that
special dispensation can be given to PLI for introduction of insurance
scheme for the employees of BSNL. But so far, Ministry of Finance
has not given any approval for introduction of this scheme.
21. On the one hand IRDA, refuses to take any case relating to
PLI since PLI does not come under them while on the other hand
Ministry of Finance is not permitting introduction of any new products,
which is in the interest of public. This virtually means that PLI cannot
introduce any new product, consequently PLI will be losing out in the
market to the other private and multi-national insurance companies,
who are introducing many new customized schemes to attract
customers who have different requirements. A way out of this would
be for Finance Ministry to allow PLI to introduce new products, which
are worked out by a professional Actuary. However, no decision has
yet been taken in the matter.
22. The Committee note that Postal Life Insurance (PLI)/Rural
Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) have enormous potential in generating
revenue in the insurance sector but due to the lack of new schemes
unlike the schemes offered by Life Insurance Corporation of India

7
(LICI) and other service providers it may loose large share of the
revenue in the long run.
The Committee have been given to understand that after
liberalization of the insurance sector in 1999, the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA) was put in place to regulate the
insurance Division and the Ministry of Finance has no control in
insurance matters thereafter. However, PLI neither comes under the
purview of IRDA nor Ministry of Finance, and therefore no new
products under the insurance scheme could be launched by the
Department. A group insurance scheme for employees of BSNL,
which was to be run by the Department could not be implemented
by the Department as no final decision has been taken in this regard
so far.
23. The Committee are perturbed to note the deadlock between
the IRDA & Ministry of Finance. Under this situation it has not
been possible for the Department to introduce any new products
under PLI in the public interest which would in turn generate
revenue for the Department. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Department should take up the matter of
introduction of new PLI products at highest level with the Ministry
of Finance and IRDA on top priority to enable the Department of
Posts to provide group insurance for the employees of BSNL and
introduce new products in the interest of the public at large. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard from time to time.
C. Rent, Rates and Tax
(Recommendation No. 8)
24. The Committee in the second report had noted that under the
head “the rent, rates and tax” the budgetary allocation had been
increasing since 2002-2003 on account of rent revision and revision of
hired buildings where the rent revision was due. The Committee further
noted that for 22,610 buildings on rent with Department of Posts, a
substantial amount i.e. Rs. 45 crores approximately was being paid
toward rent every year.
25. The Committee, therefore had desired that the Department of
Posts should chalk out its detailed policy, for construction of its own
buildings on vacant plots or land offered by the Panchayats or other

8
organisations on priority basis in a phased manner and save the huge
rent paid on hired buildings. The Committee also opined that the
option of renting out might be exercised in order to have a flexibility
of shifting operations to wherever business was anticipated.
26. The Department in its action taken note has stated that “the
Construction of buildings on departmental vacant plots of land is a
continuing process through funds provided under Plan schemes.
Planning Commission has approved funds to the tune of Rs. 115.40
crores under the head ‘Construction of Buildings’ for the Tenth Five
Year Plan. The buildings are being erected in a phased manner
depending upon priority for Post Offices, Administrative Offices and
Staff Quarters, subject to availability of funds. With a view to
networking departmental offices, first priority is being accorded for
construction of Head Post Offices, Higher Selection Grade-I & II Post
Offices and Lower Selection Grade Post Offices with 15 or more
personnel, besides post offices in urban areas where rent liability is
high, so that funds are optimally utilised. As on date, 92 Head Post
Offices, 138 HSG-I Sub Post Offices and 215 HSG-II Sub Post Offices
are functioning from rented buildings. Plots of land for construction of
these post offices are not available in all cases. Around 31 cases have
been identified where plots of land are available and construction can
start during the next two financial years. For this purpose, Rs. 64.7
crores has been proposed for BE 2005-06 since Rs. 50 crore out of the
Plan outlay would have been used by the end of 2004-05. This would
enable completion of 70 building projects and commencement of
another 80 building projects. While priority is given to bigger operative
offices and administrative offices as mentioned above, all available
plots of land are required to be put to optimal use. The allocation
from the Planning Commission is very little compared to the need to
construct on nearly 1700 vacant plots already available with the
Department. Postal Service Board has, therefore, recently taken a policy
decision to construct on these vacant plots up to maximum FSI (Floor
Space Index) and rent out excess space for augmenting financial
resources from non-tariff sources”.
27. The Committee feel that the construction of buildings on a
maximum FSI (Floor Space Index) basis and renting out excess space
for augmenting financial resources from non-tariff sources should
be examined. All steps should be taken to maximize the returns by
letting them out on rent to credible parties with adequate legal
safeguards to protect assets and maximize the revenue. The
Committee also desire that they may be kept informed about the
steps taken on each of the properties in this regard.

9
D. Financial Receipts
(Recommendation No. 12)
28. The Committee had noted with concern in its earlier report
that the most of the services introduced by the Postal Department are
running at loss. That could be justified with the fact that in the year
2002-2003, out of 38 services of the Postal Department only 8 services
generated surplus whereas remaining 30 services were at loss. Further,
for the year 2003-2004 out of 35 services only 11 services could
generated surplus whereas remaining 24 were in deficit. The Committee
had therefore, recommended that the Department should re-think and
reassess its working in order to identify reasons for incurring losses
and formulate an efficacious strategy to get rid of its services from
running into losses year after year.
29. The Department, in its Action Taken Notes, had submitted the
following important reasons which contribute to the losses:
(a) The Department follows the ‘apportionment method’ of
costing whereby the actual expenditure incurred by the
Department for maintenance of its services is taken from
the Demands for Grants and classified among different cost
centres. Thereafter, it is apportioned on the basis of traffic
and/or time factor needed in each product/service to assess
cost. As long as the revenues earned from the products/
services are lesser than the expenditure on them, as assessed
by the apportionment method of costing, these products
will continue to register losses.
(b) Revenues from products/services are based on the tariff rates
fixed for them, which in turn taken into account the USO
factor, the market competition and resultant market
conditions, and the nature and quality of the product/
services offered. In the case of the Department’s products/
services, there has been no clear categorization till date as
to what constitutes USO as far as the traditional postal
products/services are concerned. Hence an effort is now
being made to clearly define the nature and extent of USO.
All products which fall outside the category of USO will
have to be priced more commercially. Similarly, the
possibility of re-engineering existing traditional products to
identify value added features which can cater to special
segments among customers also needs to be explored. This
exercise has now been initiated.

10
(c) Fall in traffic in traditional products has contributed to the
increase in per unit cost of products. This calls for a twin
pronged strategy of giving more focused attention to the
marketing of traditional mails and also of improving quality
of service so that volume of traffic increases, thereby
contributing to reduction in the per unit fixed costs. In the
case of the former, the Business Development Directorate
has recently issued certain guidelines to Circles about the
strategies to be adopted for marketing traditional products
so that they receive as much focus as the premium products.
(d) Number of services are/were being provided by the
Department at cost The possibilities of increasing revenues
through review of commission, re-engineering of processes,
proper accounting of funds, etc. are being explored.
(e) Leakage of revenue is yet another area which has engaged
the attention of the Department.
(f) There is an inherent subsidy in the norms prescribed for
opening post offices in rural areas. However, post offices,
once opened, register far greater losses than permissible as
per policy. Feedback received from various sources indicate
that this is primarily because there is no onus on the GDS
to sustain or improve business volumes since the linkage
between their emoluments and the business they generate/
handle was removed a decade ago. This issue also merits
serious attention since 83% of the network comprise extra-
departmental offices.
(g) The Postal network was set up to cater to the Universal
Service Organization (USO) of providing greater access to
basic postal facilities. There are many post offices located in
urban and rural areas which are located at distances that
are lesser than the distance prescribed as per norms either
due to historical reasons or because they were opened on
the basis of the discretionary powers then available within
the norms. The reasons for which many of these offices
were opened no longer exist and hence there is room for
streamlining such offices and optimizing resources.
(h) The structures, processes and work norms of the Department
need to be geared to the changed scenario brought about
by induction of technology so that output and resources
earned per employee and per office are substantially
enhanced. This also requires consolidation of resources to
ensure optimum benefits from the induction of technology.

11
30. The Committee are happy to learn that the Department of
Posts have made sincere efforts to ascertain the reasons for its losses
and have also chalked out a strategy to reduce the losses. In this
connection, the Committee feel that although the strategies are
chalked out every year but losses of the DoP continue to mount
unabated. According to the Committee, the Development is an on-
going process but prudent financial management is essential to all
processes and strategies. The Committee therefore, desire that all
the plans and strategies of the Department to overcome the losses
should be implemented in true letter and spirit so that the DoP can
turn the corner and show profits in near future.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Revenue Deficit
(Recommendation No. 3)
The revenue deficit of the Department has increased from
Rs. 1364.40 crore in 2002-2003 to Rs. 1386.80 crore in 2003-2004 and
now it is expected to come down to Rs. 1377.77 crore in 2004-2005.
The huge deficit is generated through high expenditure and low
revenues through the years.
Whereas, main factor for high expenditure is the large scale base
of employees whose salaries, pensions, DA etc. have to be met by low
revenue earning through subsidised rates of products and services
which are provided through the universal obligation of the Department.
Another factor responsible for the low generation of revenue is
the unilateral restriction of commission towards agency function carried
out by the Department on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. As per
agreement the Ministry of Finance is required to enhance the per
account/per certificate remuneration by 10% every year. However, this
enhancement was unilaterally restricted to 2.36% by the Ministry for
the year 2003-2004 and 3.5% for 2004-2005 thereby increasing the deficit
of the Department by Rs. 267.33 crore in 2003-2004 and Rs. 465.13
crore during FY 2004-2005 (BE).
The Committee feel that the Ministry of Finance is doing great
injustice to the Department, which is already serving the nation by
not functioning on commercial lines without a profit motive. The
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry of Finance to abide
by its terms of agreement and enhance the per account/per certificate
remuneration by 10% every year to reduce the huge deficit of the
Department of Posts to a reasonable level.
Action taken by the Government
It is true that revenue deficit of the Department has increased
from Rs. 1364.40 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 1375.22 crore in 2003-04 (Final
12

13
Figure). The projection of deficit is Rs. 1377.77 crore for Budget
Estimates 2004-05.
The reasons for huge deficit is high expenditure and low revenues.
Main factor for high expenditure is salaries, pensions, DA etc. The
Department of Posts is prominently labour oriented. The cost of postal
services has been increasing steadily due to dependence on manual
operations and rising cost of manpower. The revision of postal rates
have not been keeping pace with the steady rising costs of operation.
The resultant gap between expenditure and revenue, which has been
steadily increasing, has been a matter of concern for the Department,
Efforts are being made to generate additional resources by taking on
new retail and agency functions on commission basis and through
introduction of new, value added products.
The figures and quantum of revenue deficit in recent years (reduced
from Rs. 1591 crore in 1988-99 to Rs. 1364 crore in 2002-03) shows a
gradual improvement in the financial health of the organisation.
However, revenue augmentation has been significantly improving in
recent year. In 1998-99, revenue receipts (Rs. 1722 crore) had been only
52% of the gross expenditure (Rs. 3313 crore), whereas in 2002-03,
revenue receipts (Rs. 4009 crore) have contributed to 75% of gross
expenditure (Rs. 5374 crore). This shows the efforts that are being
made in the Department to augment its revenues.
Steps are also being taken to reduce the expenditure, though the
scope for reduction is limited, since 90% of working expenditure is on
establishment related costs. Even out of the balance, a large part relates
to operation related costs such as printing and stationery charges,
conveyance charges, rent, rates and taxes, maintenance etc. Action is
being taken to improve productivity and efficiency through
computerisation and induction of technology.
One of the reasons for low generation of revenue is the unilateral
restriction of commission towards agency functions carried out by the
Department on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. The concerns
expressed by the Standing Committee regarding the restriction on
commission for savings bank work have been taken up with Ministry
of Finance in continuation of earlier efforts made with them to adhere
to the agreement. The matter had also been taken up with the 12th
Finance Commission previously. The response of Ministry of Finance
is awaited.

14
X-Five Year Plan
(Recommendation No. 5)
The Committee note that the working group set up by the Planning
Commission for the Department of Posts, proposed an amount of
Rs. 3616 crore for 8 Plan schemes, which include Infrastructure
Development, Computerisation and connections, Business development,
financial services, HRD, Estate development, automation & ergonomics
& philately. The Committee are however, surprised to note that the
Planning Commission, not only reduced the proposed outlay from
Rs. 3616 crore to Rs. 1350 crore but also increased the number of
schemes from 8 to 20 at the time of approval. There is one-to-one co-
relation between the schemes proposed to the Planning Commission
and approved by them as some of the elements have been bifurcated
from the original proposals to form separate schemes in the approved
plan for convenience in implementation. This however, proportionately
reduced the scope of many schemes, which were in the area of
computerisation of Post Offices, improving ergonomics, financial
services, Human Resource Development (training) and Estates
Development (Construction of buildings).
The Committee have been informed that the plan schemes are
envisaged by the Department keeping in view the basic requirement
of Postal network and demand of the customers. Moreover, bifurcation
of original proposals of the Department in the Planning Commission
will also create problem for the Department in implementing and
allocating funds for the restructured schemes. However, in-spite of all
the constraints the capacity of the Department to realistically absorb
the funds within the existing infrastructure has also to be looked into.
In view of the above and also in view of the fact that the
Department’s main objective is to modernise, computerise and facelift
itself during the X Plan, the Committee feel that the Department would
do well by absorbing Rs. 1350 crore and achieving its objectives. The
Committee also impresses upon the Planning Commission to agree to
give to the Department the desired funds if they are approached for
the same.
Action taken by the Government
The concern expressed by the Committee about optimal utilisation
of Plan funds has been noted and every effort is being made through

15
regular monitoring at varying levels in the Directorate and at the Circle
levels, to ensure co-ordination between different wings and timely and
optimal utilisation of funds. The Planning Commission has been
communicated the concern expressed by the Committee about the need
to provide the desired funds if approached for the same. The
Department has submitted proposals for Rs. 673.49 crore, including
Rs. 456.49 crore for the Computerisation project for BE 2005-06.
Computerisation of Post Offices
(Recommendation No. 6)
Computerisation of Post Offices, Sub-Post Offices, Circle
Administrative Offices, Regional Administrative Offices, Divisional
Administrative Offices and Postal Accounts Offices and networking is
on the anvil of the Department of Posts during the Xth Plan. Out of
1,55,837 such offices in the country, 1772 Post Offices including 506
Head Offices have been fully or partly computerised during the last
two Five Year Plan periods.
An amount of Rs. 836.27 crore has been provided by the Planning
Commission to computerise 5616 Post Offices and other offices during
the Xth Plan. However, since the scheme was approved by the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs in January 2004 an amount of Rs. 8.38
crores and Rs. 0.375 crore could be utilised on this project during the
first two years of the Xth Plan thereby computerising 26 POs, 31 ROs
and 3 COs.
The Committee are highly perturbed over the fate of this important
project. They are apprehensive about the possibility of the Department
to absorb approximately Rs. 828.00 crore during three years 2004-2005,
2005-2006 and 2006-2007 and achieve the gigantic target of
computerising 5616 POs. In the opinion of the Committee, the funds
do not pose any problem as such but the will to perform should be
there to capitalise gains as much as possible.
The Committee are dismayed to note that Department is not serious
enough to execute its vital and important schemes of computerisation,
which will not only facilitate effective networking of postal services
but also be helpful in increasing efficiency, downsizing of huge non-
Plan expenditure and for generation of more and more revenue by
providing efficient consumer friendly service to the customer. Keeping
in view the vital importance of the scheme, the Committee, therefor
desire that Department should explore all ways and means to

16
implement its schemes of computerisation, in a uniform manner, so
that not only urban areas but also rural/semi rural areas too can be
networked and its vital consequential benefits could accrue to the
Department of Posts and the consumer at large. The deployment of
computers should be optimised according to the realistic necessity of
each location. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
detailed time bound programme chalked out by the Department for
execution of its computerisation schemes in an judicious, efficacious
and fruitful manner. The DoP should also improve efficiency of the
internal processes of Post Offices through appropriate computerisation
and effective training of personnel.
Action taken by the Government
The Technology Division has formulated a roadmap to implement
the targets set for computerisation and networking of Post Offices as
approved by CCEA for the 10th Plan period for the next 3 years
(2004-07). The Division is working towards achieving the targets in
time.
Till 9th Plan period 506 Head Post Offices and 1266 Sub Post
Offices were partly computerised. These offices will be fully
computerised and networked during the 10th Plan period. In addition,
339 Head Post Offices, 5595 Sub Post Offices, 3 Circle Offices,
37 Regional Offices, 205 Divisional Offices and 22 Postal Accounts
Offices will also be fully computerised and networked in the
10th Plan period. The roadmap for this purpose is detailed below:
COMPUTERISATION AND NETWORKING OF POST OFFICES,
POSTAL ACCOUNTS OFFICES AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES
DURING THE TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2002-2007)
A. Computerisation & Networking
Offices Total 10th Plan 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Physical Physical Physical Physical
Target
12 3 4 5
H.O. 339 339 — —
S.O. 5595 600 2800 2195

17
12 3 4 5
CO 3 3 — —
RO 37 37 — —
DO 205 100 105 —
DA (P) 22 22 — —
B. Networking
H.O. 506 506 — —
S.O. 1266 600 666 —
The Post Offices selected for computerisation will mainly be located
in urban areas. This is because the Department is first concentrating
on computerising the larger offices where traffic and business are heavy.
All these large Post Offices have more than two public counters. The
Department’s long-term strategy was initially to take up
computerisation of smaller Post Offices having one or two counters in
the subsequent Plan period. Many of these smaller offices are located
in semi-urban/rural areas. However, even during the 10th Plan period,
as a special case, the Department has proposed computerisation of all
Post Offices in Assam, North-Eastern States and in Sikkim having two
public counters as well. Some of these offices should be in semi-urban
areas. This is part of the proposals for Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th
Plan.
Since the CCEA approval of this Plan scheme was received only
in January 2004 not much progress could be made in the year 2003-
04. Orders were placed for hardware for 3 Circle Offices, 31 Regional
Offices, 19 Postal Accounts Offices and 26 Head Post Offices in Assam,
Himachal Pradesh and Chhattisgarh States by March 2004. Approval
was received for computerisation of 313 Head Post Offices and
627 Sub Post Offices from the Hon’ble MoC in May 2004, but orders
could not be placed for hardware, as DGS&D advised the Department
not to place orders, considering that prices of hardware were likely to
reduce in the next rate contract, for which bids were under process.
The new rate contract was published in September 2004 and orders
for computerising 313 Head Post Offices and approximately 1200 Sub
Post Offices have been placed. The budget earmarked for the
Technology Division during 2004-05 is likely to be fully utilised.

18
The Department has set an ambitious target for itself for 2005-06
and has sought funds to the extent of Rs. 456.49 crore for computerising
4666 post offices and 225 administrative offices in the next year subject
to availability of resources. Separately, MoC&IT has also requested for
an additional allocation of Rs. 500 crore to computerise all the
remaining departmental post offices, since only then would the full
benefits of computerisation accrue to the Department.
In the 10th Plan about 50,000 postal staff will be trained in
Departmental software and in various other computer applications in
6 Postal Training Centres. In addition, 1,00,000 postal staff will be
trained in 62 Workplace Computer Training Centres. Adequate
importance has been given on computer training to ensure that the
computerisation programme does not suffer for lack of trained
manpower.
In so far as improving efficiency of internal work processes are
concerned, an analysis of the trend of grievances and the contributory
factors in terms of existing work processes is being continuously carried
out. Important steps in streamlining the money order services
transmitted through VSAT and for better cash management in the
paying districts has been taken as a result of these studies. Further
steps to pre-empt shortfalls in service and reduce the number and
proportion of grievances in all basic services are being taken to ensure
quality assurance. The information on public grievances is constantly
shared with field units and other Divisions of the Directorate, to help
them understand and appreciate the bottlenecks in the services being
provided, and the need to rationalise work processes through process
re-engineering on an on-going basis.
Department of Posts has also taken the initiative to improve the
efficiency of financial services by launching new facilities as well as
by process re-engineering as per details given below:
1. Electronic Clearance Scheme (ECS) has been launched as a
pilot, which has streamlined the monthly interest credit
system in MIS by giving direct credit of monthly interest to
the depositors’ bank account.
2. Decentralisation of RD & MIS accounts to the level of
departmental sub offices has been done to cut down delays
and improve efficiency.

19
3. Seven Postal Finance Marts have been opened at Chennai,
Madurai, Trichy, Pudukottai, Pattukotai, Coimbatore and
Arinthangai as a one-stop shop for financial service provider
to the public. This is proposed to be replicated in other
postal circles.
(Recommendation No. 9)
Expansion of Postal Network
The Committee note that Department of Posts has a huge network
of 155,837 Post Offices comprising of 846 HOs, 25340 SOs, 2586 Extra-
Departmental Sub-Offices and 1,27,065 Extra-Departmental Branch
Offices. The Committee further note that entire rural network is
provided with the subsidy to the extent of 66-2/3% for all Branch
Offices located in normal rural areas and 85% in remote, tribal, hilly
and desert areas. The Committee have been informed that an annual
loss of Rs. 2400/-per year per office is permissible, in case of
Department sub-office in normal areas, while it is Rs. 4800/-per year
per office in remote, hilly, tribal and desert areas, however, every post
office located in urban areas are expected to be financially self-sufficient
and earn 5% over cost at the time of the first annual review.
The Committee, note with concern that approximately 74 proposals
are pending irrespective of the prescribed norms for opening
Departmental Sub Offices and 174 proposals with prescribed norm,
pending for opening Extra-Departmental Branch Offices.
The Committee also note that post offices are not necessarily
opened on the basis of prudent norms but sometimes on extraneous
pressures and consideration beyond the control of the Department.
Such post offices may tend to go into losses. The other major factor
for post offices going into losses is the universal service obligation
which the Department has to fulfil being a member of the Universal
Postal Union. Such cases are, therefore, in the opinion of the Committee,
justified.
The Committee, therefore, are of the considered opinion that
location and density of post offices plays a vital role in revenue
generations which should not necessarily be profit-making. The main
aim of the Post Offices should be to serve the people at large.
According to the Committee, the Post Offices should be located at bus

20
stations, railway stations etc. They should not alter their fundamental
nature, which is reliability. In a bid to attain these objectives, the
Committee desires that the department should exercise utmost care
and caution for expansion of its network in the urban areas.
Action taken by the Government
When the implementation programme for the Plan scheme
“Expansion of Postal Network’ was approved for the 10th Plan period
by the competent authority, physical and financial targets were
approved by them only for the first 2 years. Before formulating the
programme for the remaining three years, a review of the status of
postal services in rural areas was required to be conducted. Based on
the results of this review, the feedback from the Circles, and the policy
initiatives spelt out in the 10th Plan, viz., to rationalise the network,
manage new offices only through redeployment of existing manpower,
and introduce the concept of franchising, the Department was to come
up with an implementation programme for the next three years. The
Department has prepared the components of its strategy for the next
three years, and this is awaiting MOC’s approval before securing the
clearance of EFC, as well as the approval of the competent authority,
for finalising the future implementation programme for this Plan
scheme.
The components of the strategy for network expansion for the
next three years, inter alia , address the concerns expressed by the
Committee. Some of the elements of the strategy include focusing Plan
support on undeserved areas, redeploying existing offices to needier
areas (without reducing access approved as per policy i.e. ensuring
that there will continue to be a post office within the prescribed
distance norm), and even supporting the post offices opened under
the Non-Recoverable Component (NRC) of loss scheme in the North
East, so as not to downgrade them as per their workload, as has been
done elsewhere.
As far as the pending proposals for opening post offices are
concerned, Circles have been empowered to meet the requirements for
SOs by redeployment of existing single or double handed sub offices
in urban areas located in closer proximity than approved as per policy.
Therefore, they can meet the requirements in the case of pending
proposals for SOs through such relocation. Similar action is being taken
in the case of BOs also.

21
Speed Post
(Recommendation No. 10)
The Committee are happy to note that the share of speed post in
express mail market segment has been constantly increasing from Rs.
77.95 crore in 1997-98 to Rs. 298.35 crore in 2003-04, but in percentage
terms, this is only 10% of the EMS which is quite disappointing. The
major chunk i.e. 90% still rests with private courier or express industry
market etc. Keeping in view the huge potential and ample scope of
the expansion of speed post in the express market and in order to
expand revenue share in the market, the Committee feel that the
Department of Posts should adopt a commercial approach based on
commercial operational parameters, fresh induction of technology,
improve efficiency and innovate business skills with effective
monitoring mechanism. In order to so, it has to overcome the
constraints like dependency on transport system, railways and airlines.
In the opinion of the Committee, the DoP should have flexibility in
operation of speed post with regard to the application of rules and
regulation and also fixing costs etc.
Action taken by the Government
A commercial approach, based on commercial parameters, is
adopted for promotion of the premium products and services.
Commercial parameters include volume discounts, free pick up, Book
Now Pay Later facilities, monthly billing, brand advertisements and
product publicity.
During the 10th Plan period it is proposed to supply computers
and other peripherals to 85 National Speed Post Centres, 480 Speed
Post Centres and Speed Post Booking Offices and 850 Speed Post
Booking and Delivery Offices in order to upgrade the existing facilities
and to induct technology for Track and Trace purposes of Speed Post
articles besides generating computerised receipts and document process.
Induction of technology and business approach would result in
improving efficiency. Business performance targets are fixed every year.
These targets are monitored every month and appraisal results
communicated to Circles.
The quality of service is monitored every month. Regular transit
analysis is done to identify delay and detention of mail for remedial

22
action. The results are communicated to Circles to take corrective action,
where found necessary.
A network of Customer Care Centres has been established to meet
customer service requirements. Business meets and seminars are being
held at different levels. Business conferences with associations such as
FICCI etc. are also being held. Marketing Executives are available in
Circles to market various products and services. Market surveys are
regularly conducted to understand the market environment and develop
new products and value additions.
Internet based systems are available for Track and Trace of Speed
Post articles by the customer himself directly from the web. An online
web-based grievance recording and response system is also available.
The dependency on the existing transport system is receiving
attention. The transmission system is regularly monitored to ensure
efficiency.
Heads of Circles have been empowered to approve business
packages with value additions thereby providing flexibility in operations
and other related aspects thereby generating revenue for the
Department.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLY OF
THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Allocation for North-East
(Recommendation No. 4)
The Committee note that as per the instructions of the Government
it is mandatory for the Department to spend 10% of its outlay for
North-East Region. However, the Committee are perturbed to observe
that out of Rs. 15 crore allotted in 2002-03 only Rs. 2.53 crore could
be utilised and for the period 2003-04 again out of Rs. 8.98 crore
budgetary funds allocated only Rs. 3.04 crore could be utilised. The
Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons explained by the
Department that due to delay in securing approvals for the various
plans, budgetary allocations could not be utilised. From the reply, the
Committee feel that no serious efforts were made by the Department
to get the schemes approved by the Planning Commission in time,
which resulted in gross underutilisation of the budgetary allocations
provided for the development of the North-East Region. The
Committee, desire that utmost attention should be given to the North-
East areas in terms of getting the schemes approved in time and actual
utilisation of funds allocated therefore. The Committee also desire that
in order to fulfil the aspiration of the people of the North-East Region,
every effort should be made to identify the areas where investment
under the plan could be made. The Committee hope that the DoP will
take suitable measures to fulfil the demands of NE region. They should
also explore the possibility of locating Post Offices in the newly
construction Community Information Centres (CRCs) of the Department
of Information Technology.
Action taken by the Government
There are two aspects to be taken into consideration when clarifying
why 10% of the Annual Plan outlay is not being invested in the NE.
The first aspect relates to the question of making adequate allocation
and the second is the question of actually utilising them. There are
23

24
issues in respect of both aspects as far as the Department’s 10th Plan
for the NE is concerned, which needs to be clarified.
The Department of Posts has always endeavoured to ensure that
10% of the Plan funds are allocated for development of the NE.
Normally, the Plan schemes of the Department are not capital intensive;
however, the outlays of the 9th Plan and 10th Plan have increased,
with outlays of Rs. 519.11 crore and Rs. 1350 crore respectively, after
some technology induction programmes were initiated. In the 9th Plan,
against the outlay of Rs. 519.11 crore, Rs. 392.19 crore were actually
utilised. Out of Rs. 246.23 crore spent for the whole of India in the
last 3 Annual Plans, Rs. 21.19 crore (8.6%) were utilised in NE Region
only. However, in the 10th Plan, with a substantially higher allocation
of Rs. 1350 crore, of which 79% has been earmarked for modernisation
and induction of technology in the postal system, it is proving
increasingly difficult to absorb funds to the extent of 10% in the NE
for the following reasons:—
1. Rs. 836.27 crore is earmarked only for computerising almost
all post offices up to those which have more than 2 hands,
all account offices and important administrative offices.
Funds have been separately provided to computerise mail
offices, foreign post offices, international mail centres, Circle
Stamp Depots, etc. However, almost all offices of the
categories that are proposed to be covered under the
10th Plan have already been computerised in the NE in the
earlier Plan.
2. The levels of investment in other Plan schemes are low,
and;
3. There are limits to the extent of investment that can be
made in the NE both in terms of the quantum of investment
and scope for doing so, on the basis of the economic activity
in that area.
The NE region’s primary requirement in terms of postal services
are for more post office facilities and for better connectivity. The first
requirement can be met only if a location can meet the 3 prescribed
norms (annexed). Of these population and income norms are difficult
to achieve, given in the levels of population and development in many
places. In fact, even most existing post offices are earning lesser income
than the prescribed subsidised level of 15% of the cost. In terms of

25
connectivity also the scope for investment is fairly limited. Therefore,
the Department has proposed certain special schemes targeted only at
the NE in the Mid Term Appraisal, to enhance the level of investment.
However, the postal system in the NE does not have the capacity to
absorb 10% of the higher outlays in the 10th Plan, despite these efforts,
within the existing parameters of the approved plan schemes.
In so far as expenditure levels are concerned, shortfalls have
occurred both in total expenditure as well as in the NE due to general
problems with implementation, as may be seen from the outlays and
actuals for NE and the rest of the country in 2002-03 and 2003-04
which are given below:—
(Rs. in crores)
2002-03 2003-04
Total Allocation Total Expend Total Allocation Total Expend
allocation for NE Expend in the NE allocation for NE Expend in the NE
150.00 15.00 45.91 2.52 150.00 8.98 63.30 3.98
NORMS FOR OPENING POST OFFICES:
1. Norms for opening Extra Departmental Branch Post Offices:
1.1 Population:
(a) In Normal Areas:
3000 population in a group of villages (including the PPO village).
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
500 population in an individual village or 1000 population in a
group of villages.
1.2 Distance:
(a) In Normal Areas:
The minimum distance from the nearest existing post office will
be 3 Kms.
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
The distance limit will be the same as above except that in Hilly
Areas, the minimum distance limit can be relaxed by the Directorate
in cases where such relaxation is warranted by special circumstances
which should be clearly explained while submitting a proposal.

26
1.3 Anticipated Income:
(a) In Normal Areas:
The minimum anticipated revenue will be 33 1/3% of the cost.
(b) In Hilly, Tribal, Desert and Inaccessible Areas:
The minimum anticipated income will be 15% of the cost.
It is further to be ensured that as a result of the opening of a new
post office, the loss in respect of the parent post office does not increase
beyond the permissible limit nor is its income reduced below the
minimum prescribed.
2. Criteria for upgrading/opening Departmental Sub Post Offices:
(a) In Rural Areas:
The minimum work load of the Extra Departmental Branch Post
Office, proposed to be upgraded, should be five hours per day. The
permissible limit of annual loss is Rs. 2400/- in Normal Rural areas
and Rs. 4800/- in Tribal and Hilly areas.
It is further to be ensured that as a result of the opening of a new
post office, the loss in respect of the parent post office does not increase
beyond the permissible limit nor is its income reduced below the
minimum prescribed.
(b) In Urban Areas:
In Urban areas, the post office should initially be self-supporting,
and, at the time of the first annual review, it should show a 5% profit
to be eligible for further retention.
The minimum distance between two post offices should be
1.5 Kms. in cities with a population of 20 lakhs and above, and
2 Kms. in other Urban Areas. No two delivery offices, however, should
be closer than 5 Kms. for each other.
Heads of Circles have powers to relax the distance condition in
10% of the cases.
A Delivery Post Office in Urban Area should have a minimum of
7 Postmen’s beats.
COMPUTERISATION OF INTERNATIONAL MAIL PROCESSING
(Recommendation No. 7)
The Committee are informed that the upgradation of the
Chennai and Kolkata Post Offices under the scheme is complete.

27
The Computerisation of four International Airmail Centres and a foreign
post office has also been completed except for Kolkata which
was delayed due to site preparation. Hardware to the extent of
Rs. 0.77 crore will be procured after the mid term review of the project.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the computerisation of
International Mail processing in Kolkata post office should be taken
up on priority basis to complete the remaining work before the time
of mid term review so that the computerisation process could be taken
up for completion in a time bound manner.
Action taken by the Government
1. In the approved Plan scheme, the upgradation of the
Chennai and Kolkata Post Offices was not included. The
proposal related only to upgradation of Foreign Post Offices
at Delhi and Mumbai and 5 sub-Foreign Post Offices at
Srinagar, Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Kochi. The
computerisation of four International Airmail Centres was
also part of the approved scheme. All these activities have
been completed.
2. In so far as Kolkata and Chennai Foreign Post Offices are
concerned, only civil and electric works were taken up to
prepare them for computerisation. To complete this
computerisation, additional funds were needed, which
Planning Commission had indicated, while approving the
outlay, will be considered after the Mid Term Appraisal
of the 10th Plan. Hardware/Software to the extent of
Rs. 0.41 crore is, therefore, proposed to be procured after
the mid-term appraisal of the 10th Five Year Plan.
Meanwhile, site preparation has been completed in Chennai,
but not in Kolkata. The latter surrendered Rs. 20 lakh
allotted to them in 2003-04 for preparatory work for
computerisation. This work will now be taken up in 2005-
06 since funds were not provided for this activity in BE
2004-05 in the expectation that the work would be completed
in 2003-04 itself. Proposals have also been made to the
Planning Commission to provide the additional funds (Rs.
0.41 crore) to complete the computerisation of these two
offices as part of the Mid Term Appraisal of the Plan.

28
Rent, Rates and Tax
(Recommendation No. 8)
The Committee note that under the head “the rent, rates and tax”
the budgetary allocation have been increasing since 2002-2003 on
account of rent revision and revision of hired buildings where the rent
revision is due. The Committee further note that for 22,610 buildings
on rent with Department of Posts, a substantial amount  i.e.
Rs. 45 crores approximately are being paid toward rent every year.
The Committee are of the opinion that in case rent being paid by
the Department for rented building is saved, by constructing its own
buildings on vacant plots on priority basis and in a phased manner,
the substantial amount saved on rent can be diverted for
implementation of important plan schemes, which are lagging behind
on account of shortage of funds.
The Committee, therefore, desired that the Department of Posts
should chalk out its detailed policy, for construction of its own
buildings on vacant plots or land offered by the Panchayats or other
organisations on priority basis in a phased manner and save the huge
rent paid on hired buildings. With regard to the location of smaller
post offices in urban areas the necessity of creating assets should be
dispensed with, which would result in saving of capital expenditure.
The option of renting out may be exercised in order to have a flexibility
of shifting operations to wherever business is anticipated. The
Committee would like to know about the detailed plan of Ministry
along with availability of land and estimates of total expenditure to be
incurred thereon.
Action taken by the Government
Construction of buildings on departmental vacant plots of land is
a continuing process through funds provided under Plan schemes.
Planning Commission has approved funds to the tune of Rs. 115.40
crores under the head ‘Construction of Buildings’ for the Tenth Five
Year Plan. The buildings are being erected in a phased manner
depending upon priority for Post Offices, Administrative Offices and
Staff Quarters, subject to availability of funds. With a view to
networking departmental offices, first priority is being accorded for
construction of Head Post Offices, Higher Selection Grade-I & II Post

29
Offices and Lower Selection Grade Post Offices with 15 or more
personnel, besides post offices in urban areas where rent liability is
high, so that funds are optimally utilised.  The second priority is to
construct administrative offices, Postal Stores Depots and Circle Stamp
Depots in order that considerable rent can be saved and operational
efficiency increased.
As on date, 92 Head Post Offices, 138 HSG-I Sub Post Offices and
215 HSG-II Sub Post Offices are functioning from rented buildings.
Plots of land for construction of these post offices are not available in
all cases. Around 31 cases have been identified where plots of land
are available and construction can start during the next two financial
years. For this purpose, Rs. 64.7 crores has been proposed for BE
2005-06 since Rs. 50 crore out of the Plan outlay would have been
used by the end of 2004-05. This would enable completion of
70 building projects and commencement of another 80 building projects.
The Department will need funds over and above Rs. 115.40 crore
in order to pursue the policy of having departmental buildings for all
Head Post offices and for Higher Selection Grade Post Offices as land
is also required to be purchased for these offices.
 Similarly, while priority is given to bigger operative offices and
administrative offices as mentioned above, all available plots of land
are required to be put to optimal use. The allocation from the Planning
Commission is very little compared to the need to construct on nearly
1700 vacant plots already available with the Department. Postal Service
Board has, therefore, recently taken a policy decision to construct on
these vacant plots up to maximum FSI (Floor Space Index) and rent
out excess space for augmenting financial resources from non-tariff
sources.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I)
Training
(Recommendation No. 11)
The Committee note that the Department have kept the training
in the thrust area and had allocated Rs. 61.30 crore for Xth Plan. They
also note that there has been under utilisation of budgetary allocation
under the head. The Department was unable to utilise the funds
allocated to it as during the year 2002-03 out of Rs. 6.65 crore allocated,
an amount of Rs. 2.37 crore could be utilised and further in 2003-04
out of Rs. 11.28 crore allocated Rs. 7.07 crore could be utilised. Lack
of adequate facilities in the existing workplace training centres and

30
certain building projects in training institutions failing to take off are
stated to be the reasons for shortfall in achievement of targets.
The Committee are of the considered opinion that in order to
bring efficiency and improvement in quality of work, imparting proper
and qualitative training to more and more employees by outside sources
could be explored to reduce overheads and to make the training more
effective. Refresher courses should also be organised to enthuse
employees in their assignments. The Committee, therefore, keeping in
view importance of the training, desire that the Department should
not only enhance their training resources including building projects
in training institutions but also devise efficient mechanisms for effective
implementation of the plan schemes so that actual utilisation of the
budgetary allocation is as near as possible.
Action taken by Government
The Plan scheme for Training was approved for implementation
only in May 2003. Therefore, the scheme could not be effectively
implemented in the first year of the 10th Plan viz 2002-03, except for
on-going training programmes. This resulted in shortfall in the first
year. In 2003-04, shortfall occurred not in the training component but
in utilising Plan funds earmarked for training buildings because some
of the civil works did not take off to the extent anticipated. Details of
Plan implementation in the year 2002-03 and 2003-04 in physical and
financial terms are annexed.
In order to bring efficiency and improvement in quality of work,
imparting proper and qualitative training to its employees, Indian Postal
Service Officers are given exposure in the outside training institutions
of repute. 45 officers were deputed for various training programmes
during last year:
Sl.No. Name of the Programme Period of training No. of officers
given exposure
1. MDP for HAG/SAG at Administrative 7-12 July, 2003 15
Staff College India, Hyderabad
2. In-service Training Programme for 15-26 September, 2003 15
JAG level officers at IIM Kolkata
3. Training Programme on Legal 27-31 January, 2004 15
matters for IPOs officers at NLSIU Bangalore

31
During current financial year, the following proposals were
approved for deputing Indian Postal Service Officers to premier training
institutes for exposure in specialised subjects:
(amount in lakhs)
Sl.No. Name of the Institute No. of No. of Cost for one Total
programmes participants course/ cost
participant
1. Administrative 2 courses 30 Rs. 2.35 Rs. 4.70
Staff College of
India, Hyderabad
2. National Law 2 courses 30 Rs. 1.63 Rs. 3.26
School, India
University,
Bangalore
3. IIT Kharagpur 1 course 15 Rs. 2.80 Rs. 2.80
4. IIM Ahmedabad 2 2 Rs. 0.35 Rs. 0.70
participants
5. IIM Kolkata 2 courses 30 Rs. 2.91 Rs. 5.82
Total 107 Rs. 2.91 Rs. 17.28
Of the above, the following courses are already conducted/being
conducted:
Sl.No. Name of the Programme Period of No. of officers
training given exposure
1. Management Development Programme 25-30 October, 2004 14
for Higher Administrative Grade
(HAG/SAG) i.e. CPMG/PMG at
Administrative Staff College India,
Hyderabad
2. Management Development Programme 27 Sept-2 2
on Computer Networking at IIM Oct, 2004
Ahmedabad
3. Training Programme on legal matters 1-5 November, 2004 15
for IPOs officers at NLSIU Bangalore
4. Programme on System Analysis & 22 Nov-3 Dec. 15
Design at IIT, Kharagpur 2004
Total 46

32
Future Plans:
(i) There is paradigm shift in the training being traditionally
imparted in regional Postal Training Centres by moving the training
of staff nearer to workplace. At present, there are 39 Workplace
Computer Training Centers (WCTCs) functioning in Circle/Regional
Headquarters which take care of computer training on departmental
software to the staff in Circle/Regional Hqrs. Supply orders for
procurement of hardware and software for setting up 21 places have
been issued on 8-11-2004. A total number of 60 WCTCs will function
to train the Group ‘C’ staff on various departmental software etc. This
training facility will augment the training facilities available in Postal
training centres across the country. Although departmental employees
with aptitude for training are posted from the cadre of inspectors and
Postal Assistants for training in specialised areas, support from reputed
private computer training institutes are also being taken in the WCTCs.
There is a plan to expand the network of WCTCs up to the level
of important Divisional Offices/Head Post Offices. The idea in
expanding the network of WCTCs is to provide for training near the
workplace resulting in least disruption in the work in the Divisions
coupled with increased frequency for updating skills. About 50,000
officials have already been trained during the last 2 years and till
date. It would be possible to train more than 50,000 officials by the
end of the 10th Five Year Plan.
(ii) Workplace training has been found to be a feasible and cost
effective option where employees have to be trained in large numbers.
The workplace training covers supply of course material one month
in advance to the candidates identified for training, obtaining feedback
in the questionnaire form from them and based on the reports a group
learning at nodal point is organised for 2-4 days duration. During the
10th Five Year Plan there is a target to train 50,000 Postmen, 71,500
Gramin Dak Sevak Branch Post Masters, 40,000 Gramin Dak Sevak
Mail Deliverers and 3,500 Mail Overseers under this scheme.
(iii) There is a proposal to train all the supervisors as trainers so
as to enable them to equip with knowledge and skills. This will further
enable to give on the job training to the staff on different Postal
Operations in the Post Office itself till they get a formal training in
the training centres.

33
(iv) The Postal Service (Group ‘B’) officers are being imparted
induction training at PSCI Ghaziabad. It is also proposed to give
exposure to the Gr. ‘B’ officers of Postal Service as well as Accounts
cadre on specialised subjects at State Level Administrative Training
Institutes (ATIs).
As regards optimum utilisation of budgetary allocations, the
position in respect of Annual Plan 2004-05 is given below:
Sl.No. Activity BE RE Anticipated
2004-05 2004-05 Expenditure
3201-02-003-01-Training
1. Training Institute Learning
(a) Training Programme for Group 3.00 40.00 40.00
‘A’ & Group ‘B’ Officers
(b) In-service training 70.00 100.00 100.00
(c) Computer training 150.00 150.00 150.00
(d) Course material/Training equipment 100.00 100.00 100.00
2. Workplace T raining
(a) In-service training to officials 130.00 130.00 130.00
including Delivery Staff
(Postmen) & GDS BPMs — 0 0
(b) Computer training to officials 180.00 150.00 150.00
(c) Training equipment 125.00 135.00 135.00
3. 5201-03-02-Training Buildings 200.00 85.00 85.00
Total 985.00 890.00 890.00

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Gross Expenditure
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that the gross expenditure under the revenue
section has been increasing year after year i.e. Rs. 5476.15 crore in the
year 2002-2003, Rs. 5804.79 crore in the year 2003-2004 and budgeted
Rs. 6027.31 crore in the year 2004-05. This has risen mainly due to the
profile of work force in the Department which is labour intensive. The
increase relates to the increase in Dearness Allowance and Dearness
Relief sanctioned to them from time to time. The other factor that is
responsible is the pension payments that are made to postal pensioners.
This pension is charged to operating work expenses of the Department,
whereas in other Ministries/Departments it is charged to a common
head of account.
Whereas the Committee appreciate the universal service obligation
being performed by the Department and its efforts to minimize the
expenditure, they are surprised at the step-motherly treatment being
meted out to the Department by charging payments to pensioners
towards operational working expenses of the Department.
The working expense for the year 2003-2004 were Rs. 5747.72 crore
out of which approximately 1/5th i.e. Rs. 1107.22 crore was spent on
pensions. Again in the year 2004-2005, the working expenses are
projected to be Rs. 6030.37 crore out of which Rs. 1215.00 crore are
being spent on pensions (again about 1/5th).
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and the
Planning Commission to treat pension payments as a separate common
head as in the case of other Ministries which would then substantially
reduce their working expenses.
34

35
Action taken by Government
Expenses on pension payments to postal pensioners have been
shown traditionally as part of working expenses, whereas it has been
shown under a separate common head for other departments. Expenses
on pension payments to postal pensioners constitute about 1/5th of
the annual working expenses. As recommended by the Committee,
the matter of treating pension payments as a separate common head,
as in the case of other Ministries, was taken up with Ministry of
Finance.
In reply, the Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance has communicated the following reply:
“Department of Posts is functioning as a departmentally run
commercial undertaking and the receipts earned by them through
commercial operations are netted against non-Plan expenditure of
the Department to establish its commercial viability. Non-Plan
expenditure, which includes the expenditure on account of
‘pensions’, is being treated as working expenses of the Department
of Posts and netted against commercial receipts to arrive at ‘Postal
Deficit’ which is funded from the General Revenues. In case of
Department of Telecommunications also, before BSNL was created,
pensions paid to the erstwhile employees of DoT used to form a
part of working expenditure of the Department of
Telecommunications. Since the expenditure on ‘pensions’ form part
of the working expenses of the commercial departments, like
Ministry of Railways, the same principal is applied to the
Department of Posts. As such, it is regretted that it may not be
possible to agree to the proposal of the Department of Posts to
bear the expenditure on ‘pensions’ by General Revenues.”
The problem that arises with this clarification is that the Department
of Posts, although it is treated as a commercial Department for purposes
of pension, in the matter of addressing the deficit etc. is also expected
to fulfil the USO without enjoying even the level of autonomy that
the Ministry of Railways or even the erstwhile Department of
Telecommunication enjoyed. Secondly, every product that Department
of Posts provides is in competition with other service providers, and
even the ‘exclusive privilege’ that it enjoys legally is un-enforced, while
there is no level playing field as far as the USO issue is concerned,
unlike in the case of Department of Telecommunication. Many of the

36
services provided by Department of Posts, including Savings Bank
facilities are not being offered on a cost plus basis.
Under the circumstances the Department continues to bear the
burden of being treated as a ‘commercial undertaking’ without enjoying
any of the benefits/flexibilities in operation that should also flow from
such a status. Therefore, it has to continue its present efforts to explore
other options to reduce its deficit.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 11, 12 & 13 of Chapter-I)
Revenue Sharing
Recommendation No. 2
Revenue earnings which come through recoveries towards
commission from other departments for agency functioning done on
behalf of these departments and organisation by the Department of
Posts accounted for Rs. 103.99 crore in the year 2003-2004 and which
is projected to be Rs. 98.60 (BE) in the year 2004-2005.
Revenue earnings also come from revenue receipts from the sale
of postage stamps, postage realised in cash, MO/IPO commission,
SB/CC and miscellaneous receipts accounted for Rs. 4256.93 crore in
2003-2004 and is projected to be Rs. 4544.00 crore (BE) in 2004-2005.
The Committee note that whereas the earnings from recoveries is
going down, the earnings from direct sale of products is going up.
This apparently is because the department is rendering services at a
minimal charge on cost to cost basis, without any profit motive. Further,
it is also attributed to the fact that people go in for insurance from
private fund managers which are more attractive than the insurance
policies of the Department of Posts. In view of such a scenario, the
Committee recommend that the Department of Posts should now come
out of the euphoria of total universal obligation and begin looking at
some practical solutions, namely insurance wherein it can reduce its
deficits by generating healthier revenue by working on commercial
lines. One of the areas could be selling non-competing products through
post offices. The Commission also recommends that adequate awareness
campaign have to be done by the DoP for popularising insurance
schemes for the common man.

37
Action taken by Government
Revenue earnings which come through recoveries towards
commission from other departments for agency functions done on
behalf of these departments and organisation by the Department of
Posts accounted for Rs. 103.91 crore (Final figure) in the year 2003-04
and Rs. 98.60 crore is projected for the year 2004-05 (Budget Estimates).
Revenue earned by the Department during the year 2003-04 was
Rs. 4256.93 crore, and Rs. 4554.00 crore has been projected in Budget
Estimates 2004-05 (instead of Rs. 4544.00 crore as indicated in this
recommendation).
Based on the concern expressed by the Committee about the fall
in receipts from recoveries, a detailed exercise has been initiated, in
consultation with the Postal Accounts Wing and other concerned
Divisions, to identify the cause of fall in revenues and to explore the
scope for arresting this trend.
As far as the observations regarding Postal Life Insurance and
Rural PLI about the attractiveness of their product vis-a-vis other life
insurance products, need to create greater awareness etc. are concerned,
the following clarifications are furnished for consideration:
The existing products available in PLI are more attractive than the
other service providers because of low premium and high bonus. For
example, bonus in PLI for Endowment Assurance (EA) policies is
Rs. 77 per thousand of sum assured per annum for a policy whereas
the same is Rs. 70/- per thousand of sum assured per annum in Life
Insurance Corporation of India (LICI) for a comparable EA policy.
Similarly, the premium rates in PLI are lower by 5% to 20% in various
plans. Thus existing plans in PLI are more attractive in comparison to
similar plans in LICI and other service providers.
PLI is providing life insurance cover to an identified category of
clientele who are regular employees of Government (Centre/State),
undertakings (Centre/State), nationalised banks, Railways, Government-
aided educational institutions, universities, defence and paramilitary
personnel and local bodies etc. who have access to regular medical
facilities. Introduction of various new products are extremely necessary
for such segment of clientele. PLI is currently facing great difficulties
in creating new schemes while facing tough competition from other

38
service providers who have entered the market with various attractive
products. The LICI has more than one hundred schemes for the public,
whereas there are only five schemes in PLI and RPLI.
Before participation of private companies in the insurance sector,
the LICI, under Section 30 of the LIC Act, 1956, had got monopoly to
transact life insurance business in India. However, as laid down in
Section 44 (d) of the said Act, the provisions thereof are not applicable
to Post Office Insurance Fund (POIF) run by the Postal Department
(Central Government) who are in charge of its administration.
Earlier, the Controller of Insurance in Ministry of Finance used to
function as an actuarial adviser to POIF. Accordingly, the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs vide their letter No. 97 (25)
Ins. II/93 dated 20.09.1993 had advised the Department to refer all
policy matters of POIF, e.g., extension of scope so as to cover more
clientele, introduction of new scheme/products etc. to Insurance
Division for concurrence. Accordingly, on the recommendations of
R.N. Malhotra Committee constituted by the Government on social
reforms, a proposal for introduction of rural Postal Life Insurance in
rural sector for the benefit of weaker sections and women of the villages
was sent to the Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) for
concurrence. The scheme was approved by the Ministry of Finance
under their letter No.17(2)/Ins.V/94/Vol.II dated 11.04.1994 and the
same was introduced with effect from 24.03.1995.
After liberalization of the insurance sector, IRDA has been put in
place to regulate the insurance sector since 1999. After the formation
of the IRDA, the control function of the Insurance Division has been
transferred from Ministry of Finance to IRDA. At present, Ministry of
Finance, has no Controller of Insurance to examine new products. Now
all new products of other companies are examined and approved only
by IRDA. Since the PLI is not under IRDA, they have refused to do
anything concerning PLI. As a result, the Department has not been
able to introduce any new product, as Ministry of Finance has washed
their hands off this function and not issued any new guidelines on
this aspect.
The Department had referred a case for introduction of Group
Insurance Scheme for the employees of the BSNL to the Ministry of
Finance on 21.07.03. In fact, BSNL themselves approached the
Department to run this scheme for their employees after they came

39
outside the ambit of the CGEIS on formation of the Corporation.
Ministry of Finance replied on 1.8.2003, asking that approval of IRDA
be taken. This case remained in correspondence with IRDA and
Ministry of Finance for more than a year, but the Department failed
to get any response from Ministry of Finance. A meeting was held
with Chairman of IRDA at Hyderabad on 30.12.2003, and after much
persuasion, the IRDA wrote to Ministry of Finance on 25.03.2004 that
special dispensation can be given to PLI for introduction of insurance
scheme for the employees of BSNL. But so far, Ministry of Finance
has not given any approval for introduction of this scheme.
On the one hand IRDA, refuses to take any case relating to PLI
since PLI does not come under them while on the other hand Ministry
of Finance is not permitting introduction of any new products, which
is in the interest of public. This virtually means that PLI cannot
introduce any new product; consequently PLI will be losing out in the
market to the other private and multi-national insurance companies,
who are introducing many new customised schemes to attract
customers who have different requirements. A way out of this would
be for Finance Ministry to allow PLI to introduce new products, which
are worked out by a professional Actuary. However, no decision has
yet been taken in the matter.
As far as creation of awareness is concerned, funds to following
extent are earmarked for publicity:—
(i) PLI Directorate — Rs. 8 lakhs
(ii) Circles (PLI) — Rs. 28.08 lakhs
(iii) Circles (RPLI) — Rs. 14.28 lakhs
Publicity is being done through telecasting advertisement on TV
during prime time on popular TV channels and programmes. Besides,
RPLI melas are being organised in villages to get on-the-spot business.
Advertising is also being done through newspapers. The Department
has also approached Directorate of Audio Visual Publicity to prepare
a campaign plan to reach rural masses through Radio and TV . It has
also prepared a Media Plan for its insurance products which is under
submission for approval.
An agency system was introduced in PLI in October 2003 but the
field units could empanel the same only by mid-2004. The working of

40
the agents has been reviewed up to September 30, 2004 and 342 agents
have procured a business of Rs. 69.3461 crore during 4-5 months. The
response is encouraging and it is hoped that this will gather momentum
in the coming months. The agents have penetrating reach in the rural
areas to cover the maximum prospective clientele.
Here, it would be apt to bring out one more important point
regarding the problems faced by field units in imparting training in
insurance to the agents/staff through the institutes accredited by the
IRDA. The IRDA has issued orders banning accredited institutes from
training PLI/RPLI agents/staff through the institutes accredited by
them. The Department has referred the case to the Chairman, IRDA
for recommendation.
The Committee’s recommendation about selling non-competing
products through the post office is already being implemented by the
Department. The sale of non-life insurance products through post offices
has been introduced in select post offices in some Circles in the country.
Under this arrangement, the Department functions as the marketing
agent of M/s Oriental Insurance Corporation for identified products,
on commission basis. This scheme is being gradually expanded after
providing training in more and more post offices.
The Department is also focussing on optimising its retail capacity
by promoting services across the counter, which are relevant to the
needs of the community on behalf of other agencies/Departments/
corporate bodies etc. which do not have its reach, for a fee. Heads of
Circles have been empowered in 2003 to approve customised retail
packages on a cost plus basis. This has resulted in revenue from retail
post enhancing from Rs. 0.69 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs. 33.65 crore in
2003-04. In the current year, the target is fixed at Rs. 53.15 crore and
the achievement up to September is Rs. 20.04 crore.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 22 & 23 of Chapter I)
Financial Receipts
(Recommendation No. 12)
The Committee note with serious concern that for the year
2002-2003, out of 38 services of the Postal Department only 8 services

41
generated surplus, whereas the remaining services were running losses.
Further, for the year 2003-04 out of 35 services of the postal department,
only 11 services were in surplus and remaining 24 were in deficit. The
Committee are of the opinion that in the era of severe competition
and high expectations of customers from postal services and its
products, the postal Department should rethink and reassess its working
in order to identify reasons for incurring losses and formulate an
efficacious strategy to get rid of its services from running into losses
year after year. In such a situation, the Committee feel that Department
will have to be always dependent on grant/rebate for running its
postal network. The Committee, therefore would like to know the
reasons for its services running into losses and desire that effective
steps should be taken by the Department to overcome the recurring
losses. They suggest that the DoP should have a relook at their range
of products and services offered by them and optimise the bouquet of
services/products depending upon the location of Post Offices.
Action taken by Government
In the context of the continuing losses of the Department, the
Committee has sought to know the reasons for the services running
into losses and steps being taken to overcome them. The reasons that
contribute to the losses are many; however some of the important
ones are listed below:
(a) The Department follows the ‘apportionment method’ of
costing whereby the actual expenditure incurred by the
Department for maintenance of its services is taken from
the Demands for Grants and classified among different cost
centres. Thereafter, it is apportioned on the basis of traffic
and/or time factor needed in each product/service to assess
cost. As long as the revenues earned from the products/
services are lesser than the expenditure on them, as assessed
by the apportionment method of costing, these products
will continue to register losses.
(b) Revenues from products/services are based on the tariff rates
fixed for them, which in turn taken into account the USO
factor, the market competition and resultant market
conditions, and the nature and quality of the product/
services offered. In the case of the Department’s products/
services, there has been no clear categorization till date as

42
to what constitutes USO as far as the traditional postal
products/services are concerned. Hence an effort is now
being made to clearly define the nature and extent of USO.
All products which fall outside the category of USO will
have to be priced more commercially. Similarly, the
possibility of re-engineering existing traditional products to
identify value added features which can cater to special
segments among customers also needs to be explored. This
exercise has now been initiated.
(c) Fall in traffic in traditional products has contributed to the
increase in per unit cost of products. This calls for a twin
pronged strategy of giving more focussed attention to the
marketing of traditional mails and also of improving quality
of service so that volume of traffic increases, thereby
contributing to reduction in the per unit fixed costs. In the
case of the former, the Business Development Directorate
has recently issued certain guidelines to Circles about the
strategies to be adopted for marketing traditional products
so that they receive as much focus as the premium products.
(d) Number of services are/were being provided by the
Department at cost. The possibilities of increasing revenues
through review of commission, re-engineering of processes,
proper accounting of funds, etc. are being explored.
(e) Leakage of revenue is yet another area which has engaged
the attention of the Department.
(f) There is an inherent subsidy in the norms prescribed for
opening post offices in rural areas. However, post offices,
once opened, register far greater losses than permissible as
per policy. Feedback received from various sources indicate
that this is primarily because there is no onus on the GDS
to sustain or improve business volumes since the linkage
between their emoluments and the business they generate/
handle was removed a decade ago. This issue also merits
serious attention since 83% of the network comprise extra-
departmental offices.
(g) The Postal network was set up to cater to the Universal
Service Organization (USO) of providing greater access to
basic postal facilities. There are many post offices located in
urban and rural areas which are located at distances that

43
are lesser than the distance prescribed as per norms either
due to historical reasons or because they were opened on
the basis of the discretionary powers then available within
the norms. The reasons for which many of these offices
were opened no longer exist and hence there is room for
streamlining such offices and optimizing resources.
(h) The structures, processes and work norms of the Department
need to be geared to the changed scenario brought about
by induction of technology so that output and resources
earned per employee and per office are substantially
enhanced. This also requires consolidation of resources to
ensure optimum benefits from the induction of technology.
All post offices offer the same range of basic services across the
country. However, premium and value added services are focused in
those areas where there is a demand for them. Even Savings Bank
facilities are not provided in all the post offices. Similarly, retail services
like sale of application forms, collection of utility bills etc. are being
provided where there is a demand for them. In the area of mail
delivery also, it may be mentioned that all post offices are not delivery
post offices, especially in Urban areas. Thsi facility is extended only
through identified post offices to optimise resources while a large
number of post offices function as Non-delivery Town sub offices.
Thus, even at present, efforts are being made to tailor the bouquet of
services offered through post office to suit local needs.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
44

45
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 20 January, 2005 from 1100 hours
to 1325 hours in Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P . Karunakaran
6. Dr. P .P . Koya
7. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
8. Col. G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
10. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Vijay J. Darda
13. Shri Ashwani Kumar
14. Shri Balbir K. Punj
15. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
16. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
17. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
18. Shri Motiur Rahman
19. Shri Sanjay Nirupam

46
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in Second Report on “Demands for Grants (2004-05)” relating
to Department of Posts.
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Action Taken
Reports with some amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to House on a date and time
convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
SECOND REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 3,5, 6, 9, 10
Total: 5
Percentage: 41.66%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 4, 7, 8, 11
Total: 4
Percentage: 33.33%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 12
Total: 3
Percentage: 25%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil.
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
47