CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ pertaining
to the Department of Posts (DoP).
2. The Forty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2007. It
contained 28 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 12, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
26, 27 and 28
Total-18
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para No. 13
Total-01
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 8, 10, 11 and 16
Total-04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos. 2, 5, 14, 17, 25
Total-05
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Rate of Remuneration for Savings Bank and Cash Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
6. In their Forty-Fifth Report the Committee had observed that
pursuant to the recommendations of an Expert Committee set up in
1993-94 by the Ministry of Finance, the Department of Posts were
entitled to a hike of 10 per cent per annum of the rate of remuneration
for the Savings Bank and Cash Certificates work performed by them.
Taking note of the fact that the recommended increase in the rate of
remuneration never touched even four per cent between the years
2004-2005 and 2007-2008 and keeping in mind the number of agency
functions rendered by the Department of Posts for the Ministry of
Finance, the Committee had hoped that the Ministry of Finance would
look into the matter favourably. The Committee had also desired that
the Department should vigorously follow up the matter with the
Ministry of Finance failing which the matter may be placed before the
Union Cabinet for consideration.
7. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:—
“The matter relating to rate of remuneration for saving bank and
cash certificates was taken up with Ministry of Finance in the past
but no reply was received from Ministry of Finance. Remuneration
is being fixed by Ministry of Finance unilaterally ignoring the
recommendation of the Expert Committee set up in 1993-94 by
Ministry of Finance for 10% increase every year. On the
recommendation of the Standing Committee, the matter will now
be again taken up with Ministry of Finance.”

3
8. The Committee note that an Expert Committee of the Ministry
of Finance set up in 1993-94 had recommended that the Department
of Posts were entitled to a hike of 10 per cent per annum in the rate
of remuneration for work relating to Savings Banks and Cash
Certificate performed by them on behalf of the Ministry of Finance.
However, the Ministry of Finance have not been honouring this
recommendation of their own Expert Committee. Time and again
the Standing Committee on Information Technology have been
recommending in their successive reports on Demand for Grants of
the Department of Posts about the urgent need for sorting out the
matter and to place it before the Cabinet for their consideration, if
need be. The Committee regret to note that despite their persistent
exhortations the stalemate continues with neither the Ministry of
Finance nor the Department of Posts having taken any effective
initiative in resolving the long pending issue. This is unfortunate to
say the least. The Committee desire that the authorities concerned
should conclusively resolve the wrangle within a period of three
months with a view to ensuring not only due remuneration to DoP
for the agency functions rendered by them but also proper reflection
of the overall financial performance of the Department. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action taken.
II. Recovery of Outstanding Dues
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
9. In their Forty-Fifth Report, the Committee had expressed concern
over the Department of Post’s outstanding of Rs. 246 crore during the
years 2002-2003 to 2005-2006, out of which Rs. 210 crore had been
pending recovery from BSNL due to non-agreement over rate of
commission or handling telegrams and booking, transfer and delivery
of messages. Expressing their surprise over the fact that such issues
were not resolved for years together for which the outstanding amount
went on compounding, and finding that a MoU has been signed with
BSNL, the Committee had recommended that the DoP should devise
ways to amicably resolve the disputed issues for an early recovery of
dues.
10. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
follows:
“(i) Share of P&T Audit Charges: Till 31/3/2002 the share of P &
T Audit charge were apportioned in the ratio of 30 : 70 between
DoP and DoT. After formation of Committee under the

4
Chairmanship of Shri Malhotra, BSNL put forth the plea that the
share should be on deployment of manpower. Despite our best
efforts, the DG P&T Audit never intimated the deployment position
and the BSNL refused to settle the outstanding without this
information. In the meanwhile, C&AG of India agreed to bear
74% of the total dues but when the claim was preferred they
backtracked stating that they would reimburse 74% of the total
expensed from 1/4/2007 and not for earlier periods. This office
had again taken up the issue with DG P&T Audit to prevail upon
BSNL/DoT to clear the arrears as per old formula i.e. 30 : 70.
(ii) Commission for handling Telegrams: Nearly 50% of the
outstanding is on account of this item. The sub committee formed
was unable to arrive at unanimous decision. In their report dated
23/5/2007, the sub-committee suggested as an interim measure to
settle the commission @6.95 from 1991-92 pending a final decision
on the rate of commission which should be resolved by a
Committee of Secretaries. The interim claim is being preferred.”
11. In their earlier Report, the Committee had expressed concern
over the pending dues of the Department of Posts for the years
2002-03 to 2005-06 amounting to Rs. 246 crore. The Committee had
pointed out that out of these dues, Rs. 210 crore had been pending
recovery from BSNL alone. From the action taken reply now
furnished by the Departments of Posts, the Committee note that the
two components that constituted the BSNL dues were, the share of
P&T audit charges and the commission for handling telegrams. While
the dispute over the share of P&T audit charges involving DoP ,
BSNL and the Director-General of P&T Audit remains unsettled, the
sub-committee, which was formed for deciding the commission for
handling telegrams that amounted to nearly 50 per cent of the
outstandings, was unable to arrive at any decision. Thus, no headway
has been made in the realisation of the BSNL dues and the impasse
still continues. What has caused concern to the Committee is that
the DoP are yet to prefer the interim claim as was suggested by the
sub-committee in May 2007. The Committee are constrained to point
out that all these are indicative of the casual attitude of the
Department of Posts in realising their legitimate dues which is
deplorable. The Committee, therefore, desire that the issues should
be sorted out conclusively in a time-bound manner and they be
apprised of the status/outcome. They would also like to be informed
of the overall position regarding recovery of dues of DoP .

5
III. Utilisation of Plan Outlays
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
12. In their earlier Report, the Committee had been constrained to
note that against the Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 1350 crore for various
projects, the Department had been able to utilise Rs. 642.91 crore only
(upto December, 2006) i.e. percent utilisation was only 47.62. the
Committee recognised the difficulties of the Department in utilising
the Plan outlay because of the delayed approval of the Planning
Commission though that happened only during the first year of the
Plan period i.e. 2002-2003. The Committee also found that even before
working out the extent of under utilisation of the Plan outlay for
2006-07, the Department had already surrendered an amount of
Rs. 14.16 crore. Expressing concern over the state of affairs, the
Committee had recommended that the Department should intensify
their preparedness besides making appropriate planning well in
advance to achieve the Eleventh Plan outlays in general and that of
2007-2008 in particular.
13. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:
“During Tenth Plan period although most of the schemes got EFC/
SFC approved in last quarter of  Annual Plan 2002-2003 and first
quarter of 2003-2004, the major two schemes i.e. computerization
of POs/AOs/PAOs and Construction of Buildings got approved
only in January 2004 and August 2003. Hence the speed for
implementing the schemes picked up only in the third year and
the expenditure level also increased proportionately in the last three
years. During 2006-07 also funds to the extent of Rs. 322.19 crores
has already been booked as against the BE allocation of Rs. 419
crores which amounts to 76.89% utilisation. Out of the approved
Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 1435 crores, funds to the extent of
Rs. 874.47 crore has been actually spent upto 2006-07 which
amounts to 60.94% utilisation of the approved outlay.
During Eleventh Plan Period, preparatory action has already been
initiated by the Department for preparing draft EFC/SFC
memorandums in anticipation of approval from Planning
Commission. Funds are being released to circles to meet the
spillover payments of the Tenth Plan from the approved outlay
for 2007-08. Action has been taken for better monitoring and
coordination of plan funds and also their utilisation.”

6
14. In their earlier Reports, the Committee had emphasized the
need for the Department of Posts to take all advance measures for
optimum utilisation of the Annual Plan Outlays during the Tenth
Plan period. They, however, note with concern that out of the
approved outlay of Rs. 1435 crore, the Department of Posts have
been able to spend Rs. 874.47 crore only, which is a mere 60.94
percent of the approved outlay of the Tenth Plan. Evidently, there
has been a major failure in the planning and execution process in
the Department. The Department of Posts attributed the under-
utilisation of resources to delayed approval of two major schemes
i.e. computerization of POs/Aos/PAOs and construction of buildings
at the beginning of the Tenth Plan period. This clearly shows that
the Department had not taken sufficient preparatory action for
meaningful utilisation of the outlays as had been recommended by
the Committee, which is unfortunate. The Committee trust that the
corrective action now taken by the Department of Posts for better
monitoring and coordination of plan funds and also their utilisation
would yield tangible results during the Eleventh Plan period.
IV . Variation between Utilisation of Approved Plan Outlay and
Achievements of Tenth Plan Physical Targets
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
15. In their earlier Report, the Committee had acknowledged that
in most of the schemes/projects earmarked for the Tenth Plan period,
the Department have achieved the physical targets. However, in the
light of the fact that the tenth Plan funds utilisation was less than
fifty percent, the Committee had wondered how the Department’s
achievement of physical targets during the period was optimal. The
Committee had desired that the Department should look into the
variations between utilisation of funds and achievement of physical
targets and take corrective measures accordingly to project a more
realistic picture.
16. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:
“Physical targets were achieved in most of the activities as the
momentum of the implementation of the activities picked up from
the third year onwards, however the financial utilisation was less
when compared to physical targets achieved due to the facts:
1. Although expenditure were incurred by Circles, some of
the Circles could not book the expenditure before the close
of the financial year.

7
2. Some of the pending bills with DGS&D could not be
adjusted well within stipulated time and in some cases
vendors did not present the bills in time.
3. There were also some misclassifications made by circles
under non-plan, which could not be rectified by transfer
entry before the close of the books for the financial year.
However, the recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
The physical target and achievement of building projects during
the Xth Five Year Plan was reconciled by the Department by taking
into consideration of physical achievement of Spill over projects of
IXth Five Year Plan pertaining to Post offices/Mail Offices,
Administrative Officers and Staff Quarters. Hence, a revised report
showing the number of approved building projects of IXth Plan
completed during the Xth Five Year Plan period is enclosed as
Annexure “A”.
As regards financial targets and achievement is concerned, an outlay
of Rs. 115.40 crores had been approved for the scheme “construction
of Buildings” for the Xth Five Year Plan and against this outlay,
actual funds of Rs. 98.40 crores were earmarked at the Final grant
Stage. The financial targets and achievements of the Department
during Xth Five Year Plan is given as under:
Year Budget allocation Achievement
(Final Grant)
2002-03 Rs. 15.36 crores Rs. 13.90 crores
2003-04 Rs. 17.35 crores Rs. 15.01 crores
2004-05 Rs. 17.29 crores Rs. 15.72 crores
2005-06 Rs. 24.00 crores Rs. 21.63 crores
2006-07 Rs. 24.40 crores Rs. 17.39 crores”
17. In their earlier Report, the Committee had drawn attention
to the mismatch between utilisation of funds by the Department of
Posts and achievement of physical targets during the Tenth Plan
period. The Department of Posts have now stated in their action
taken reply that the anomalies occurred because, some of the circles
could not book the expenditure, despite incurring it, before the close
of the financial year. Further, some of the pending bills with DGS&D
could not be adjusted well within the stipulated time and in some

8
cases the vendors did not submit the bills in time. Moreover, there
were also some misclassifications made by the Circles under Non-
Plan, which could not be rectified by transfer entry before the close
of the books for the financial year. The Committee note with
unhappiness that the above reasons depict nothing but an incept
and unrealistic financial management by the Department of Posts
during the Tenth Plan Period. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department should impress upon the Circles to rectify the
shortcomings displayed during the Tenth Plan Period so that there
are no mismatches between the utilisation of funds and the
achievement of physical targets during the Eleventh Plan period.
V. Budgetary Allocation for North-East
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
18. The Committee had in their earlier Report noted with deep
concern the recurrent under utilisation of Budget outlay during each
year of the Tenth Plan Period for the North-East Region. Out of the
total allocation of Rs. 71.87 crore a mere Rs. 18.01 crore was spent
upto January 2007 i.e. virtually the end of Tenth Five Year Plan. Pointing
out that the percentage of Plan expenditure being 5.51 percent in
2002-03, 6.18 in 2003-04, 2.98 in 2004-05, 1.60 in 2005-06 and
astonishingly nil in 2006-07 (upto January 07) was much below the
mandatory ten per cent of the total expenditure and keeping in mind
the unlimited scope of technological innovations and induction in the
Region, the Committee had desired that the Department should ensure
optimum budgetary allocation and at least the mandated ten per cent
of total Plan expenditure, to be allocated to the North-East Region
during the coming years.
19. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
under:
“Although the funds utilized under North-East Region is less than
the 10% mandatory efforts are being made by the Department for
allocation and utilization of funds in North-East in all possible
areas through relaxation of some norms e.g. Computerization of
double handed post offices in North-East, Improving Ergononomics
of post offices, mail offices and speed post centers, providing
support for all Non-Returnable Contribution (NRC) post offices in
North-East. During the Annual Plan 2007-08 Rs. 31.34 crores has
been earmarked for North-Eastern region out of the BE outlay of
Rs. 315 crores which amounts to 9.95% of the total outlay.”

9
20. The Committee regret to point out that the Department of
Posts have not offered any convincing explanation for the gross
under-utilisation of funds i.e. below the mandatory 10% stipulation
earmarked for the North-East Region during the Tenth Plan Period.
The Department’s contention that efforts were being made for
allocation and utilisation of funds in the Region through relaxation
of some norms is not sustainable at all in view of the low percentage
of utilisation ranging from 0 to 6.18 per cent during the financial
years from 2002-2003 to 2006-2007. Clearly, the Department’s approach
towards North-East leaves a lot to be desired. The Committee
fervently hope that in the year 2007 which the Government of India
has declared as the year of North-East and when the Department
have claimed to have initiated several measures for optimum
utilisation of allocated funds, the trend would finally be reversed
and Rs. 31.34 crore allocated for North-East Region for the current
year would be utilised fully.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
I. Budgetary Analysis
Revenue Deficit
Recommendation (No. 1)
The Committee observe that the revenue deficit of the Department
of Posts was Rs. 1364.40 in 2003-04, Rs. 1375.22 in 2003-04, Rs. 1381.84
in 2004-05 and Rs. 1209.88 crore in 2005-06. The Committee also find
that the revenue deficit for the year 2006-07 (upto January, 2007) is
Rs. 3052.58 crore although the final projection  i.e. by 31st March, 2007
is Rs. 1317.66 crore. As projected, the expected deficit for the year
2007-08 would be Rs. 1482.61 crore. The increase in the revenue deficit
has been attributed to the increase in Pay, Dearness Allowances and
other establishment cost and operational charges besides heavy load
of pensionary charges included in the working expenditure of the
Department. Although a number of measures like induction of better
technology, introduction of new products/services were reportedly
being taken by the Department, yet the Committee are concerned to
note the alarmingly growing trend of the revenue deficit over the
years. The Committee feel that among other measures, intensifying the
technology induction at various levels coupled with redeployment of
staff would help the Department to cut down their establishment and
operational cost which would ultimately help in containing the revenue
deficit. The Committee also desire that the department should seriously
endeavor to launch and popularize their products/services like
disbursement of wages to the beneficiaries under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), old age pension in the rural
areas, and other premium products in view of their immense potential,
so that more revenues are generated to neutralize the impact of the
deficit. A definite time frame for the above measures should be kept
in mind in order to prevent the revenue deficit from taking  a menacing
proportion.
Action Taken by the Government
Sincere efforts are being made to expand the network of distribution
of benefits to the beneficiaries under National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), old age pension scheme in rural areas

11
through post offices. The matter is also being pursued with Ministry
of Rural Development for disbursement of NREGS benefits across the
country through Post Office savings account.
The Department has evolved various schemes to garner revenue
like collection of Utility service payments and other business packages
in many Circles. It has taken efforts to further extend the sale and
acceptance of Passport Application forms through many more Post
Offices in consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Department has entered in a tie up with State Bank of India
for sale of their liability and asset products, as a pilot project in five
Circles.
Revenue Receipts
Recommendation (No. 3)
The Committee observe that the Revenue receipts of the DoP were
Rs. 4009.65 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 4256.93 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 4431.85
crore in 2004-05 and Rs. 5023.49 crore in 2005-06. The anticipated
revenue receipts for the year 2006-07 is 5350.45 crore whereas the
actuals upto January, 2007 is Rs. 2277.33 crore only. The slow growth
in revenue receipts is reportedly due to decline in traditional mail
traffic, money order traffic etc. for which efforts are being made by
the Department to introduce innovative products and services like
passport services, Business post, Bill Mail Service etc. for generation of
more revenue. The Committee feel that with the fast changing
technological advancements, traditional mail traffic is bound to decline
sooner than later. The Department have, therefore, to take advantage
of the new avenues that are surfacing as a result of the advancement
of technology and introduce innovative products commensurate with
the market requirements so that their revenue receipts get a boost.
Action taken by the Government
The Department has developed e-enabled services to cater to the
needs of its customers. E-post service has been launched to bridge the
digital divide and provide services to the customers with the use of
Internet.
Recommendation (No. 4)
In this context, the Committee find that the revenue receipts
of the Department through sale of stamps have reduced from

12
Rs. 981.04 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 758.66 crore in 2005-06 due to the
Department’s active encouragement of use of Franking Machines and
Multi Purpose Counter Machines. But the Committee are glad to
observe that such a move by the Department, although resulted in
decline in the sale of stamps and revenue thereof, has caused revenue
in ‘postage realized in cash’ to the extent of Rs. 1469.99 crore in
2005-06 vis-a-vis Rs. 1017.35 crore in 2002-03. That is why precisely the
Committee are emphasizing the advantages of the technological
advancements and recommend that the Department should continue
exploring innovative measures.
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts has been encouraging the use of High Speed
Franking machines in its Business Post Offices for speedier disposal of
corporate mails. Business Post has been contributing significantly to
the revenues of the department.
Rate of remuneration for Savings Bank and Cash Certificates
Recommendation (No. 6)
The Committee note that the rate of remuneration for the Savings
Bank and Cash Certificates work performed by the Department entails
them a hike of 10 per cent every year pursuant to the recommendations
of an expert Committee set up on 1993-1994 by the Ministry of Finance.
But they are constrained to observe that it never touched even four
per cent between the years 2004-05 and 2007-08. In view of the alarming
revenue deficit position of the Department and keeping in mind the
services rendered by the department below the cost margin under
social obligation, the Committee are of the view that the enhancement
of 10% hike in the rate of remuneration as agreed to by the Ministry
of Finance merit compliance. They, therefore, trust that the Ministry of
Finance will look into the matter favourably, more so when the Postal
department have been rendering a number of agency functions for the
Ministry of Finance. The department of Posts, on their part, should
follow up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to do the needful
failing, which the matter may be placed before the Union cabinet for
their consideration.
Action taken by the Government
The matter relating to rate of remuneration for savings bank and
cash certificates was taken up with Ministry of Finance in the past but
no reply was received from Ministry of Finance. Remuneration is being
fixed by Ministry of Finance unilaterally ignoring the recommendation
of the Expert Committee set up in 1993-94 by Ministry of Finance for

13
10% increase every year. On the recommendation of the Standing
Committee, the matter will now be again taken up with Ministry of
Finance.
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 8 of the Chapter-I.
Recoveries
Recommendation (No. 7)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts are paid agency
charges for the services rendered by them to various Ministries/
Departments and other Government organizations. In this context, the
Committee find that the Department of Posts received agency charges
of Rs. 102 crore in 2002-03, Rs. 103.91 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 150.85 crore
in 2004-05 and Rs. 195.78 crore in 2005-06.  For the year 2006-07, the
projection has been Rs. 231 crore, but upto January, 2007 the receipt
has been Rs. 12.81 crore only. The Committee are concerned to note
that the receipts/recoveries of the agency charges by the department
during the Tenth Plan period are not commensurate with the services
rendered and the amount raised thereof. The Department’s contention
that from the year 2004-05, recoveries of the agency charges marked
a steady growth does not convince the Committee in view of the huge
amount i.e., Rs. 246.65 crore that has been pending recovery during
the first our years of the Tenth Plan period. The Committee feel that
when the Department are straddled with so many financial constraints,
they can least afford to ignore such a noticeable outstanding amount.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the department to take all
appropriate measures including regular monitoring in their own interest,
to recover the amount pending against various organizations. The
Committee also desire that the Department should ensure recovery of
Rs. 231 crore, as projected for the year 2006-07 by the end of that
fiscal, besides appropriately expanding and diversifying the agency
services to generate additional revenue in the coming years.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts is taking various innovative measures to
diversify its service base and increase the No. of agency services
keeping in view of customers and market requirement. In the year
2006-07, the Department received Rs. 207.16 crores from various
organizations and a suitable mechanism has been evolved for each
agency services in order to ensure timely recovery of dues.

14
Recommendation (No. 9)
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Rural
Development and various other State Government are interested in
tie-up with the Department of Posts for the disbursement of National
Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) through Post Offices. The
Committee also appreciate that in Andhra Pradesh alone, 32 lakh
Savings accounts have been opened for disbursement of NREGS. The
Committee desire that similar business avenues should be explored in
other States also in view of their reported interest for disbursement of
NREGS through Post Offices.
Action Taken by the Government
Presently, the benefits to the beneficiaries under NREGS is being
disbursed in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Jharkhand
and West Bengal Circles. The matter is being pursued with Ministry
of Rural Development to start NREGS disbursement through post office
across the country.
Expansion of Postal Network
Recommendation (No. 12)
The Committee note that 377 requests from various circles for
opening up of post offices have been pending with the Department
since 2004-05. They also observe that during the years 2004-05 and
2005-06, no new post offices were opened and the requirement for
post offices in various areas in the country was met by relocation of
POs from areas where they were no longer justified as per the
prescribed norms. The Committee are informed that as per the decision
taken by the Expenditure Finance Committee, in future only non-
recurring cost will be taken into account for calculating unit cost to
open Branch Post Offices and Sub-Post Offices and the manpower for
new Post Offices is to be met only by redeployment of the existing
personnel. The Committee, thus, find that while the Department face
the challenges of demand for opening up of new Post offices, the
funding pattern and manpower provisions remain the same, thereby
posing a greater challenge for the Department. In such a complex
scenario, the Committee would like the Department to see how best
they can prudently re-deploy the existing manpower and judiciously
utilize the available resources so that the demand for opening up of
new post offices are appropriately catered to.

15
Action Taken by the Government
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for the Tenth Five Year
Plan had approved implementation of the scheme for expansion of
Postal Network for the first two years of the Tenth Five Year Plan, viz.
2002-2003 and 2003-04, with the stipulation that no new posts should
be created and that expansion should be restricted to providing basic
infrastructure only. Resultantly, 440 EDBOs and 45 DSOs were opened
in various Circles through redeployment of staff. Similarly, Standing
Finance Committee (SFC) approved a target of 10 DSOs to be opened
in some of the Circles during the financial year 2006-07. These
10 DSOs also were opened through redeployment of staff.
During the year 2007-08, it is proposed to open 500 DSOs and
250 EDBOs through redeployment of staff. The Department will strive
to ensure 100% achievement of targets by redeployment of staff from
those offices where work can be managed by lesser number of
employees without affecting the access to postal services in anyway.
Mail Business Centres (MBCs)
Recommendation (No. 15)
The Committee observe that in view of the decline in the mail
traffic and as a part of rationalization of the mail network, the
Department propose to converge the existing 487 mail offices across
the country into 300 Mail Business Centres which will function as a
hub for mail related activities and will be equipped with latest
technology and state of the art equipment for assembly line processing,
warehousing, packaging, conveyance etc. The Committee also find that
85 Mail Business Centres have so far been set up across the country.
The Committee would like to encourage the Department to set up
more such centres in the country, in line with international
phenomenon, during the Eleventh Plan period by optimally utilizing
Rs. 388.60 crore earmarked towards the objective. The Committee are
hopeful that once such rationalization of mail network is accomplished
on a large scale, it will ensure quality service to the customers besides
reducing cost of operations and generating additional revenue.
Action Taken by the Government
1. Sixty four (64) transit sections have so far been abolished
resulting in an approximate saving of Rs. 13.00 crores.
2. Fifty five (55) Mail Offices have been closed/merged and
the projected saving is approximately Rs. 5.00 crores.

16
3. Eighty five (85) Mail Business Centres have been established
across the country.
4. Under the XIth Five Year Plan 300 MBCs would be
established equipped with state-of-the-art technology. These
MBCs would function “One Stop Shop” offering total
mailing solution to bulk customers.
Community Service Centres
Recommendation (No. 18)
The Committee notes that there is a proposal for setting up one
lakh Community Service Centres (CSCs) with public-private
partnerships or NGOs or corporate organizations throughout the
country. The objective of the CSCs is to provide information and the
day-to-day service to the villagers using Information Technology. In
this context, the Committee find that the DoP with its vast network of
1,55,516 Post Offices in the country have been considered suitable for
facilitating the establishment of Community Service Centres with a
role of providing necessary accommodation, manpower, electricity
connection, advertising etc. As the CSCs will be of great help in
providing day-to-day information and basic services to the rural people,
the Committee hope that the Department, commensurate with the role
and responsibility assigned, will facilitate setting up of CSCs.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts has set up CSCs in collaboration with
NGOs in different Postal Circles as detailed below:—
(i) in Collaboration with Kisan Soochna Kendra:
1. Uttarakhand : 1
2. Rajasthan : 1
3. Assam : 1
In addition to above, the Postal Circles are coordinating with the
State Governments and their facilitating agencies for participating in
the setting up of CSCs.
The Department has been creating the necessary infrastructure for
setting up CSCs in post offices. Business Development Directorate
of the Department has been made the nodal division for setting up
CSCs.

17
Postal Delivery System
Recommendation (No. 19)
The Committee note that the instances of delay in delivery of
money orders was 157816 in 2003-04, 217434 in 2004-05 and 173347 in
2005-06. Similarly, the number of complaints about delay in delivery
of Registered letters was 40179 in 2003-04, 53035 in 2004-05 and 53348
in 2005-06. The reasons for such delays are stated to be cancellation of
trains/airlines/buses, incomplete and wrong address on money orders/
letters, non use of Postal Index Number (PIN) Code growth of
unplanned colonies etc. Although the Department have initiated various
steps like regular monitoring of mail delivery , surprise checks, regular
co-ordination with airlines, railways and state route transport authority,
yet the instances of delay in delivery of money orders and registered
letters are still on higher side. The Secretary DOP’s statement that the
figures of delay are not too high looking at the volume handled does
not impress the Committee as there should not be slightest scope of
aberration in pursuit of excellence. The Committee, therefore, urge that
the Department should further strengthen their monitoring mechanism
besides appropriately rationalizing their mail processing network so
that instances in delivery of postal articles, especially money orders
are reduced to a greater extent for the benefit of the common man.
The Committee also hope that the electronic based money order, which
is on the anvil, will largely eliminate delays in the delivery system, as
also assured by the Secretary, DOP .
Action Taken by the Government
1. In order to rationalize the mail network and ensure optimal
utilization of resources smaller mail units are being consolidated and
merged with bigger units. This has already resulted in better and
more effective monitoring.
2. Under the New Paradigm for mail management, Mail Business
Centres are being set up across the country. Delivery of bulk mail will
be carried out directly from Mail Business Centres. This would ease
the pressure on delivery post offices, which in turn, would expedite
delivery of individual mail as well.
3. Daily e-mail monitoring: A new system of Daily Mail Monitoring
has been introduced, wherein all circles are required to send a daily
mail monitoring report containing information on delivery performance
of post offices, functioning of mail offices, delay/detention, if any, etc.
Thus, performance of each circle is being monitored at the Directorate
on a daily basis. This has already resulted in significant improvement
in delivery of mail.

18
4. To reduce dependency on Railways and Airlines, the Department
has initiated a multi-modal transport conveyance of mail. Short beat
RMS sections are being replaced by road transport, wherever feasible
to ensure guaranteed delivery. In order to improve quality of mail
transmission and delivery in the North-East Region, Department has
leased a freighter from Indian Airlines. This is to ensure guaranteed
delivery of mail in the North East Sector.
Recommendation (No. 20)
The Committee appreciate to note that during the year 2003-04,
203 postal employees have been proceeded against/punished for being
at fault in prompt delivery of mails. The Committee are of the opinion
that when there are so many reasons, beyond the Department’s control,
which cause inordinate delay in the delivery of postal items, the
involvement of the Department employees for such delay should be
continued to be dealt with a firm hand.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance. All the Postal Circles have been informed vide letter
No. 3-35/2007-PG dated 17.7.2007 to take strict action against the
officials found responsible for delay in the delivery of postal articles.
Recommendation (No. 21)
The Committee note that there was a decline of mail traffic in
unregistered letters from 214.18 million in 2004-2005 to 208.56 million
in 2005-06 whereas such decline in registered letters were to 6492.16
million in 2005-06 as compared to 7146.18 million in 2004-05. Reasons
for decline in both registered and unregistered mails are attributed to
decline in personal mail. However, the Committee are informed that
although there has been a decline in personal mail. Yet bulk mail is
picking up. The Committee therefore, recommend that as there is huge
potential in bulk mail business, it should be encouraged and
incentivised in order to generate more revenue.
Action taken by the Government
Department of Posts has already incentivized the processing of
bulk mail through providing discounts on pre-sorted and franked mail.
Bill Mail service is currently undergoing price revision in order to
make it more competitive and attractive. The revised product is likely
to give substantial fillip to traffic and revenue of Bill Mail.

19
Business Development Activities
Recommendation (No. 22)
While the Committee appreciate to note that Media Posts, Business
Posts and Retail Posts are doing quite well in terms of revenue
generation, they are constrained to observe that the Greeting Post has
been exhibiting a declining trend due to discontinuation of the printing
of new Greeting Cards as a premium cost product. The Committee
further note that in spite of vast infrastructure created for Speed Post,
its revenue generation could be enhanced by 15% only in 2005-2006 as
compared to the previous year. In order to encourage Speed Post
business ‘One India, One Rate’ was introduced in August 2006 and
numerous other measures are also reportedly being taken to give
publicity to Speed Post. The Committee are of the opinion that the
Department should focus on their core business and evolve other
innovative strategies encompassing value additions for the customers
so that growth in the Speed Post business in accelerated.
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts in order to encourage Speed Post keeping up
with the momentum generated by the ‘One India One Rate’ has further
revised tariff of Speed Post local rates. Speed Post local rates has been
reduced from Rs. 20 to Rs. 12 with effect from 11.6.2007. Same day
Speed Post Service has now been introduced in many towns and cities
across the country. In order to provide service of international standards
establishment of Speed Post call centres in metro cities has been
envisaged during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Recommendation (No. 23)
The Committee are happy to note that market surveys are being
conducted by the Department of Posts to assess the customers
expectations and requirements. Structured customer meets are also being
conducted at various levels in order to have the feedback about various
services introduced by the Postal Department. the Committee, therefore,
recommend that more and more such surveys and customer interactive
measures should be undertaken to get the response of the public
towards the quality of service provided by the Department of Posts
and based on such feed back corrective measures be taken accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts in its endeavour to fulfil customer expectations
and requirements has envisaged broad spectrum of market surveys
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Product designing and delivery
would be broadly based on the results of such surveys.

20
Postal Finance Marts
Recommendation (No. 24)
The Committee observe that 142 Postal Finance Marts have already
been set up in the country for providing specialized value added
financial services like Management Information System (MIS), Term
Deposit (TD), Senior Citizen Saving Scheme (SCSS), Kisan Vikas Patra
(KVP) in conformity with market standards and in a customer friendly
environment. As the Postal Finance Mart is a brand positioning exercise
of financial services offered by the banks to customers, the Committee
desire that more and more such ‘One Stop Shop’ for Financial Services
should be opened up, including the targeted 34 such Marts for 2007-
08. The Committee also desire that feasibility of opening of such Postal
Finance Marts in the rural areas should also be explored in view of
the Department’s vast rural customer base.
Action taken by the Government
Till now 290 Postal Finance Marts have been set up across the
country. It has been proposed to set up another 715 Postal Finance
Marts during the 11th Five Year Plan. The observations of the
Committee about feasibility of opening of such Postal Finance Marts
in rural areas will be looked into while selecting locations for Postal
Finance Marts.
Philately
Recommendation (No. 26)
The Committee observe that philatelic exhibitions are periodically
being organized at the Divisional, Circle and National levels for the
promotion of philately. Further, philatelic festivals, workshops, seminars,
promotional literature and publications have been initiated for the
upgradation and promotion of philately in the country. The Committee
appreciates the steps taken by the Department of Posts for the
promotion and upgradation of philately and recommend that the
Department should maintain the momentum in this regard in the
coming years also.
Action Taken by the Government
Philately Division of the Department will hold circle, National and
Internation levels philatelic exhibitions for the promotion of Philately.
It will organize festivals, workshops seminars and will initiate
promotional literature and publication for the upgradation and
promotion of philately in the coming years and will keep the
momentum up in this regard.

21
Advertising and Publicity of various schemes
Recommendation (No. 27)
The Committee appreciate to note the Secretary’s statement that
the department has been coming out with periodical and attractive
advertising products to endorse various products/schemes. The
Committee feel that this aspect of business acumen should never be
lost sight of, for the Department to remain in contention. In this context,
the Committee also desire that while subletting their premises to other
Private/Multi-National Companies/the DoP should appropriately
negotiate with them to advertise/publicise various postal products/
schemes.
Action Taken by the Government
During the tenth five-year plan 2002-07, out of the allocation of
Rs. 25 crores, made to Department of Posts for promotion and publicity
of Premium products, Department of Posts spent Rs. 18 crores. In
addition customer meets at different levels, workshops, seminars, Press
Conferences etc. were organized. The activities would also continue in
Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Recommendation (No. 28)
The Committee note that the Department has huge savings account
deposit to the tune of Rs. 3,23,780.37 crore by virtue of work performed
on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also note that
the Department have absolutely no access to such funds to utilise a
part of the same for advertising/publicity campaign. However, after
required negotiation, the Department may consider increasing the
commission rate for the work they are performing for the Ministry of
Finance. The additional fund, thus, generated can be utilized for
advertising purposes. The Committee also desire that the DoP should
request the Government for separate funds for the purpose, as also
agreed to by the Secretary , DoP .
Action Taken by the Government
During the Tenth Five Year Plan an amount of Rs. 0.75 crore for
the year 2004-05 and Rs. 2 crore each for 2005-06 and 2006-07 have
been provided for publicity of Post Office Saving Bank products/
Financial Services and Instant Money Order (IMO) service to create
awareness among the people.
Several programmes for promotion, publicity, marketing and
business expansion in the area of premium products and a programme
for developing a media plan for the entire department including
marketing plan for financial services are envisaged in the 11th Plan.

22
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (No. 13)
The Committee are concerned to note that out of the 2,34,755 Gram
Panchayat villages in the country there are still 1,18,874 Gram Panchayat
villages without post offices. The Committee are informed that post
offices can be opened only in those Gram Panchayat villages where
the norms for opening of Branch Post Offices with regard to distance,
population and income are fulfilled and thus every Gram Panchayat
village cannot have a post office though postal facilities are provided
to all the villages. In this content, the Committee find that there are
proposals to open 250 Branch Post Offices in rural areas during the
year 2007-08. In view of the fact that such a large number of Gram
Panchayat villages do not have any post offices, the Committee would
like to impress upon the Department to take all effective measures to
achieve the 2007-08 target of Branch Post Offices which will also cover
those Gram Panchayat villages where a post office is justified as per
norms. As every Gram Panchayat village cannot have a post office
due to the prevalent norms, the Committee desire that continuous and
uninterrupted basic postal facilities should be provided to those Gram
Panchayat villages which are deprived of the advantages of post office.
Action Taken by the Government
Out of a total of 2,34,755 Gram Panchayat villages in the country,
1,15,881 Gram Panchayat Villages have already been provided with
post offices, while 1,18,874 Gram Panchayat villages do not have the
physical existence of a post office. Non-existence of a post office does
not imply denial of postal facilities. Postal facilities in terms of daily
delivery of dak, sale of stamps/stationery at the doorstep of customers
and reception of mail through letterboxes is ensured in every nook
and corner of the country.
Of the 1,18,874 Gram Panchayat villages, there are only 3752 Gram
Panchayat villages (September, 2030) which fulfil distance and
population norms but not the income norms. Only these villages fall
under the zone of consideration for opening of post office if they fulfil

23
income norms. Target of 250 EDBOs (in rural areas) allotted during
the year 2007-08 (subject to final approval by the competent authority)
will be utilized for opening post offices in equal number of villages
including GP village. Opening of post offices can be considered in
those Gram Panchayat villages which fulfil the prescribed norms for
opening of post offices with regard to distance, population and income.
It may not be possible to provide a post office in every GP village
because the Department has already ensured 100% access to postal
services.

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (No. 8)
The Committee are concerned to observe that out of the outstanding
amount of Rs. 246 crore during the years 2002-2003 to 200-2006, as
much as Rs. 210 crore has been pending recovery from BSNL due to
non-agreement over rate of commission for handling telegrams and
booking, transfer and deliver of messages. The Committee are surprised
that such issues could not be resolved for years together and the
outstanding amount went on compounding. However, now that a MOU
has been signed with BSNL, the Committee desire that there should
be synergy between the sister Departments, disputed issues resolved
amicably and the Department of Posts get their outstanding dues.
Action taken by the Government
(i) Share of P&T Audit Charges : Till 31/3/2002 the share of
P & T Audit charges were apportioned in the ratio of 30:70 between
DoP and DoT. After formation of Committee under the Chairmanship
of Shri Malhotra, BSNL put forth the plea that the share should be on
deployment of manpower. Despite our best efforts, the DG P&T Audit
never intimated the deployment position and the BSNL refused to
settle the outstanding without this information. In the meanwhile,
C&AG of India agreed to bear 74% of the total dues but when the
claim was preferred they backtracked stating that they would reimburse
74% of the total expenses from 1/4/2007 and not for earlier periods.
This office had again taken up the issue with DG P&T Audit to prevail
upon BSNL/DoT to clear the arrears as per old formula i.e. 30:70.
(ii) Commission for handling Telegrams : Nearly 50% of the
outstanding is on account of this item. The sub committee
formed was unable to arrive at unanimous decision. In their report
dated 23/5/2007, the sub-committee suggested as an interim measure
to settle the commission @ 6.95 from 1991-92 pending a final decision
on the rate of commission which should be resolved by a Committee
of Secretaries. The interim claim is being preferred.

25
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 11 of the Chapter-I)
Utilisation of Plan Outlays
Recommendation (No. 10)
The Committee are constrained to note that against the Tenth Plan
Outlay of Rs. 1350 crore for various projects, the Department have
been able to utilise Rs. 642.91 crore only (upto December, 2006) which
constitutes 47.62 percent utilisation of the plan outlay . The under
utilisation of the Plan Outlay was attributed to the delayed approval
of the scheme-wise outlays by the Planning Commission and the
resultant delay by the Department in taking further action. The
Committee recognise the difficulties of the Department in utilising the
Plan outlay because of the delayed approval of the Planning
Commission. But that happened only during the first year of the plan
period i.e. 2002-03, as has been observed from the Department’s reply.
In the subsequent years, the Department should have taken all advance
measures for optimum utilisation of Annual Plan Outlays, instead of
justifying that the expenditure increased to 71.08 percent in 2004-05
and further to 74.08 in 2005-2006. Although the extent of under
utilisation of the Plan outlay for the year 2006-2007 has not yet been
worked out, the Committee find that an amount of Rs 14.16 crore has
already been surrendered by the Department. The Committee are of
the view that less than fifty percent utilisation of the total plan outlay
cannot be condoned, regardless of the reasons. They, therefore,
recommend that the Department, instead of leaving things to take
their own course, should intensify the preparedness, make all
appropriate planings well in advance and thrive to achieve the Eleventh
plan outlays in general and that of 2007-2008 in particular to the
optimum extent.
Action taken by the Government
During Tenth Plan period although most of the schemes got EFC/
SFC approved in last quarter of  Annual Plan 2002-2003 and first
quarter of 2003-2004, the major two schemes  i.e. computerization of
Pos/Aos/PAOs and Construction of Buildings got approved only in
January 2004 and August 2003. Hence the speed for implementing the
schemes picked up only in the third year and the expenditure level
also increased proportionately in the last three years. During 2006-07

26
also funds to the extent of Rs. 322.19 crores has already been booked
as against the BE allocation of Rs. 419 crores which amounts to 76.89%
utilisation. Out of the approved Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 1435 crores,
funds to the extent of Rs. 874.47 crore has been actually spent upto
2006-07 which amounts to 60.94% utilisation of the approved outlay.
During Eleventh Plan Period, preparatory action has already been
initiated by the Department for preparing draft EFC/SFC
memorandums in anticipation of approval from Planning Commission.
Funds are being released to circles to meet the spillover payments of
the Tenth Plan from the approved outlay for 2007-08. Action has been
taken for better monitoring and coordination of plan funds and also
their utilisation.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 14 of the Chapter-I)
Tenth Plan Physical Targets and Achievements
Recommendation (No. 11)
The Committee appreciate to note that in most of the schemes/
projects earmarked for the Tenth Plan period, the Department have
achieved the physical targets. But the Committee fail to understand
that when the Tenth Plan financial utilization is less than fifty percent,
how the achievement of physical targets during the period is optimal.
It implies that either the physical targets originally proposed to be
accomplished during the Tenth Plan period have drastically been
reduced or the financial projections to achieve the targets have been
unrealistic. The, Committee, desire that such variations between
utilisation of funds and achievement of physical targets should be
looked into and corrective measures taken accordingly to project a
realistic picture.
Action taken by the Government
Physical targets were achieved in most of the activities as the
momentum of the implementation of the activities picked up from the
third year onwards, however the financial utilisation was less when
compared to physical targets achieved due to the facts:
1. Although expenditure were incurred by Circles, some of
the Circles could not book the expenditure before the close
of the financial year.

27
2. Some of the pending bills with DGS&D could not be
adjusted well within stipulated time and in some cases
vendors did not present the bills in time.
3. There were also some misclassifications made by circles
under non-plan, which could not be rectified by transfer
entry before the close of the books for the financial year.
However the recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
The physical target and achievement of building projects during
the X Five Year Plan was reconciled by the Department by taking into
consideration of physical achievement of Spill over projects of IX Five
Year Plan pertaining to Post offices/Mail Offices, Administrative Officers
and Staff Quarters. Hence, a revised report showing the number of
approved building projects of IX Plan completed during the X Five
Year Plan period is enclosed as Annexure “A”.
As regards financial targets and achievement is concerned, an outlay
of Rs. 115.40 crores had been approved for the scheme “construction
of Buildings” for the X Five Year Plan and against this outlay, actual
funds of Rs. 98.40 crores were earmarked at the Final Grant Stage.
The financial targets and achievements of the Department during
X Five Year Plan is given as under:
Year Budget allocation Achievement
(Final Grant)
2002-03 Rs. 15.36 crores Rs. 13.90 crores
2003-04 Rs. 17.35 crores Rs. 15.01 crores
2004-05 Rs. 17.29 crores Rs. 15.72 crores
2005-06 Rs. 24.00 crores Rs. 21.63 crores
2006-07 Rs. 24.40 crores Rs. 17.39 crores
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 17 of the Chapter-I)
Budgetary allocation for North East
Recommendation (No. 16)
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for the North
East Region during the Tenth Plan period was Rs. 71.87 crore whereas

28
the actual utilisation (upto Jan. 2007) has been Rs. 18.01 crore only,
each year witnessing shortfalls. The Committee also find that the
percentage of Plan expenditure has been 5.51 percent in 2002-03,
6.18 in 2003-04, 2.98 in 2004-05, 1.60 in 2005-06 and astonishingly nil
in 2006-2007 (upto January, 2007). Needless to say, the Plan Expenditure
in the North East Region has been much below the mandatory ten
percent of the total expenditure during each year of the Tenth Plan
period. No scope for further investment under the plan scheme
consequent upon induction of technology in almost all operative and
administrative offices in the North East Region, the reason as advanced
by the Department for the under utilisation of plan expenditure, does
not convince the Committee in view of the unlimited scope of
technological innovations and induction there. Similarly, the other
reason that the level of investment in other Plan Schemes was very
low due to their non-capital intensive nature fail to impress the
Committee as the Department have to keep their social commitment
in mind. In the opinion of the Committee, merely by stating that
regular monitoring of plan activities and coordination with the Circles
in the North East region will fetch the desired result, the Department
cannot absolve themselves of the responsibilities towards that Region.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to take a
firm resolve and ensure optimum budgetary allocation and at least
ten percent plan expenditure, as mandated, in the North East region
during the coming years so that the people of that region remain well
connected with the mainstream.
Action taken by the Government
Although the funds utilized under North-East Region is less than
the 10% mandatory, efforts are being made by the Department for
allocation and utilization of funds in North-East in all possible areas
through relaxation of some norms e.g. Computerization of double
handed post offices in North-East, Improving Ergononomics of post
offices, mail offices and speed post centers, providing support for all
Non-Returnable Contribution (NRC) post offices in North-East. During
the Annual Plan 2007-08 Rs. 31.34 crores has been earmarked for North-
Eastern region out of the BE outlay of Rs. 315 crores which amounts
to 9.95% of the total outlay.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 20 of Chapter-I)

29
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (No. 2)
The Committee note that one of the foremost reasons for the
growing revenue deficit of the Department of Posts is heavy load of
pensionary charges included in the working expenditure of the
Department whereas in the case of most of the central Government
Ministries/Departments, the pension payments made are booked to a
common head of account. This has been done because of the DoP is
considered as a commercial Department and their services are supposed
to have a tariff, which not only would pay for the salaries, but also
for the pensionary liabilities. The Committee find it difficult to be in
agreement with the viewing of the Department of Posts as a purely
commercial entity. In fact, the social obligation enforced upon the DoP
is enormous in view of the affordable services rendered by them
throughout the country. In line with the recommendations made by
them in their earlier  Reports, the Committee once again recommend
that the Government should consider absolving the Department of the
“commercial” tag and charge the pensionary cost to the common head
of accounts, as is being done in the case of most of the Ministries/
Departments. The Department of Posts, on their part, should again
pursue the matter with the Finance in this regard for a noticeable
reduction of their revenue deficit.
Action taken by the Government
The matter of charging expenditure on payments of Pension and
Pensionary benefits in respect of Department of Posts to the common
head of account at par with other Ministries/Departments was taken
up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission as and
when recommended by the Standing Committee in their various
Reports. In reply ministry of Finance has always rejected the request
with the contention that as per rule 54 of the Government Accounting
Rules 1970, the Department of Posts continues function on commercial
principles. However the Department of posts is pursuing the matter at
highest level with ministry of Finance for shifting the burden of pension
liability of the department to central exchequer.

30
Revenue Expenditure
Recommendation (No. 5)
The Committee noted that the Gross Expenditure under the Revenue
Section has been increasing year after year, viz. Rs. 5736.06 crore in 2003-04,
Rs. 5964.54 crore in 2004-05, Rs. 6429.1 crore in 2005-06, Rs. 6899.11 crore
(RE) in 2006-07 and projected at Rs. 7237.39 crore in 2007-08. Such rise
in expenditure has reportedly been mainly due to the expenditure
incurred on mandatory items such as salaries, wages, pensionary
charges, medical expenses that amounts 85% of expenditure of the
total gross expenditure of the Department. The Committee are informed
that despite making concerted efforts to control expenditure by
observing economy measures strictly on the basis of guidelines issued
by the Ministry of Finance from time to time, the Department have
very limited scope for curtailing expenditure in view of the reason
explained above. The Committee acknowledges the constraints of the
Department in this regard. But, they are of the view that induction of
technology being identified, as a thrust area of the Department should
result in reduction of manpower and cost of operations in may areas
leading to reduction in gross expenditure. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Department to make a detailed study as to how the
induction of technology would bring down the working expenses of
the Department once the process of computerization of post offices is
over. The outcome of the study should be made available to the
Committee.
Action taken by the Government
Manpower costs are the major working expenses in post offices.
The Department needs to revise the norms for various front and back
office operations of computerized post offices and implement them.
Only after that the benefits in terms of reduction in working expenses
will be clear. The matter is under examination in the Department.
Computerisation of Post Offices/Postal Accounts Offices/
Administrative Offices
Recommendation (No. 14)
The Committee are happy to note that the Tenth Plan physical
targets of computerization of Post Offices, Postal Account Offices and
Administrative Offices are almost achieved. The Committee further
note that the Department have proposed to computerize the remaining
POs/PAOs/AOs alongwith the Branch Post Offices during the Eleventh

31
Plan period. The proposal is said to be under consideration of the
Planning Commission. The Committee desire that once the proposal to
computerize the remaining Post Offices including Postal Accounts
Offices (PAOs), Account Office (AOs) and Branch Offices is finalized,
the Department should carry the commendable performances exhibited
during the Tenth Plan period into the Eleventh one.”
Action taken by the Government
The Standing Committee has appreciated the Departments’
performance in achieving the targets in respect of computerization of
POs/PAOs/Aos in the Tenth Plan period. The Department has
submitted a proposal to computerize remaining Departmental Post
Offices/Administrative and Accounts Offices and also for
computerization of Branch Post Offices to the Planning Commission.
The proposal has not yet been finalized.
Recommendation (No. 17)
The Committee feel that relaxing the norms to open Post Offices
in the North East Region, computerization of Mail Offices/Registration
Centres and leasing of Aircraft for carriage of mails are steps in the
right direction for facilitation of adequate postal services in those areas
by overcoming the constraints of inordinate delay in delivery of postal
articles. The Committee desire that such measures should be persisted
with besides exploring other possible ways to provide better postal
services to the North East region.
Action taken by the Government
Steps are being initiated for releasing the funds earmarked for
North Eastern region once the Eleventh Five Year Plan outlay is
approved by Planning Commission and EFC/SFC approvals for the
schemes are obtained. A separate sub-plan for North Eastern Region
has also been proposed during the Eleventh Plan and the approval of
the Planning Commission in this regard is awaited. Efforts are being
made by the department to provide all postal services in this region.
Shortage of Staff
Recommendation (No. 25)
The Committee are constrained to note that quite a large number
of posts in the Department are lying vacant in various categories, i.e.,
76 in Group A, 877 in Group B, 25,200 in Group C and 5,497 in
Group D due to the directions by the DO P&T according to which
one-third of the direct recruitment vacancies subject to a further ceiling

32
of 1% of the sanctioned strength of the Department can be filled after
getting clearance from the Screening Committee. However, the
Committee observe that there is no restriction on filling up posts in
the promotional category. As the postal business is growing and a
large number of post offices are being opened in the Eleventh Plan
period, the Committee desire that the shortage in the number of posts
in various categories should be taken up with the DOP&T at the
highest level for relaxation of norms in filling up the vacancies so that
the Department are adequate able to cater to the postal needs of the
country, especially the rural areas.
Action taken by the Government
As per DOP&T O.M. No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated 16.5.2001 1/3 of the
direct recruitment vacancies subject to a further ceiling of 1% of the
sanctioned strength of the Department can be filled after getting
clearance from the Screening Committee.
The validity of the Optimization scheme has been extended upto
31.3.2009 vide DOP&T O.M. No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated 30.8.2006.
The total 31,650 (76+877+25200+5497) vacancies indicated above
included both promotional and direct recruitment vacancies lying vacant
as on 1.8.2006. It comprises 11% of the total strength. However, the
direct recruitment vacancies for the year 2005 were only 7,564 of which
the Screening Committee had cleared 2521 for filling up. This the bulk
of the vacancies were to be filed up by promotion. There is no
restriction on filing up of promotional vacancies and these vacancies
are filled up in normal course by holding the DPCs regularly as per
relevant recruitment rules and the procedure prescribed by the
Department from time to time.
A proposal is under active consideration for seeking exemption
from the purview of the optimization Scheme/subjecting the vacancies
to  Screening Committee and to fill up the existing as well as direct
recruitment vacancies may occur in future.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

33
ANNEXURE A
TENTH PLAN PHYSICAL TARGETS AND ACHEIVEMENTS
Construction of BuildingsSl. Particulars Tenth Total upto Achieved during Total from 2002-03 to Grand Percentage Reasons forNo. Plan 2005-07 2006-07 2006-07 Total of variations
Outlays Approved Spill over Approved Spill over Approved Spill over achievement
Projects of projects of Projects of projects of projects of projects ofXth Plan IXth Plan Xth Plan IXth Plan Xth Plan IXth Plan
(a) Construction 84 43 48 15 0 58 48 106 126% No
of post
Variations
offices/mailoffices
(b) Construction 12 9 10 02 0 11 10 21 175% No
of
Variations
administrativeoffice
(c) Construction 181 6 projects 29 projects 6 projects 0 12 29 projects 41 projects 157% No
of staff (19 quarters) (248 quarters) (18 quarters) Projects (248 quarters) (285 quarters) Variationsquarters
(37 quarters)

34
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th November, 2007 from 1630
hrs. to 1815 hrs. in Committee Room No. G-074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and
adopted the following Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** ***

35
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained
in their Forty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
2008) relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Posts).
(iv) *** *** ***
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above said Draft Reports and present the same to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

36
APPENDIX II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 12, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 26, 27 and 28
Total: 18
Percentage: 64.28%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Sl. No. 13
Total : 01
Percentage : 3.57%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 8, 10, 11 and 16
Total: 4
Percentage: 14.28%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 14, 17 and 25
Total: 05
Percentage: 17.85%

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 5.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 175
Price : Rs. 44.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Government ..................................... 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 24
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 29
ANNEXURE
I. Tenth Plan Physical Targets and Achievements .. 33
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2007-08)
held on 30.11.2007 .................................................... 34
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Forty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 36

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
13. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
**15. Prof. Prem Kumar Dhumal
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
27. Shri Motiur Rehman
28. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi*
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
* Nominated w.e.f. 24 August, 2007.
** Nominated w.e.f. 5 October, 2007 vice Vishnu Deo Sai ceased to be member of this
Committee w.e.f. 30 August, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology,
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-Third Report on Action taken
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ relating to the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts.)
2. The Forty-Fifth report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The
Department furnished Action taken Notes on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report on 27 July, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 30 November, 2007.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Forty-Fifth  Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

53
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)
