REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
the Department of Posts.
2. The Fifty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April,
2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. It
contained 53 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: - 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 13, 17, 19, 20, 25, 26, 29, 31, 32,
35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51 and
52
Total: 31
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government.
Para Nos: - 18, 21, 24 and 33
Total: 04
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration:
Para Nos: - 5, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 27, 28 and 53
Total: 10
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos: - 4, 9, 22, 23, 30, 34, 38 and 47
Total: 08
Chapter-V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter–V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. REVENUE RECEIPTS
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
6. While noting the slow growth in the Revenue Receipts of the
Department during the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Committee in the
earlier recommendation had exhorted the Department to intensify their
efforts commensurate with the customer requirements, if the
Department want to remain a serious player in the market.
7. The Department in the action taken reply have stated as follows:
“The overall revenue receipts of the Department during the last
five years have been as under.
 (Rs. in crore)
Year Revenue Receipt % increase over
the previous year
2003-04 4256.93
2004-05 4431.85 4.11
2005-06 5023.49 13.35
2006-07 5322.44 5.95
2007-08 5488.00 3.11

3
The Department have developed a market outlook to effectively
respond to the business challenges with a view to increase the
Revenue Receipt of the Department. Various steps being undertaken
by the Department to respond to the market challenges are as
below:
The Department of Posts are providing market oriented products
like Speed Post, Business Post, Express Parcel Post, Bill Mail Service,
Direct Post, Logistics Post and various e-enabled services like
e-Post, e-Payment and Instant Money Order Service.
Customized solutions and value additions are being provided in
response to specific requirements of customers. The various value
additions introduced are as below:
• Collection from customers’ premises
•C redit facility for corporate customers
•V olume based discount
• Internet based Track and Trace system is available to find
out the status of delivery of Speed Post articles.
The revenue earned from the various premium products has been
in increasing trend. Further, the following initiatives have been
taken during the last few years to increase the revenue of the
Department as also their customer base.
(i) Instant Money Order Service
(ii) International Money Transfer Service
(iii) Retailing of Mutual Fund
(iv) Distribution of non-life products of Oriental Insurance Co.
(v) Field Postal Orders
(vi) Implementation of NREGA and National Old Age Assistance
Programme through Post Offices
(vii) Setting up of Postal Finance Marts (PFMs).
(viii) Electronic Clearing Service
(ix) Dematerialization of National Savings Certificates/Kisan Vikas
Patra.
As regards, business from Postal Life Insurance and Rural Postal
Life Insurance, the Fixed Rate of Remuneration received by the

4
Postal Department from PLI and RPLI operations from 2005-06
onwards are as follows:—
(Rs. in Lakh)
PLI RPLI Total
2005-06 7559 4746 12305
2006-07 10077 6885 16912
2007-08 13033 6726 19759
There is increasing trend in PLI/RPLI business and following steps
have been initiated for further growth in business:
(i) Recruitment of additional Direct Agents
(ii) Increased publicity activities
(iii) Sensitizing Senior Officers through workshop and training
to Field Staff.
However, the valuable advice of the Committee is well taken and
suitable action will be taken.”
8. The Committee note that even when the Department have
claimed an increase in the revenue earned from the various premium
products, the said increase has not made any concrete impact on the
overall position of revenue receipts. The growth in the revenue
receipts, which was 5.95 percent during the year 2006-07 has declined
to 3.11 percent during the year 2007-08. Besides, there is a shortfall
of Rs. 219.20 crore (R.E. being Rs. 5707.20 crore and Actuals being
Rs. 5488 crore) in the actual revenue receipts during the year
2007-08 as compared to the projection made at the Revised Estimates
stage. Further, even when the fixed rate of remuneration from
RPLI has declined from Rs. 6885 lakh during the year 2006-07 to
Rs. 6726 lakh during the year 2007-08, the Department have claimed
that there is an increasing trend in RPLI business. The reply indicates
a sense of complacency on the part of the Department. The
Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like
the Department to take all desired initiatives to make their products
competitive. Besides, the Committee feel that all the actions taken
by the Department in this regard, should actually boost the overall
revenue receipts of the Department.
9. The Committee, further find the discrepancy in the data
furnished in the Action Taken Notes with regard to the amount

5
realised on account of PLI and RPLI business during the year
2006-07 and 2007-08. In reply to the recommendation in question,
the said data has been given as Rs. 169.12 crore for the years
2006-07 and Rs. 197.59 crore for the year 2007-08. At another place,
in reply to recommendation of para no. 7, the said data has been
indicated as Rs. 160.37 crore and Rs. 200.47 crore respectively. The
Committee would like the Department to clarify the actual position
in this regard.
II. RATE OF REMUNERATION FOR SAVINGS BANK AND CASH
CERTIFICATES
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
10. The Committee, in their earlier Report had observed that one
of the reasons for lesser Revenue Receipts of the Department, was the
Government not honouring the recommendation of the Expert
Committee of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) set up in 1993-94 for a
hike of ten percent per annum in the rate of remuneration for the
agency functions performed by the Department of Posts on behalf of
MoF for Savings Bank and Cash Certificate activities. The Committee
had recommended that the Department of Posts should continue their
efforts to secure the recommended hike of ten percent per annum in
order to be compensated reasonably for the agency functions being
discharged by them.
11. The Department in their Action taken Note have stated that
they are pursuing with the Ministry of Finance to restore increase in
the rate of remuneration to 10% as recommended by Expert Committee.
In this regard, Secretary, Posts has addressed Finance Secretary with
copy to Secretary, Banking on 25.02.2008.
12. The Committee in their earlier Reports, have repeatedly been
exhorting the Department to take up the matter with MoF to get the
ten percent per annum incremental remuneration as recommended
by the Expert Committee. While examining the Demands for Grants
(2008-09), the Committee found that as a result of the persistent
efforts of the Department, the rate of remuneration for the year
2008-09 was increased to 4.6 percent against 3 percent during the
previous fiscal which, however, still is nowhere near the ten percent
as recommended by the Expert Committee. In view of the
commendable services rendered by DoP on behalf of MoF, the
Committee find no reason behind the reluctance of the Ministry of
Finance to honour the recommendation of their own Expert
Committee. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons

6
as to why Ministry of Finance has not so far agreed to the
recommendation of the Expert Committee. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Department to continue their efforts and pursue the
matter forcefully with the Ministry of Finance so as to secure the
10 percent per annum increase as recommended by the Expert
Committee.
III. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
13. Concerned with the highly disconcerting gross under-utilisation
of funds meant for Capital expenditure throughout the Tenth Plan
period and also in the first year of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee
in their earlier Report had desired that the Department should take
urgent corrective steps to stop this alarming trend and ensure prudent
and optimal utilisation of the allocation of Rs. 426.61 crore during the
year 2008-09 towards capital expenditure.
14. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
during the year 2007-08, the allocation of funds under Capital Section
(Plan) was reduced proportionately from Rs. 228.21 crore to Rs. 198.21
crore. At the final grant stage, the Capital allocation was further
reduced and retained at Rs. 164.63 crore as per the requirement of the
Department. Annual Plan 2007-08 being first year of the Eleventh Plan,
approval for the Schemes had to be obtained from the competent
authority before implementation of the Schemes, which took time hence
there was low booking till December 2007. Funds to the extent of
Rs. 98.09 crore have been booked upto March 2008.
15. It has been further stated that during 2008-09 the Department
have already initiated action for early processing of Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC)/Standing Finance Committee (SFC) memos and
obtaining the approval of the Schemes at the earliest in order to
implement the Schemes by early July, 2008. A fast track monitoring
cell has also been set up at the Directorate level for monitoring of the
implementation of the Schemes by fixing a stipulated time frame at
each stage. Circles have also been instructed to monitor the
implementation of the Schemes by fixing timeframes at Circle level
and also of booking the expenditure under correct account head. Thus,
Department hope to utilise the approved Outlay of Rs. 600 crore fully.
16. The Committee are concerned to observe that there have been
consistent shortfalls on the part of the Department on the Capital
expenditure side throughout the Tenth Plan and during the first

7
year of the Eleventh Plan. These are mainly on account of the delay
or non-receipt of necessary approvals for the various Schemes from
the competent authorities. The Committee have always been emphatic
that procedural requirement like necessary approvals of competent
authorities, etc. should be obtained well in time. This not only
ensures that the Annual Schemes/Projects take off as per schedule
but the Capital expenditure is also optimised. It seems that the
Department, unfortunately, did not pay much heed to the concerns
of the Committee and as a result there is continuous underspending
on Capital side throughout the Tenth Plan and also in the first year
of the Eleventh Plan. Now, that an assurance has been given that
during 2008-09 all measures are being taken to obtain early approvals
and a monitoring cell has been set-up at Directorate level to oversee
the implementation of the Schemes within a definite time frame,
the Committee hope that there would be no shortfalls in Capital
expenditure during the ongoing fiscal. The Committee further desire
that such prudent measures should also be persisted with beyond
2008-09 so that Capital expenditure is optimal during the remaining
years of the Eleventh Plan.
IV. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR THE NORTH-EASTERN
REGION
Recommendation (Para Nos. 11 & 12)
17. Observing nil physical achievement in the North East Region
with regard to six important Schemes viz. Departmental Post offices,
Extra Departmental Post Offices, Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras ,
Computerisation of Postal Account Offices, Administrative Offices and
Staff Quarters and consequentially no expenditure upto January, 2008
during the financial year 2007-08, the Committee had recommended
that besides ensuring mandatory allocations of 10 percent of the total
Outlay towards the North East Region, the Department should see to
it that the Outlay was meaningfully utilised there. The Committee
specifically drew the attention of the Department towards 190 pending
proposals (as on Jan. 2008) for setting up of Post Offices in the North
East Region.
18. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have submitted
as follows:
“During the Tenth Plan, the achievement of physical targets were
nil under the following activities during some years of the Plan
period—

8
For the Plan activities—Departmental Post Offices, Extra
Departmental Post Offices and Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras  the
EFC committee had approved these Schemes only for the first two
years of the Plan period and there was no operation of the Schemes
for the last three years of Tenth Plan and no physical targets were
fixed, therefore, the achievement is also nil. The expenditure
incurred during the last three years was the recurring expenditure
incurred on opening of Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras .
In respect of Computerisation of Postal Accounts Offices—There
are only 2 PAOs in North East region and both the PAOs were
computerised during the third year i.e. 2004-05. As there was no
other PAOs left for computerisation there was no physical or
financial targets fixed or achieved during the last 2 years of the
Plan period.
In respect of computerisation of Administrative Offices and
construction of staff quarters also, the targets fixed during the
Tenth Plan period was completed during the first 3 years and no
such proposal was received from the Circles during the last
2 years. The physical targets achieved have been shown as nil.
During the year 2007-08, the expenditure incurred under North
East upto January 2008 was shown as ‘nil’ as all the expenditure
of the Department will be booked under the common head of
account 3201 and 5201. The bifurcation of the expenditure of the
North East will be compiled after the accounts are finalised and
on obtaining the details of expenditure from Assam and North
East Circle. However, funds to the extent of Rs. 13.74 crore have
been booked so far in NE region as against the BE allocation of
Rs. 31.34 crore. The final figures are yet to be firmed up. It is
hoped that the funds allocated at BE stage will be fully utilised.
During 2008-09 funds to the extent of Rs. 60 crore have been
earmarked for NE region out of the BE allocation of Rs. 600 crore
thus ensuring that the mandatory allocation of 10 percent of the
total Outlay is earmarked for NE region and Department are aiming
at utilisation of the amount fully.”
The Department have further stated:—
“All the proposals pending for opening of Post Offices in North
East Circle have been examined. Out of 235 proposals, 45 have
been found justified as per prescribed norms. The other
190 proposals have also been examined but these have not been

9
found justified. Opening of 45 justified Post Offices is under
consideration. A meeting of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC)
on the Plan Scheme “Access to the Postal Network” for the
Eleventh Five Year Plan was held recently. It was decided to take
up the matter for appointment of 3000 Gramin Dak Sevaks  for
manning new Extra Departmental Post Offices proposed to be
opened throughout the Country, with the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India. The opening of new Branch Post Offices
may take some time.”
19. The Committee note that funds to the extent of Rs. 13.74
crore has been booked so far in the North East Region as against
the 2007-08 BE allocation of Rs. 31.34 crore. The Department,
reportedly, hope that funds allocated at the 2007-08 BE stage would
be fully utilised. The Department have further stated that during
the year 2007-08, the expenditure incurred in the North East upto
January, 2008 was shown as ‘nil’ as the bifurcation of the expenditure
in the North East would be compiled after the accounts are finalised
and on obtaining the details of expenditure from Assam and the
North East Circle. The Committee are surprised to observe that even
on 31 July, 2008 (the date mentioned in the Action Taken Notes
furnished to the Committee), the bifurcation of expenditure in the
North East Region for the 2007-08 fiscal was yet to be compiled.
They fail to understand when ten per cent mandatory allocation of
the total Outlay is earmarked for the North East Region, why
bifurcation of expenditure has not been compiled three months after
the financial year 2007-08 ended. Needless to say, timely compiling
of exclusive expenditure towards the North East Region would be a
great help to the Department in working out any perspective plans
for the Region and also in taking corrective measures as required to
provide the requisite postal facilities there. The Committee, therefore,
exhort the Department to ensure that from 2008-09 onwards,
bifurcation of expenditure in the North East Region should be timely
compiled so as to ensure that the norm of ten per cent allocation to
the North East Region is followed in letter and spirit and the USO
obligations of the Department are met in an efficient and effective
manner.
20. The Committee were apprised in March, 2008 that out of the
235 proposals for setting up of Post Offices (as on January, 2008) in
the North Eastern Region, 45 were found justified and the remaining
190 proposals were under consideration of the Department. Now, in
their Action Taken Note submitted to the Committee in August,
2008, the Department have stated that all the aforesaid 190 pending

10
proposals were not found justified. To make the matters worse, due
to the focus of the Department on the matter of appointment of
Gramin Dak Sevaks  for proposed Extra Departmental Post Offices,
the opening of even the 45 justified Post Offices will be delayed
further. The Committee are unhappy with the laid back attitude of
the Department as inspite of assurances to the contrary, nothing
concrete could be achieved in the entire first year of the Eleventh
Plan and the precious 4/5 months of the ongoing fiscal. The fact
that even the 45 justified POs are getting delayed because of shift
in priorities of the Department, shows that desired attention is not
being given to the much neglected North East Region.
Notwithstanding the new found logic of the Department, the
Committee would like to impress upon them to adhere to a definite
and early time frame for opening of the justified  Post Offices.
Besides, the Committee find it inexplicable that none of the
190 proposals which were stated to be under consideration at the
stage of examination of Demands for Grants has found favour with
the Department. The Committee would like the Department to
reconsider the rejection of 190 cases so as to see that the Post Offices
which do not require substantial relaxation from the specified norms
are also opened under a time bound programme. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the precise action taken in this regard.
V. UTILISATION OF PLAN OUTLAYS
Recommendation (Para Nos. 14, 15 & 16)
21. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that out
of the proposed Outlay of Rs. 3619.83 crore for different Plan Schemes
during the Tenth Plan, the Department got Rs. 1350 crore, out of which
only Rs. 874.67 crore could be utilised. Having noticed that although
the financial targets were under achieved, the Department could achieve
almost cent per cent physical targets and not convinced with the
Department’s explanation for this anomalous situation, the Committee
had recommended that realistic estimates be made for the Annual
Plans and Five Year Plans and full utilisation of the scarce resources
for different Plan Schemes be ensured. The Committee had further
observed that during the year 2007-08, out of the allocated sum of
Rs. 315 crore, the Department could utilise Rs. 38.13 crore only i.e.
12.10 per cent of the allocation. The Committee also noted with dismay
that during the aforesaid year, the physical achievements under the
major Scheme ‘Access to the Postal Network’ viz. Branch Post Offices
(BOs), Sub-Post Offices (SPOs), Departmental Sub-Offices (DSOs) and
Franchisee Outlets were ‘nil’. Taking note that there were serious
problems in the whole planning process and first two years of each

11
Five Year Plan were wasted in obtaining various clearances/approvals,
etc., the Committee had recommended that all formalities like
evaluation and restructuring of the Schemes, obtaining various
clearances, etc. should be done well before 1 April of the First Year of
each Five Year Plan so that the targets are realistically achieved. Because
of the obvious ramification of such a step on the planning process in
general, the Committee had also desired that their concerns be
communicated to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission as
well as the Cabinet Secretariat.
22. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:
“All the proposals are projected keeping in pace with the current
trend, customer requirements and the Department’s network
availability and the proposals for the five year Plan period are
processed keeping the above facts in view. Further, Department
intend to induct technology to meet the current challenges faced.
The Annual Plan estimates are projected keeping in view the total
Outlay approved for the Plan period, funds spent so far, and the
remaining funds to be proportionately spread over the leftover
years. Thus, the estimates projected during the Annual Plans are
realistic. The Department are making all efforts for fuller utilisation
of funds allocated.”
The Department have further stated:
“Annual Plan 2007-08 is the first year of the Eleventh Plan. The
process for obtaining the approval for the Schemes could be
initiated only after the finalisation of the Outlays. Thus, the first
half of the year was focused only on obtaining the approvals for
the Schemes from the competent authority. The expenditure,
whatever has been incurred, is only on the spillover payments of
the Tenth Plan. However, as and when the Schemes got approved,
the implementation process has been initiated and funds are being
utilised. Funds to the extent of Rs 98.09 crore have been utilised
so far and the final figures are yet to be firmed up.
The achievement of physical targets has been shown as nil in
respect of the Plan activities—Branch Post Offices (BOs), Sub Post
Offices (SPOs) Departmental Sub-Offices (DSOs) and franchise
outlets as the Scheme is yet to be approved. The SFC memo has
been circulated amongst the committee members for comments.
Pending the approval of the Scheme, action could not be initiated
for implementation of the Scheme. However, it is ensured that the

12
Scheme will become effective from the current year and the
Department hope to achieve the targets fully.”
23. The Department have also submitted that the views of the
Committee would be communicated to the Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission/Cabinet Secretariat.
24. The Committee are not inclined to accept the Department’s
statement that the estimates projected during the Annual Plans are
realistic. Notwithstanding the Department’s plea, that induction of
technology to meet the current challenges and the falling prices of
equipment resulted in lesser expenditure, the 100 per cent
achievement of physical targets in the Tenth Plan by spending less
than 65 per cent of allocation, is a clear pointer towards unrealistic
planning. The very same thing has been repeated during 2007-08 i.e.
the first year of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should henceforth ensure that a
reasonable coherence is maintained between the financial projections/
allocations and the physical targets/achievements so that precious
funds are not stuck without justifiable reasons.
25. The Committee find that during the year 2007-08, the
achievement of the Department in some of the Plan activities like
Branch Post Offices, Sub-Post Offices, Departmental Sub-Offices and
Franchise Outlets has been nil as on January, 2008 for want of
approvals for the Schemes. The Department’s plea that the Schemes
would become effective in the current year i.e. 2008-09 does not
convince the Committee in view of the persistent delays in approvals
for the Schemes over the years. Therefore, instead of giving mere
assurances, some mechanism ought to be evolved and put in place
at the earliest so that all the necessary approvals/clearances from
various competent authorities are obtained in time for maximum
achievement of the earmarked physical targets. This would require
inter-ministry/agency consultation as stated in their previous Report
and the Committee would like their concerns in the matter to be
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission/Cabinet
Secretariat at the earliest.
VI. AUTOMATIC MAIL PROCESSING CENTRES (AMPCs)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 27 & 28)
26. The Committee, in their earlier Report had observed that the
Department planned to set up two AMPCs at Kolkata and Delhi and
Rs. 71.05 crore were allocated for the purpose during the Tenth Plan.

13
In response to the global tender floated, two bids were received. One
bid which was found technically qualified was later on cancelled and
re-tendering could not be done as the time left in the Tenth Plan was
too short. The Committee on finding out that, even when the bid
failed and nothing concrete could be done, the Department had still
utilised Rs. 12.10 crore during the Plan period. The Committee as
such desired to be apprised of the details of the expenditure. Further,
concerned with the poor response by the bidders and having been
apprised that a meeting with machine manufacturers was held in
December 2007 to sort out the matter, the Committee desired to be
apprised of the outcome of the aforesaid meeting.
27. The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted
the details of expenditure during the Tenth Plan in the following table:
 Plan Amount Remarks
(Rs. in crore)
2002-03 11.15 In the first year, Rs.11.15 crore was
spent on building component for
Delhi and Kolkata sites.
2003-04 0.60 Paid on account of arrears of bills.
2004-05 0.15  - do-
2005-06 0.14  - do-
2006-07 0.06  - do-
Total 12.10
28. The Department have also stated that the Plan Scheme of
‘Setting up of Automatic Mail Processing Centers’ is yet to be approved
by the Expenditure Finance Committee. The process for re-tendering
for setting up of AMPCs at Delhi and Kolkata is also underway. The
meeting held in December 2007 was primarily an attempt to interact
with the prospective bidders before action on setting up of AMPCs
could be taken. No apparent reason was given by the manufacturers
who attended the meeting.
29. The Committee find it highly unsatisfactory that the Plan
Scheme of ‘Setting up of Automatic Mail Processing Centres’ at
Kolkata and Delhi which was to be implemented way back in the
Ninth Plan is still at conceptual state. The Scheme is yet to be
approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee and the retendering
process for setting up of AMPCs at Delhi and Kolkata is also moving

14
at snail’s pace. In the meantime, inexplicably, the Department have
already spent Rs. 12.10 crore during the Tenth Plan towards building
component for Delhi and Kolkata sites. Such sorry state of affairs is
indicative of the Department’s callous attitude and inaction in
implementing such an important Scheme. Given the imminent value
addition to the mail services including an effective delivery system
that the proposed AMPCs will bring about, the Committee impress
upon the Department to expeditiously obtain approval from the EFC,
complete the retendering process and set up the AMPCs at Delhi
and Kolkata without wasting time.
VII. REGULATORY MECHANISM
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
30. Having observed the increasing responsibilities of the
Department in postal operations and a wide gamut of financial
activities, the Committee in their Fifty-sixth Report had recommended
that the Department should consider setting up of a regulatory
mechanism to bring in more accountability and transparency in the
services rendered by the Department.
31. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the PLI/RPLI are exempted insurers under section 118 (c) of the
Insurance Act (1938) and also under Section 44(d) of the LIC Act
(1956). These Schemes do not come under the purview of IRDA Act
(1999), and consequently, not regulated by IRDA. It has been further
stated that the views of the Committee will be communicated to the
Government.
32. The Committee are well aware of the fact that the PLI/RPLI
Schemes do not come under the purview of IRDA Act, 1999 and
that is one of the reasons why in their earlier Report, it was
recommended that some sort of regulatory mechanism should be
put in place to oversee and regulate the various activities being
undertaken by the Department so that accountability, transparency
and efficient delivery of services could be ensured. The Committee
hope that their concern would be earnestly taken up at the
appropriate fora as assured.
VIII. GENDER BUDGETING
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
33. In their Fifty-sixth Report, the Committee had observed that
although the Gender Budget Committee of the Department had been

15
formed and (i) Training (ii) Postal Network (construction) and
(iii) Control and Supervision of Circle Office Schemes had been
identified for gender budgeting, yet gender specific allocations in these
Schemes was not feasible, according to the Department. Appalled, as
to why such Schemes where gender based budgeting was not feasible,
had been identified for the purpose, the Committee had desired that
the Department should make concerted attempts to identify Schemes
where gender specific allocations were possible and apprise the
Committee of concrete workable proposals at the earliest.
34. The Department in their Action Taken note have stated that
the Plan Schemes implemented by the Department are of such nature,
the bifurcation of the Plan fund allocation exclusively for women cannot
be identified. The Schemes are implemented for the Country as a whole
and the postal services are easily accessible by all citizens of the
Country, which include women also. However, efforts are being made
by the Department to identify some of the Schemes with gender
specifications.
35. The Committee feel that either the Department could not
comprehend the essence of their recommendation or an effort has
been made to paper over a glaring failure. What the Committee, in
their earlier Report, had desired was that the Department should
make concerted efforts to identify Schemes for the employees of the
Department where gender budgeting was feasible. The three Schemes
previously identified for gender budgeting by DoP and in which
finally they said gender budgeting was not feasible, were all
departmental Schemes meant for their employees. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department should formulate concrete and
workable proposals post-haste for the welfare of their women
employees and resort to gender specific budgeting which has
remained neglected for many years.

16
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Department of Posts (DoP) under the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology are entrusted with the
task of fulfilling the Universal service obligation for providing basic
postal services throughout the country, irrespective of terrain at an
affordable price. To fulfil this obligation, the Department have an
elaborate network, of 1,55,204 Post Offices. Of these 1,25,439 are Branch
Post Offices catering exclusively to the rural areas. Besides providing
postal services, Post Offices perform, certain agency functions on behalf
of other Ministries/Departments of the Government of India/other
organisations. The earnings of the Department are in the form of
“Revenue” and “Recoveries”, The deficit of the Department is met
from the Budgetary Support by the General Revenues. Similarly, the
Capital Expenditure of the DoP is also met from the General Revenues.
The Demands for Grants of the DoP is also met from the General
Revenues. The Demands for Grants of the Department of Posts for the
year 2008-09 is Rs. 7989.01 crore, Rs. 7562.40 crore under the Revenue
Section (inclusive of Rs. 24 lakh charged) and Rs. 426.61 crore under
the Capital Section. The various aspects arising out of examination of
the Demands for Grants of DoP for the year 2008-09 by the Committee
are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
Rates of postal services as a part of the USO are fixed by the
Parliament. 1,55,204 Post Offices are functioning to provide postal
services to every citizen of India.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt(PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee find that the gross expenditure under the Revenue
Section has been increasing year after year. It has risen from Rs. 6429.15
crore in 2005-06 to Rs. 7291.79 crore in 2007-08 (RE) and has been
projected at Rs. 7562.40 crore in 2008-09. The Department have
attributed the rising trend in the gross expenditure to the expenditure
incurred on salaries, pensionary charges, dearness allowance,

17
operational expansion for mail delivery, business promotions for
revenue enhancement, etc. While the Committee are aware of the
constraints being faced by the Department in controlling the
expenditure under Revenue Section, they desire that DoP should devise
some mechanism to effectively monitor the expenditure under different
heads so as to keep a control over the same as far as possible.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has been continuously instructing the circles/units
responsible to incur expenditure to observe strict economy and to
adhere to the guidelines/instructions issued to observe cut and austerity
measure while incurring Non Plan expenditure so that the same may
be reduced to the extent possible. The instructions have been
issued for the year 2008-09 also as per O.M. No. 7(1) E. Coord./2008
dated 5-6-2008 issued by the Ministry of Finance. Regular review of
expenditures in the Department under different heads of accounts is
done by Budget Branch at the Directorate and CPMGSG at, Circle
level to see that the expenditure is within allotment of funds against
the relevant head. Any excess expenditure beyond the allotted fund is
promptly taken up with the sanctioning authority to arrest it in
ensuring month. Allotment of fund against the requisition is also done
after applying reasonable cut.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt.(PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
In this context, an analysis of the hike under different heads of
the Revenue Section by the Committee revealed that a major hike has
been under the Head ‘Foreign Travel Expenses’ where the proposed
expenditure during the year 2008-09 is about 140 per cent more than
the enhanced RE allocation of 2007-08. The Department have stated
that they propose to impart training in the best practices to the officials
to give them international exposure. Besides, the proposed expenditure
is on account of regular visits to different countries for sitting the
inbound and outbound business to meet the ambitious targets to
achieve from the global business. While the Committee are indeed in
favour of brining professionalism in the Department they , at the same
time, also expect the Department to achieve tangible results thereof
commensurate with the expenditure incurred.

18
Action Taken by the Government
The hike in the “Foreign Travel Expenses” is mainly due to India
Post assuming more and more responsibilities in various international
postal forums especially that of the Universal Postal Union and APPU.
The Department has increased its efforts to foster closer ties with
prominent postal administrations with the aim of increasing business.
Today India Post is looked upon as the leading member from the
developing member countries and closer interaction with others in the
postal field are the need of the hour which will ultimately result in
enhanced business and revenue for the Department.
Further in the XI Five year Plan, an outlay of Rs. 124.92 crores has
been allocated for implementation of training schemes under Human
Resources Development. It is proposed under this scheme to have a
comprehensive program for development of major cadres and training
for all the cadres of organization. The programs proposed aim at all
round development of the officers in Management, Business Orientation,
Quality of Services and Technology Induction.
Mandatory development programs for Postal Service officers are
held at intervals e.g. Executive Development Program (EDP), Middle
level Development Program (MDP) and Advanced Development
Program (ADP). These programs will prepare these officers for higher
responsibility. They will also get exposure to foreign Postal
Administrations. Training tie ups with other postal administrations are
also proposed.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt.(PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee further note that the remuneration for Savings Bank
and Savings Certificate constitutes nearly 46 per cent of the revenue
of the Postal Department. In this regard, the Committee note that one
of the reasons for lesser increase in Revenue Receipts was the
Government not honouring the recommendation of the Expert
Committee of the Ministry of Finance set up in 1993-94 for a hike of
10 per cent per annum in the rate of remuneration for the services
performed by the Department of Posts on behalf of the Ministry of
Finance in Savings Bank and Cash Certificate functions. According to
DoP , with the continuous pursuance of the issue, the Ministry of
Finance have now agreed to increase the rate of remuneration by

19
4.5 per cent during the year 2008-09. The Committee would like the
Department to continue the efforts in this regard to get the hike of
10 per cent per annum as recommended by the Expert Committee so
that DoP is compensated reasonably for the agency functions being
discharged by them.
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts is pursuing with Ministry of Finance to restore
increase in rate of 10% as recommended by Expert Committee. In this
regard, Secretary, Posts has addressed Finance Secretary with copy to
Secretary, Banking on 25.02.2008.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt.(PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts are paid agency
charges for the services rendered by them on behalf of other
Departments/Organisations like Postal Life Insurances, Pension
Payments Western Union Money Transfer Scheme, etc. The Committee
note with concern that as against an amount of Rs. 293.25 crore for
the year 2007-08 the actual recovery upto January, 2008 was Rs. 28.33
crore only. Further, recovery of about Rs. 20 crore pertaining to the
sister Departments/agencies like Telecommunications, Employees
Provident Fund, Coal Mines Provident Fund (CMPF), etc. in respect of
the past years are still pending. Clearly, this is an unsatisfactory
position. The Committee, therefore, recommend that arrears of
recoveries due as on 31 March, 2008 agaist all Departments/
Organisations should be worked out and recovery action should be
expedited with all concerned. The Committee would like to be informed
of the progress in this regard with details within a period of three
months.
Action Taken by the Government
Efforts are being made to recover all oustanding dues from Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited authorities. An amount of Rs. 10 crores has
been received in this year as advance from Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited. Issue of recovery of Audit charges has been solved and claim
has been raised against Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Department
of Telecommunications.

20
The position of amounts due from Department of
Telecommunications, Employees Provident Fund, Coal Mines Provident
Fund as on 31-03-2008 is as follows:
(Rs. in crores)
Sl.No. Name of the Department Amount due as on
31-03-2008
1. Department of Telecommunications 5.15
2. Employees Provident Fund 19.96
3. Coal Mines Provident Fund 16.86
This is a continuous process and the matter is being pursued
vigorously with the Departments concerned to get the amount
recovered. No recovery is due from Western Union.
As regards PLI and RPLI, the agency charges are adjusted every
year once in the March Supplementary Accounts. The rate of
remuneration is 7% of total premium collected in respect of PLI and
10% of total premium collected in respect of RPLI.
The details of amounts realized by the Department of Posts in
respect of PLI and RPLI business for the year 2006-07, 2007-08 are as
follows:
(Rs. in crores)
2006-07 Rs. 160.37
2007-08 Rs. 200.47
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt.(PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the revenue deficit of DoP was Rs. 1375.22 crore
during the year 2003-04, Rs. 1381.84 crore in 2004-05, Rs. 1209.88 crore
in 2005-06 and Rs. 1317.66 crore in 2006-07. Further during the year
2007-08, the deficit was to the tune of Rs. 3278.54 crore upto January,
2008 which the Department hoped to bring down to Rs. 1291.34 crore
as proposed at Revised Estimates level. During the year 2008-09, the
Budget Estimates for revenue deficit are for Rs. 1135.74 crore. The
revenue expenditure of the Department during the year 2008-09 may
increase further with the implementation of the recommendations of
the Sixth Pay Commission. All these facts clearly establish that the

21
efforts of the Department to reduce the revenue deficit urgently require
a new thrust and direction. The Committee, no doubt appreciate the
Universal Service Obligation of the Department to provide efficient
and accessible postal services in all corners of the country. However
the present day economic scenario warrants self sufficiency. The
Department of Posts should therefore in the light of their experience
during the Tenth Five Year Plan, devise ways and means to make
them commercially viable without compromising with their national
obligation.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has taken initiatives to popularize premium
products by offering various customizations and value additions to
the major customers. In addition, this Department has worked out
various business alliances and partnerships with public and private
corporations for leveraging its rural postal network. These services are
broadly as below:
I. The Department has started a pilot to provide financial
inclusion in rural areas under the scheme of Business
Correspondent in collaboration with the State Bank of India.
II. A Pilot for extending disbursement of micro credit to self
help groups has also been started in collaboration with the
National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development.
III. The Department has started Passenger Reservation Service
in collaboration with the Ministry of Railways.
IV. The Department is providing a platform to facilitate payment
of various bills by the customers for telecommunication
companies and other utility service providers.
V. The Department is distributing financial instruments like
Mutual Funds etc on behalf of financial institutions like
UTI, SBI, Franklin Templeton Reliance Mutual Funds etc.
The Department is also distributing the Non Life products
of Oriental Insurance Company Ltd.
VI. The Department provides the facility of receiving remittances
from 205 countries through the International Money Transfer
service.
VII. The disbursement of wages to the beneficiaries of the NREG
Act 2005 is done through the post offices in some States.
VIII. The payment of Old Age Pension under the National Social
Assistance Programme is being undertaken by the
Department of Posts in some States.

22
The following initiatives have been taken during the last few years
to increase the revenue of the Department thereby reducing the deficit.
(i) Instant Money Order Service
(ii) International Money Transfer Service
(iii) Retailing of Mutual Fund
(iv) Distribution of Non-life products of Oriental Insurance Co.
(v) Field Postal Orders
(vi) Implementation of NREGA and National Old Age Assistance
Programme through Post Offices
However, the valuable advice of the Committee is well taken and
suitable action will be taken.
The Department through Global Business Division is making
specific efforts to devise ways and means to generate revenues without
compromising on the Universal Services Obligation. To ensure these,
the remuneration for all such international services, which do not
involve the USO, are fixed on commercial lines.
Despite the deficit that the DoP has to bear, national obligation of
providing postal services to every citizen at an affordable price has
not been compromised.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee appreciate the laudable initative taken by the
Department by Operationalising an aircraft in North-East in August
last year even though the old load was only 4 tonnes against the
aircraft’s capacity of 14 tonnes. The aforesaid initiative was taken even
when the aircraft was supposed to run at a loss in order to give better
connectivity to the North-East. The Committee further find that even
though initially there was loss on account of lower utilisation of
capacity, the demand has increased over time as informed to the
Committee during the evidence. The Committee feel that similar
initiatives by the relaxation of norms are required in the case of these
areas particularly when the Government have given top most priority
and 10 per cent exclusive allocation is earmarked for these areas.

23
Action Taken by the Government
Department is making all efforts to provide all basic postal facilities
in North East by relaxation of norms. Upto 2006-07 all double handed
post offices have been computerised and during 2007-08 the schemes
has been extended to computerise all single handed post offices by
relaxing the norms exclusively for North east and also to network all
the computerised post offices. A freighter Aircraft has been wet leased
exclusively for carriage of mails to North East. During 2008-09 funds
to the extent of Rs. 60 crores has been earmarked for NE Region out
of the BE allocation of Rs. 600 crores and Department hopes to utilise
the same fully.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee further note that the physical targets set during
the first two years of the Eleventh Plan are not proportionate to the
overall targets set for the Eleventh Plan. For example, under Branch
Post Offices, whereas the physical targets under the Eleventh Plan are
3000, the targets fixed during the first two years are just 750 which
means that the remaining 75 per cent of the targets would have to be
achieved in the 60 per cent of the available period of three years.
With the position of achieving nil targets during the first two years,
the situation appears to be rather grim. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that all out efforts should be made to increase
the pace of implementation of various Plan Schemes in the coming
years.
Action Taken by the Government
Annual Plan 2007-08 being the first year of the 11th plan, the
targets were fixed at minimum, as the 11th plan outlays were not yet
approved by Planning Commission. Keeping the time frame required
for preparation of SFC/EFC memos and obtaining the approvals and
also the time required for implementation of the scheme over the vast
network, the targets were fixed at a lower side. However the
department ensures that once the schemes are approved implementation
can take place in full swing and the targets shall be achieved. All
efforts are being made by the Department for obtaining the approval
of the scheme by Competent authority.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]

24
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note from the information provided by the
Department that on the one side the demand for setting up Post Offices
has gone up with the expansion of cities and towns and on the other
hand, 89 per cent of the overall postal network incurs loss due to
being sub sized. In this context, there is an urgent need to have the
proper assessment of the category of the Post Office to be set up in
a particular areas so as to avoid chances of relocation. The Department
should undertake a proper assessment in this regard keeping in view
the existing population in a particular area where a type of Post Office
is proposed to be set up. In this context the Committee note that
perhaps there is an urgent need to tie up with the Panchayati Raj
Institutions, who can help the Postal Department in setting realistic
plans with regard to setting up of Post Offices in rural areas.
Action Taken by the Government
Relocation of Post Offices is resorted to in certain cases because
there are many Extra Departmental Branch Post Offices (EDBOs) in
normal rural areas which are located in closer proximity than the
prescribed norms of 3 kms. Most of such Post Offices were opened in
the past in exercise of discretionary powers. Such powers were later
dispensed with. Owing to non-availability of Plan targets for opening
of new EDBOs after 2003-04 it was considered essential to relocate
those Post Offices (located in closer proximity with each other) not
fulfilling the prescribed distance criteria, to other needy areas. Care is
being taken not to reduce access in any area.
As regards concern expressed by the Committee on need for tie
up with Panchayati Raj institutions in setting realistic plans with regard
to opening of Post Offices in rural areas and proper assessment of
need for appropriate category of post Offices in a particular area, Circles
have been requested to have necessary tie up with the Panchayati Raj
institutions in this regard.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee observe that the Scheme of setting up Franchised
Outlets for certain postal functions (except traditional mail, selling
stamps and doing Saving Bank transactions) has found favourable

25
response and these outlets are in fact bringing more business to Post
Offices. The Committee trust that the targets for setting up Franchised
Outlets during the Eleventh Plan would be fully achieved.
Action Taken by the Government
It is proposed to open 10,000 Franchise Outlets throughout the
country in urban areas, upcoming urban centres etc. during the
Eleventh Five Year Plan. Every effort will be made to achieve the
targets during the Plan Period. So far 336 Franchise Outlets have been
opened in the country. Physical targets for opening of Franchise Outlets
during the year 2008-09 are being assigned to Circles.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee further note that the Department aim to have
‘any time anywhere banking’ in the postal network during the Eleventh
Plan whereby a person can operate account from anywhere in the
country. The Committee strongly recommend to complete the task of
networking of various types of post offices so that the ambitious plan
to have ‘anytime anywhere banking’ can be achieved during the
Eleventh Plan.
Action Taken by the Government
Core Banking Solution (CBS) envisages to provide ‘Anywhere-
Anytime-Any branch banking for Post Office Small Savings Schemes’
customers. The objectives of CBS are to streamline existing operations
Small Savings Schemes, provide facilities like ATMs, internet, telephone
and mobile banking to customers, better Management Information
System (MIS) for efficient decision making, faster grievance redressal
through Call Centre, etc. All the Departmental Post offices are proposed
to network in XI plan which will provide a nation-wide reliable
network for providing connectivity to various post offices. This will
enable ‘anytime anywhere banking’.
Committee’s valuable advise on networking the Post Offices is
well taken.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]

26
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that the Department propose to set up and
equip 300 Mail Business Centres (MBCs) across the country at the
estimated expenditure of Rs. 180 crore. These Centres will function as
hub for mail related activities. The Committee further find that the
Scheme has already got the approval of the Government and is under
finalisation. The Committee recommend that the Scheme should be
finalized expeditiously so that the targets of setting up the Mail
Business Centres during the year 2008-09 can be achieved.
Action Taken by the Government
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memo and Detailed
Project Report (DPR) on plan scheme for ‘Setting up of Mail Business
Centres’ is under preparation.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
During the Tenth Plan period, DoP had decided to establish a
National Data Centre with the objective of networking of various
activities of the Department in the Central Data Base. In their earlier
Reports, the Committee had commented upon the delay in the setting
up of the Centre. The Committee note that at last the National Data
Centre has finally been commissioned at New Delhi with a total of
30 high end servers and many applications are already being accessed
by the Post Offices through the Centre. The ultimate end of the setting
up of the National Data Centre is complete makeover to automation
and efficiency. The Committee have been informed in this regard, that
the disaster recovery centre is planned to be set up in the case of
disaster and recovery of data for which the National Informatics Centre
has already been given the task of designing the hardware
requirements. During the Eleventh Plan, the Department plan to set
up single integrated software which would henceforth create centralized
database environment. The Committee would like that topmost priority
should be given to setting up the disaster recovery centre within a
stipulated time frame so that the objectives behind establishing the
Centralized Data base are fully achieved.
Action Taken by the Government
A National Data Centre has been established at NIC-HQ,
New Delhi to integrate and hosting applications of the Department for
providing network driven value added counter, mail, financial and
banking services leading to better customer satisfactions. This will

27
consolidate the enterprise-wise e-projects reducing cost of IT operations
and enhance system resource utilization. The web enabled applications
of the Department have been hosted at NDC and are being accessed
by the Post Offices. In the next phase of the project, Disaster Recovery
Centre is also being set-up at NIC’s Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC),
Hyderabad.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee note that as on date DoP are maintaing 17,23,97,269
Postal Accounts involving a total deposit of Rs. 3,51,548 crore in various
Saving Schemes of Post Offices. However during the course of oral
evidence, the Committee have been informed that although the number
of accounts in Postal Saving Banks are increasing, the total money
deposited is coming down. This is a matter of concern to the
Committee. They wish to point out that various Saving Schemes of
Post Offices have been popular for parking funds especially for the
middle class. The negative growth by way of more withdrawals than
deposits is an important aspect which should be thoroughly looked
into and corrective action taken to arrest this disturbing trend. The
Committee would like to be informed of the precise action taken in
this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Department is regularly taking up the issue of declining trend in
Savings Schemes with Ministry of Finance. Recently Hon’ble MOS
(C&IT) has written a DO letter to Hon’ble Finance Minister on 09.05.08
requesting him to take steps for revision of interest rates of Small
Saving Schemes as well as other incidental benefits of the small saving
schemes to mobilize more deposits.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee further note that the Department have taken some
novel initiatives in the field of Savings Bank operations. They have
tied up with SBI in 100 Post Offices of 5 Circles in a pilot project. The
main concentration is on loan products. Besides, ten year term deposit
and two year term deposit which are not the Schemes with the Posts,

28
are being offered through SBI. In another initiative, the Postal
Department are tapping into the fast growing mutual fund
opportunities through a larger clientele. Under this project, over
250 Post Offices are distributing select mutual funds. The Committee
appreciate the aforesaid initiatives. The Committee feel that the
Department have the biggest advantage in terms of reach due to their
wider network in the country. By tying up with various Banks
particularly SBI and mutual funds, the Post Offices can reach to the
last person living in the remotest of the areas through these initiatives
where banks and other mutual fund companies may feel the handicap.
The Committee would like the Department to consider the feasibility
of extending the aforesaid operations to the other areas also. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about the action taken
thereon with the relevant details.
Action Taken by the Government
State Bank of India has tied up with India Post for implementing
its plan of rural financial inclusion. An agreement has been signed
between India Post and State Bank of India for providing facilities in
the rural areas to open smart card and non smart card accounts, deposit
and withdraw money besides availing various loan schemes available
with the State Bank of India through Post Offices. Smart Card accounts
are being operated through a Point of Sale. Device which consists of
a Mobile Phone instrument, Biometric reader to check the identification
of the account holders and a battery operated printer. The day-to-day
transactions are updated immediately with the Back End Server, which
is centrally located by the SBI at Mumbai. A Pilot project has been
launched on 02 July, 2007 in the five States namely Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu simultaneously.
The pilot project is implemented in 17 Post Offices in Andhra Pradesh
Circle, 21 POs in Jharkhand, 23 POs in Karnataka, 21 POs in
Maharashtra and 13 POs in Tamil Nadu Circle. Branch Post Offices
and Sub Post Offices have been identified for implementing the Pilot
Project. It is proposed to expand the pilot project in select Post Offices
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh Postal
Circles.
So far as mutual fund is concerned, at present more than 1000
Post Offices had been distributing mutual funds. Department had tied
up with five mutual funds. Department had tied up with five mutual
funds companies namely UTI, SBI, Principal, Franklin, Templeton and
Reliance Mutual Fund.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]

29
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee note that as per a study conducted by the
Department in the year 2006, the revenue share of Speed Post vis-a-vis
the other major players in the organised courier industry is
27.55 per cent. The Committee have also been apprised that the Posts
are facing stiff competition from private couriers (both organized and
unorganised) in the express mail industry. With the changing attitude
of the Department for looking at mails as a business activity, and
taking a number of measures for promotion of Speed Post business,
the Department have been able to stop the trend of losing mail traffic
by about 9 to 10 per cent every year. The Department are optimistic
that during the Eleventh Plan they would be able to reverse this
decline. The Committee desire that the Department should closely
monitor the market trends and take appropriate action in order to
make their presence in the industry pronounced and improve their
financial health in the process.
Action Taken by the Government
The Business Development and Marketing Directorate was created
in the year 1996 to undertake product development and marketing
activities to compete market and to enhance the revenue of the
Department. This Directorate aims to give focused attention to the
development of customer friendly products and to make use of the
opportunities being created by new technologies. Some initiatives taken
up by the Department in this direction are listed below:
• The Department are closely following the market trends and
modifying product features and pricing of premium
products.
• Introduction of One India One Rate scheme in August 2006
brought down the price of Speed Post upto 50 gms to
Rs. 25 across India.
• The Local Speed Post rates were slashed to Rs. 12 in
June 2007.
• The Department have improved operational efficiency by
expanding its Speed Post network to 290 Speed Post Centres.
• The rates for Express Parcel Post were revised effective from
1st April 2008 keeping the market trends in mind.
• Department have introduced Logistic Post Air to provide
express service to the customers of the North Eastern Region

30
of the country who want fast and time-bound delivery of
their consignments.
• National Bill Mail Service has also been created to enable
the service providers to send the bills in the National stream.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Posts at
present are involved in the disbursement of wages under NREGA in
72 districts in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal. With the intention of getting
involved throughout the country, a model Memorandum of
Understanding has been prepared and sent to the Ministry of Law for
legal vetting. On finalisation, the MoU will be sent to all the Postal
Circles for tie-ups individually with the State Governments. The
Committee further find that the Department of Posts have withdrawn
the service charge fo two per cent of the amount disbursed under
NREGA. However, a proposal has been submitted to the Ministry of
Finance for sufficient remuneration for handling NREGA across the
country. The Committee recommend that the model MoU be finalised
expeditiously, so that various Circles can tie-up individually with the
State Governments to be involved in all the districts in this regard.
While recommending for the country-wide involvement of the
Department of Posts in the implementation of the Programme, the
Committee also desire that the Ministry of Finance should consider
compensating DoP by way of sufficient remuneration for discharging
this onerous social responsibility.
Action Taken by the Government
NREGS is now operational in all the rural areas of the country
w.e.f. 1st April, 2008. As per the directives given in the Minutes issued
by Prime Minister’s Office vide I.D No. 490/31/C/14/07-ES.II dated
21.1.08 in consultation with Ministry of Rural Development a Model
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been prepared and
circulated to all the Circles for entering into tie-ups individually with
State Governments. As instructed in the Minutes on Department’s
administrative and operational costs for handling NREGS accounts,
issue of budgetary support of Rs. 84 crore for the year 2008-09 has
been taken up with Ministry of Finance.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]

31
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee further note that as on 29 February 2008, 87,18,546
new accounts were opened under NREGA. With the NREGA being
extended country-wide from 1 April, 2008 the Department of Posts
can capture rural sector by the strategy of opening Savings Bank
Account of every BPL family covered under NREGA with the objective
of financial inclusion. To achieve the aforesaid objective, the officials
of the Department should involve Panchayati Raj Institutions. Besides,
the involvement of Posts in various schemes needs to be publicised
through close interaction with the functionaries of the Panchayati Raj
Institutions as well as through the forum of Gram Sabha meetings.
Action Taken by the Government
The valuable advice of the Committee is well taken. Department
has issued instructions to all the Circles to coordinate and maintain
effective liaison with the State Governments for smooth and widespread
implementation of NREGS through Post Offices covering all the rural
areas of the country. Circles have been further advised to have periodic
meetings with State Governments officers from State to Panchayat levels
to meet this objective. They have also been asked to coordinate with
State Governments including representatives of Panchayats to publicize
the facility of NREGS wage payments through Post Offices. Similar
action will be taken for other Schemes, which would be made available
through Post Offices.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee also note the initiative taken by the Department of
Posts to get involved in credit linking of Self Help Groups under the
pilot project. The recovery rate of 148 per cent in this regard is really
noteworthy. The Committee would like the Department to take the
lead to get involved in the disbursement of Self Help Groups in all
the States particularly when the recovery rate is so encouraging.
Action Taken by the Government
The Post Office-Self Help Group-NABARD Linkage Scheme was
commenced as a Pilot Project a few identified blocks of Savaging and
Pudukottai District in the State of Tamil Nadu. It was then extended

32
to a few selected blocks of Tiruvannamalai District. The scheme had
its further extension in the entire districts of Sivaganga, Pudukottai,
Tiruvannamalai, Thanjavur and Tiruvarur Districts.
9 Postal divisions are serving the identified districts either fully or
partly.
Details of SHG Accounts and the SHGs credit
linked are as below: (*)
Sl.No. Name of the No. of No. of SHG No. of Amount of
Postal Division Post Accounts SHGs credit
Offices opened credit effected so
involved so far linked far (Rs.)
1. Tiruvannamalai 459 531 25 6,00,000
2. Pudukottai 342 463 174 40,20,650
3. Nagapattinam 95 171 9 1,99,000
4. Pattukottai 217 298 43 10,70,300
5. Kumbakonam 148 285 6 1,50,00
6. Thanjavur 372 385 42 10,44,000
7. Myladuthurai 20 75 11 2,75,000
8. Karaikudi 116 121 61 14,64,000
9. Sivaganga 194 502
Total 1963 2831 371 88,22,950
*as on 01.04.08
The scheme is in its Pilot Stage and will be extended in consultation
with NABARD. The Department is also exploring the possibility of
association with other nationalized banks and Financial Institutions
for the same.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee further note that out of 2823 Self Help Groups
who have opened account so far, only 223 Self Help Groups which is
approximately 8 per cent could be credit linked. In this regard various
pro-active initiatives to provide forward and backward linkages should

33
be taken to enable Self Help Groups to start the economic activity.
Further the Department should also publicise the initiatives taken by
them in this regard so that more and more Self Help Groups approach
to DoP for disbursement of loans.
Action Taken by the Government
The Self Help Groups opening accounts in Post Offices will become
eligible for loans after a period of 6 months, during which the
performance of the groups will be watched. The groups will be credit
rated based on the prescribed criteria and procedures. These measures
are being strictly followed to ensure that the needy and eligible groups
alone are granted credit linkage.
The Pilot project of disbursal of micro credit through post offices
has three main players, viz., the NABARD; the Post Office and the
Non Government Organisations. These NGOs together with NABARD,
help the Self Help Groups enter into viable enterprises leading to
income generation and asset creation. The rural postmaster, while acting
as a Self Help Promoting Institution, acts as a reliable and reachable
disbursement channel for micro credit.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The Committee observe that there are lots of opportunities for the
Department of Posts by way of actively being involved in various
Centrally Sponsored Schemes like Indira Awaas Yojana. The
involvement in more and more Centrally Sponsored, Central Sector
and State Sponsored Social Sector Schemes would not help the
Department to increase the revenue but also fulfil the social
commitment on the part of the Department.
Action taken by the Government
The advice of the Committee is well received and suitable action
along the instructions indicated will be taken.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The Committee note that a Global Business Division has been
created by the Department in September, 2007 with the objective of
expanding their operations at international level. The intention is to

34
maximise the benefits accruing from the growth of Indian economy
and its integration with the international economy. The Committee
feel that these are steps in right direction and should be pursued
earnestly to provide efficient and customer friendly services as there
are immense possibilities of its growth particularly in countries where
there is a large concentration of people of Indian origin.
Action Taken by the Government
The Global Business Division created at the Directorate in the
Department of Posts is pursuing different efficient and customer
friendly services whose commercial possibilities are estimated very high.
These include:
(i) Inbound and outbound services in Mails Segment.
(ii) Inbound and outbound services in Express Segment.
(iii) Services in the area of Money Remittances.
(iv) Special services for target groups like students, exporters
etc.
(v) Promotion of Indian Philately in overseas markets.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee appreciate the new initiative being taken by the
Department in the field of retail post whereby the ‘India Post’ offers
the facility to collect consumers’ bills for service industries like
telephone/electricity/mobile phone bills, etc. for the Government and
also private organisations. The Committee are anxious to know about
the extent of coverage of the aforesaid facility in the whole country.
They, therefore, would like to be apprised of the details in this regard
both, for rural and urban areas, separately. The Department should
also consider extending the aforesaid facility in all the Post Offices
particularly in rural areas based on the feedback received.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department are acting as the payment getaway for various
Bills and payments for the public. This service is extended in Urban
and rural areas depending on the requirements of the service providers
and customer needs.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-2008]

35
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
The Committee note with satisfaction the initiatives taken by the
Posts to sell the application forms of various Government and private
institutions through Post Offices in the country. There is enough scope
to sell the forms for common entrance tests for Government and private
institutions not covered so far. The Committee note that these initiatives
would not only increase the revenue of the Department but also help
the Department to fulfil the social obligation. The students in rural
and remote areas can particularly be benefitted. In addition to the sale
of application forms for various competitive examinations, the
Department can also take the initiative of selling forms for various
housing schemes of respective State Governments. The Committee may
be kept apprised about the concrete action in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has entered into a tie up with various Government
and Private educational institutions for sale of application forms and
collection of fee etc. to leverage its network and to increase its revenue.
A few of the tie ups are listed below:
1. Sale of application forms of UPSC examinations.
2. Sale of application forms of the Armed Forces Medical
College.
3. Sale of LAWCET applications (Common Entrance Test for
Law Colleges).
4. Sale of EAMCET applications (Common Entrance Test for
Management Courses).
5. Sale of State Public Service Commission application forms
in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh etc. at
present.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-08]
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
The Committee further note that the Postal Circles have been
empowered to enter into local tie-ups with private or Government
agencies. The Department as such have not initiated any scheme on
an All India basis and are not aware of the revenue earned by the
concerned Circles in this regard. The Committee note that the
Department of Posts have a very wide network of Post Offices

36
throughout the country and the infrastructure created for setting up of
Post Offices is the biggest asset of the Dpeartment. There is an urgent
need to explore possibilities to ensure the optimum use of the area
occupied by Post Offices. The Committee would like the Department
to examine the matter with a view to assessing its impact and extending
its coverage if felt desired. The Committee would like to be apprised
of its details with regard to the revenue earned by the concerned
Circles through this initiative.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts are offering a few selected services besides
postal services with an objective to leverage its network and to utilize
its existing infrastructure optimally. The Postal circles have been
empowered to enter into various tie ups and form Circle Business
Packages. The Business Development and Marketing Directorate also
enter into tie ups with various Government and Private Institutions
centrally. The details of various business packages worked out by the
Circles are given in the Annexure.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-08]
(ATN to Recommendation No. 45)
Sl.No Name of the Circle Details of Business Packages
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Sale of application forms of various
institutions like Dr. BRAOU Eligibility Test
applications, Central University Distance
Eucation applications, ICET applications,
ECET applications, EAMCET applications,
Ed CET applications, DIETCET applications,
LAWCET applications, PGD CET
applications, PRITA CET applications,
SKUCET applications, SKU CDE
applications, APPSC-AEE applications,
APPSC-(Jr. Asstt. & JL & DEO) applications,
APPSC-Departmental applications, APPSV-
Gr-I applications APPSC Gr-II applications,
APPSC LDC applications etc.

37
12 3
Sale of magazines and publications like
Discovery magazines, ‘Andhra Prabha’
newspaper, ‘Health Help’ Magazine,
Annadata Magazines, Vyaktitva Vikasam
Book, Spoken English Book,
Amruthavarshini book, Chandamanma
Magazine, Ushodaya CDs etc.
Sale of Postal Tariff Cards, ITZ Cash Cards,
BSNL Products, Milk Cards, Puttur Thailam,
Ambica Darbar Agarbathi Products etc.
Bank on Your Postman scheme Internet Cafe
in Vijayawada Region eSeva facility at
Hyderabad GPO Collection of TVSSFL
Cheques, Bajaj Auto Finance Cheques,
Shriram Finance Cheques, ICICI Bank
Cheques etc.
Sale of Bhadrachalam Prasadam,
Mallikarjuna Swamy Prasadam,
Vemulawada Prasadam, Aksharabhyasam
Scheme-Prasadam, Basara Saraswathi Devi
Prasadam, Sri Sarada Peetham Prasadam, Sri
Kanakamahalakshmi Ammavari Prasadam,
Arasavalli Prasadam, Sri Kurmananda
Swamy Prasadam, Karthika Prasadam,
Pooja/Prasadam tickets of Chodavaram
Devasthanam, Pooja/Prasadam tickets of 4
Shaktipeethams, Pooja/Prasadam tickets of
Sri Padha Vallabha Maha Samsthanam etc.
Dr. BRAOU fee collection, Collection of
Water Tax, House Tax & Electricity Bills,
TATA PCOs Collection etc.
Commission earned on HDFC disbursement
of loans against NSC/KVP
Payment of wages to wage-seekers through
POSB under NREGS etc.
2. Assam Distribution of coins/exchange of soiled
notes through Post Offices in tie-up Reserve
Bank of India.
Sale of application forms of various
Universities/Colleges through Post Offices.

38
12 3
3. Bihar Disbursement of coins Payment of wages
under National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.
Payment of Pension under State Old Age
Pension Scheme/National Old Age Pension
Scheme.
Disbursement of loan through HDFC on
NSC/KVP Sale of application forms of
different organizations viz. BSSC, VIT, SRM
Institute, SOA University.
Sale of books of Divya Yog Prakashan.
4. Chhattisgarh Selling of books of Sahitya Academy
Bhartiya Gyanpeeth and National Book
Trust.
Selling of application forms of Vyawsaik
Pareeksha Mandal.
5. Delhi Sale of examination prospectus forms of
CBSE, IIT, IIM, SSC etc.
Sale of judicial/non-judicial stamp papers
Collection of utility bills payment of MTNL
and Delhi Jal Board Distribution of old age
pension on behalf of Delhi State
Government.
Collection of amount of Traffic Challan
Sale of entry tickets of IITF.
Sale of magazines/publications.
Sale of RBI coins and exchange of soiled
notes.
6. Gujarat Payment of Widow Financial Assistance
Collection of energy bills of Gujarat Urja
Vikas Nigam Ltd.
Sale of Sheetal brand Aloe Vera products
through POs.
Setting up Gramin Suvidha Kendras in the
POs of Mahesana Dn.
In collaboration with Multi Commodity
Exchange Ltd.
Collection of mobile bills of various Cellular
companies like Vodafone, Idea, Airtel, etc.
through e-payment.
Sale of Judicial/Non-Judicial Stamps.
Distribution of coins and exchange of soiled
notes through selected POs.

39
12 3
7. Haryana Sale of forms on behalf of various
educational institutes.
Collection of telephone bills.
Collection of electricity bills.
Sale of publications on behalf of Divya Yog
Prakashan, Haridwar.
8. Himachal Pradesh Sale of different Universities prospectus.
Sale of Yoga books of Divya Mandir Trust/
Patanjali Yog Peeth Haridwar.
Prasadam of different temples.
Sale of Airtel Recharge coupons.
Sale of HP subordinate service selection
Board, Hamirpur.
 9. Jammu & Kashmir Distribution of coins of RBI Delivery of
mobile/landline bills of Airtel.
Installation of coin collection boxes of Bharti
Airtel.
10. Jharkhand Sale of application form for various
competitive exam through POs counter.
Sale of Judicial/Non-Judicial Stamps form.
Loan Distribution through HDFC Bank.
Sale of Assam Tea.
Sale of Yoga Book.
Sale of Family planning and RCH product
of HLFPPT Coin distribution/exchange of
soiled currency notes with RBI.
11. Karnataka Sale of Airtickets of M/s Deccan Aviation
Ltd.
Distribution of coins/exchage of soiled notes
(5 POs).
Sale & Acceptance of KPSC Applications.
ITC, Sancharnet Cards, Broadband/COMBO
connection etc.
Telephone bill collection Insurance premia
collection of Vodafone, ICICI Prudential.
‘Electricity bill collection of BESCOM and
MESCOM.
Collection of Annual subscription towards
“Annadata Magazines” from customers.

40
12 3
Sale of applications for competitive
Examinations of IBA, MEDA, ICFAI.
Sale of Solar lantern of TATA BP Solar.
Conducting Rural household Survey
through Postman Sale of CDs.
Sale/acceptance of BBMP-Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike Hand books for
regularization of construction.
Sale of Sandur Kushala Kala Kendra-
Handicrafts items.
“Hrudaya Post” e-Transmission of Medical
reports of clients to Narayana Hrudayalaya.
Collection of RC Books from ICICI
customers.
Collection & remittance of cheques of TVC
Finance, Bajaj Auto Finance, Centurian Bank
of Punjab and HDFC Bank.
12. Kerala Sale of Kerala Public Service Commission
application forms through POs.
13. Madhya Pradesh Sale of ITC Cards, FLPP Cards, Sancharnet
Cards etc.
Distribution/collection of energy bills in
urban/rural areas in Bhopal, Raisen, Harda,
Vidisha, Sehore, Rajgarh (Biaora) and
Hoshangabad districts.
14. Maharashtra Bill collection of MTNL, BSNL, MSEB BEST
and Mahanagar Gas
Sale of forms of MPSC Exam and DET
(MBA)
Distribution of Loan products of
Corporation Bank, Union Bank of India,
Sena Bank and SBI
Sale of Siddhivinayak Prasadhan
Drop boxes of Standard chartered Bank
Distribution of Annadata Magazine.
15. North East Sale of prospectus and forms of NERIST
form the selected HO/SOs of North East,
Assam and Sikkim.
Sale of ethnic products and the products of
self help groups on commission basis under
Retail Post.

41
12 3
16. Orissa Sale of forms and prospectus of educational
institutions through POs under retail Post
Collection of BSNL telephone bills through
postmen. Collection of motor vehicle tax
and other bills through e-payment in
identified POs.
Distribution of coins on behalf of RBI
through Postal Counters. Implementation of
NREGA through PO Savings Bank.
17. Punjab Collection of payment of electricity bills on
behalf of Punjab State Electricity Board in
10 Distts. of Punjab State covering 6 postal
divisions.
Distribution of coins of denomination of
Re. 1/- and Rs. 2/- on behalf of RBI in
3 Post Offices in UT Chandigarh.
Sale of Bumper Lottery tickets on behalf of
Punjab Government in 3862 Post Offices in
Punjab State.
Sale of Books “Yog ki kasauti par vigyan”
in all POs. Collection of premium on behalf
of ICICI Prudential Life Insurance in 29 POs
in the Circle.
18. Rajasthan Deposit of post paid mobile bills through
e-payment of Vodafone.
Coin distribution on behalf of RBI through
selected post offices in Jaipur city.
Franking of non-judicial stamp at Jaipur
collectorate P .O., Jaipur On-Line acceptance
of passport application at all HO/MDG in
Rajasthan Circle.
19. Tamil Nadu Sale of application forms of Tamil Nadu
Public Service Commission (TNPSC), UPSC
& various Colleges/Universities Collection
of Exam Fees for Tamil Nadu Public Service
Commission (TNPSC)
Acceptance of telephone bills of various
telephone service providers viz., Airtel,
TATA, Vodafone.

42
12 3
Verification of address of the subscribers on
behalf of telephone companies.
Collection of payment of PO/SB Cheques
on behalf of Non-Banking Finance
Institutions.
Issue of coins on behalf of RBI.
Collection of insurance premium for ICICI
Prudential Life Insurance Corporation Ltd.
Booking of Air Tickets for Deccan Aviation
Ltd.
Sale of Books of various publications.
20. Uttar Pradesh Sale of Recharge coupons, STM cards
installation of kiosks of Vodafone.
Sale of forms of UPTU, CPMT, Jaipuria
Instt. of Management, Bundelkhand
University, NICE College, Bareilly.
Sale of Bhabhoot of Kashi Vishwanath
Temple.
Distribution of coins in tie up with RBI.
21. Uttarakhand Sale of forms of UPSC, University
application forms, Uttarakhand Public
Service Commission forms, etc.
Sale of herbal product of Divya Yog
Pharmacy collection of electricity bills
Exchange of coins of Re. 1/- & Rs. 2/- from
select post offices Telephone revenue
collection.
22. West Bengal WBSEB bill collection.
Sale of different examination forms &
magazines.
Address verification on behalf of Bajaj
Allianz Limited.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee find that a comprehensive study has been
conducted by the Department to set up an exclusive Rural Department
to cater to the population of rural areas. The Committee trust that the
report on the Study will be examined and follow-up action taken
expeditiously to address to the cause of the rural sector.

43
Action Taken by the Government
Rural Business Division has started functioning at the Directorate.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-08]
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
Human resource is undoubtedly the biggest asset for any
Department. To get best of the results training is a sine qua non .
Unfortunately, the track record of the Department of Posts in the matter
is totally uninspiring. The Committee’s examination of the data in this
regard reveal that the utilisation of resources under the Head ‘Human
Resource Development’ during the Tenth Plan, was dismal. Out of the
allocated Outlay of Rs. 40.65 crore, DoP utilised Rs. 12.2 crore only, i.e.
about 30 per cent. Similarly, during the year 2007-08, the Department
have allocated Rs. 26.27 crore under the Head out of which the
utilisation is just Rs. 3.26 crore i.e. 12.40 per cent. The Committee
deplore the under utilisation of Outlay under one of the important
Head i.e. Human Resource Management. They strongly recommend
that the Department should take all initiatives to impart training to
the various level of officers so as to bring professionalism in the
Department which may ultimately help in facing the stiff competition
from the private sector.
Action Taken by the Government
Against the Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 40.65 crores, the total
expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 28.43 crore. Hence the percentage
of utilization of outlay is 70%. Department is able to achieve the
physical targets fully. The shortfall in utilization of Plan funds during
10th Five Year Plan was mainly due to reduction in expenditure under
Domestic Travel Expenses and delay in finalization of building projects
of PTC, Guwahati, construction of Hostels in PTC Mysore, Saharanpur
and Vadodara.
During the year 2007-08 from an Outlay of Rs. 19.17 crores received
under Final Grant for Human Resource Development, only Rs. 9.40
crores were spent. Funds were utilized only on the ongoing activities
of the 10th Plan. Year 2007-08 being the first year of Five Year Plan
the new activities could not be initiated for want of approval of EFC.
There are many new Programmes/activities proposed for 11th Five
Year Plan, for training all cadres of the Department. Training
Programmes have been designed to facilitate our personnel to face
competition in the market.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-08]

44
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Committee are concerned to note that a total of 7088 cases of
losses and frauds involving Rs. 227.00 crore were pending as on
31 December, 2007. There is an urgent need to finalise those cases to
their logical conclusion and also to take effective steps to check
recurrence of such cases. The Committee, therefore, desire that DoP
should look into the same and inform them of the follow-up and
corrective action taken in this matter.
Action taken by the Government
All out efforts are made for settlement of pending cases. A serious
note of the pendency of loss and fraud cases in the Department was
taken in the year 2006-07 by the Secretary (Posts) and a special drive
of settlement of pending cases was launched. The drive was also
continued in the year 2007-08 giving special emphasis on settlement of
long pending cases. This vigorous effort brought down the number of
cases pending from 7,625 (as on 1.4.06) to 6,692 (as on 31.3.08) despite
receipt of 3,362 fresh cases in between. Out of these, around 15%
cases are pending for Police investigation and 16% for court proceedings
where the Department has to depend on external agencies. In order to
involve top managements attention to important pending cases in a
focused manner, it has been prescribed by the Secretary (Posts) in
October, 2006 that the Heads of Circle should review one longest
pending case and one case involving highest amount and send action
taken report through their monthly reports to the Secretary (Posts) on
important events. This is in addition to the normal half yearly reviews
and other monitoring already in existence. The drive shall be continued
in the year 2008-09 to finalise pending cases to their logical conclusion.
As regards steps taken to stop recurrence of loss and fraud cases,
it is mentioned that operations in the Post Offices in the country
including management and handling of cash are carried out as the
prescribed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). The Secretary (Posts)
issued specific instructions for safety and security of Post Office cash
in his DO letter No. 10-1/2006-Inv. Dated 18.7.2006 addressed to all
Heads of Circles suggesting inter-alia provision of inner locking safes,
concrete embedding of safes, avoiding excess retention of cash and
fitting of burglar alarm systems with autodialing facility . The
improvements necessitated in the Standard Operating System out of
the breaches observed while handling loss and fraud cases pertaining
to SB/RD/Cash Certificates are addressed suitably by the Department.
The Group of Officers—now headed by Member (I & FS)—constituted
by the Secretary (Posts) to suggest plan of Action to control frauds
and improve security measures in Post Office Savings Bank has given

45
recommendations on some lacunae identified in the system, in the
minutes of the meeting held on 4.10.2006, 12.10.2007 and 03.3.2008.
Since sizeable number of cases relate to fraudulent encashment of lost/
stolen Cash Certificates, a ‘Negative List’ of such certificates is now
incorporated in the Savings Bank Software itself (Sanchay Post ver.
6.0) so that the system will do an auto-check and alert operator every
time a stolen/lost certificate is attempted for encashment in a
computerized post office. Hardcopies of Negative List are also supplied
for use by non-computerized post office.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA)
dated 31-07-08]
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee further find that with the increased activities of
the Department in the various fields of postal operations and with the
highly competitive commercial banking and insurance activities being
undertaken, there is an urgent need for some sort of regulatory
mechanism. The Committee recommend that the Government should
consider setting up of a regulatory mechanism in this regard. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
PLI/RPLI are exempted insurers under section 118(C) of the
Insurance Act (1938) and also under Section 44(d) of the LIC Act
(1956). These schemes do not come under the purview of IRDA Act
(1999), and consequently, not regulated by IRDA.
Views of the Committee will be communicated to the Government.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-08]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
The Committee further find that the Department have taken a
laudable initiative for the implementation of ‘Sevottam’ a Service
Delivery Excellence Model developed by the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, which stresses upon
improvement in the areas of citizens charter, Public Grievances
Mechanism and Service Delivery Capabilities. The Committee have

46
been informed that DoP have almost completed the various preparatory
activities for getting the Department of Posts certified by the Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee hope that the Department
would be certified expeditiously by the BIS which may give assurance
to the public about the quality of services being rendered by the Posts
and further help in enlarging the business in the country.
Action Taken by the Government
Keeping in view the assessment framework designed by the BIS
to ascertain the well functioning of a Government Department with
respect to public service delivery, the Department has brought out a
new Service Quality Manual and a Compendium on Processing and
Disposal of Public Complaints. The Department has also revised its
Citizen’s Charter.
India Posts has got the IS 15700:2005 Certification for the New
Delhi GPO. This is the corresponding certification for implementing
‘Sevottam’ the Service Delivery Excellence Model. India Post gets the
credit for being the first Government Department to get certificate for
one of its outlets.
The adoption and implementation of the quality improvement
model has been taken as a thrust area by the Prime Minister’s Office.
The Department of Posts took on the pioneering role to implement
‘Sevottam’ systematically through its network. Apart from the New
Delhi GPO, the Department has identified more than 600 post offices
for systematic improvement of service quality using the model in the
first phase. Experience has shown that improvement in counter services,
mail delivery, financial services and customer care are effectively
brought about by using the ‘Sevottam’ framework in post offices for
benefit of our customers.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-08]
Recommendation (Para No. 52)
The Committee note that the women employees constitute only
13.84 percent of the work force in the Deparment of Posts. In fact in
Group B non-gazetted services, only 2.52 per cent of the employees
are women. They have also noted the various steps being taken by
the Department to ensure a supportive environment to their women
employees including gender sensitive training programmes, setting up
of committees at various levels for prevention of sexual harassment,
provision of separate rest rooms and recreation rooms and creches
and additional facilitites to women employees performing night duties.

47
While taking note of the steps taken by the Department the Committee
recommend that the initiatives taken should further be geared up to
provide healthy environment at work place and also to attract more
women to join the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
All concerned have been advised to gear up the action to provide
healthy environment and ensure the security of women employees at
their workplaces and they have also been advised to ensure that
vacancy circulars are given wide publicity in newspapers and take
other necessary steps to attract more women to apply for the vacancies
in the Department, Circles etc.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-08]

48
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee again note the gross mis-match between the
physical and financial achievements during the Tenth Plan under one
of the important Schemes of the Department i.e. ‘Expansion of Postal
Network’. As against the Tenth Plan Outlay of Rs. 32.43 crore, the
actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 10.63 crore i.e. 32.77 per
cent. Ironically, achivement of physical targets on this front was
reported to be around 100 per cent. It is really difficult to comprehend
as to how the physical achievement could be achieved to the extent of
100 per cent with the 32.77 per cent of the expenditure of the allocated
Outlay. The argument of decreasing prices of electronic equipments
over the years, as given by the Department, quoted in the earlier para
of the report in the context of mismatch of the overall physical and
finacial achievements is not acceptable in this case on many grounds.
The expenditure on account of electronic equipments like computer
may be only one part of the expenditure for setting up of a Post
Office. This only reinforces the apprehensions of the Committee about
the serious problems in the process of making projection. Such
unrealistic projections may deprive the other important projects of the
much needed Outlay in a year. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend once again that the Department should seriously review
the process of making projections. Besides, the Department owe an
explanation for such an unrealistic projection under one of the
important schemes.
Action Taken by the Government
The total allocation during the Tenth Five Year Plan was
Rs. 37.27 crores for the following activities:
(a) Opening of EDBOs : Rs. 15.87 crores
(b) Opening of DSOs : Rs.  7.45 crores
(c) Opening of PSSKs : Rs. 13.95 crores
Total : Rs. 37.27 crores
The Original outlay of Rs. 37.27 crores was subsequently revised
to Rs. 32.43 crores.

49
The EFC approved the implementation of the scheme for first two
years of the Tenth Plan, i.e. for 2002-03 and 2003-04 with the stipulation
that no new posts will be created and that expenditure will be restricted
to providing basic infrastructure only. The following recurring
expenditure could not be utilized as creation of new posts for manning
DSOs and EDBOs was allowed:
EDBOs Rs. 17.65 crores
DSOs Rs.  8.06 crores
Total Rs. 25.71 crores
The targets for the five years and target approved by the EFC
during the first two years of the Five Year Plan is as under:—
Activity Proposed targets Targets approved by
for five years EFC for the first
two years of  the
10th Five Year Plan
(a) Opening of EDBOs 1,000 450 (for the years 2002-03
and 2003-04)
(b) Opening of DSOs 100 45 (for the years 2002-03
and 2003-04)
(c) PSSKs 5,000 2,400 for the years 2002-03 and
2003-04)
The EFC approved the proposal for initial two years only of ‘10th
Plan without recurring costs (no new post creation for manning DSOs
and EDBOs allowed and hence no recurring expenditure became
involved as Plan Period progressed) and hence there was variation in
the initial outlay and the actual expenditure. Out of a total target of
450 EDBOs (as given in (a) above) approved by the EFC, 440 EDBOs
were opened by redeployment of staff during the 10th Plan Period.
Similarly, all the 55 DSO approved by the EFC/SFC were opened
during the 10th Plan Period (during the year 2006-07 target for opening
of 10 DSOs was approved by the SFC in addition to 45 already
approved for 2002-03 and 2003-04). Thus the physical targets originally
proposed to be accomplished during the Tenth Five Year Plan were
reduced by the EFC. The targets approved by the EFC/SFC were almost
achieved fully. (No targets for opening of new Post Offices were
approved by the EFC for the financial year 2004-05 and 2005-06).
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-08]

50
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee find that the far-flung tribal, hilly and other difficult
areas are scarcely populated and the people have to travel long
distances to avail of the various facilities of Posts. The population
norms for setting up Post Offices are difficult to be met in these areas.
The situation is further aggravated during the unfavourable weather
conditions like extreme winter in J & K and other hilly areas, when
it is difficult to go outdoor to avail postal facilities. More so, banks
and other financial institutions also may not be interested in opening
branches in these areas due to commercial reasons. The most
economical and easy solution in this case is mobile Post Offices. Mobile
Post Offices equipped with all the possible postal services and
equipment can be of a great help to the people of these areas by
providing the postal facilities at the doorstep. Another possible solution
may be weekly bazaars of postal services at a prominent place in
different villages in the rural areas. A proper coordination with the
Panchayats can help the Postal Department in getting the space for
opening the weekly bazaars in the Panchayat headquarters. The
Committee would like the Department to explore the possibilities of
opening mobile and weekly Post Offices on the suggested lines and
apprise the Committee about the concrete action taken in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
In view of the existing level of access to Postal facilities, it may
not be appropriate to implement the concept of mobile Post Offices
and weekly bazaar Post Offices in rural/hilly areas.
Out of a total network of 1,55,204 Post Offices (as on 31.3.2007),
1,39,046 Post Offices are located in rural areas. Thus, more than 89%
of the Post Offices are functioning in rural areas. Average area and
population served per Post Office is 21.2 sq. km and 7166 respectively.
This compares favourably with other advanced countries, viz., China
which has a larger terrain and population to cover. USA also has
larger geographical terrain to cover.
Postal facilities in terms of regular delivery of mail at the doorstep
of every customer, collection of letters from letterboxes and selling of
stamps/stationery is provided by the Department in every village
irrespective of terrain through delivery agents while on their regular
visit to respective beats. Almost all the villages are being touched
everyday by the delivery staff.
Since the Department is constantly in the process of providing
postal facilities through various means like opening of new EDBOs,

51
alternative means of providing basic postal facilities through PSSKs,
relocation of Post Offices to needy areas, mobile PCO facility called
Gramin Sanchar Sewak (GSS) scheme operated through delivery agents
of this Department etc. Licenced Stamp Vendors and Licenced Postal
Agents are also functioning in many places. Department has recently
introduced Franchisee Scheme in new and upcoming areas. In addition
to basic postal facilities Franchisee Outlets provide a range of services
like utility bill collection, insurance facilities etc.
It can, therefore, be seen that extensive postal facilities are available
throughout the country including remote and far flung areas. The
services available are considered to be satisfactory. In view of above,
the need for Mobile Post Offices and Weekly Postal Bazaars is not an
immediate necessity.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee observe that the Department could achieve more
than 100 per cent targets under two Schemes viz. (i) Computerisation
of Post Offices and (ii) Computerisation of Administrative Offices by
spending 70 per cent of the Outlay earmarked during the Tenth Plan.
The over achievement of targets has reportedly been possible due to
the reduction in the cost of hardware peripherals. However, under the
Scheme Computerisation of Postal Accounts and Management the
Department could not achieve the same level of result. The Committee
feel that the savings made possible due to the reduction in the cost of
hardware and peripherals as stated by the Department could have
been leveraged for better achievement of physical targets. The
Committee would like to be informed about the constraints leading to
under achievement of physical targets under the aforesaid Scheme.
Action Taken by the Government
During the 10th Five Year Plan, EFC to the tune of Rs. 4.08 crores
was approved for the computerization of Postal Accounts offices and
accordingly funds of Rs. 4.05 crores was allotted during the Five Year
Plan period (2002-07). Even though the full allotment of funds of
Rs. 4.05 crores was made to all the Postal Circles, but an amount of
Rs. 2.60 crores was shown as booked by the Circles under the Head
of Account 5201-104-10-01-52 Computerization of Postal Accounts
offices during the 10th Five Year Plan and remaining amount of

52
Rs. 1.45 Crores could not be booked during the 10th Plan due to non-
adjustment of DGS&D bills, for which purchase order was issued
during the end of Annual Plan 2006-07 through DGS&D rate contract.
The same spillover expenditure was booked during Annual Plan 2007-
08. Hence, the total expenditure was Rs. 4.05 crore (2.6+1.45=4.05 crores)
during the 10th Plan period of which Rs. 1.45 crore was booked in the
first Annual Plan Year 2007-08 of 11th Plan.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee further note that Department are providing the
facility of receiving remittances from more than 205 countries and
territories on real time basis. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the details of the results of operations of the service.
Action Taken by the Government
India Post is offering International Money Transfer Service in
association with Western Union from over 8500 post offices across the
country. India Post disbursed an amount of over Rs. 5139 crores during
the year 2007-08. The revenue earned by the Department has been
Rs. 30.02 crores.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]

53
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee observe that the Revenue Receipts of DoP increased
from Rs. 5023.49 crore in 2005-06 to Rs. 5322.44 crore in 2006-07 and
to Rs. 5707.20 crore in 2007-08. For the year 2008-09, the Receipts have
been projected at Rs. 6159.31 crore. The Committee’s examination
revealed that the growth in the Revenue Receipts during the entire
Tenth Five Year Plan was rather slow. The Department attributed this
largely to the decline in the traditional mail traffic, money order traffic,
etc. They also assured the Committee that with the introduction of
innovative products and services like Speed Post, Passport Service,
Business Post, Bill Mail Service, Retail Post, etc. and other agency
service being promoted, the trend will undergo changes. At this stage,
the Committee are not inclined to remain contented with this. In their
opinion, if DoP want to remain a serious player in the market, they
have to intensify their efforts commensurate with the customer
requirements so that their Revenue Receipts get a boost.
Action Taken by the Government
The overall revenue receipts of the Department during the last
five years have been as under.
(Rs. in crores)
Year Revenue % increase over
Receipt the previous year
2003-04 4256.93
2004-05 4431.85 4.11
2005-06 5023.49 13.35
2006-07 5322.44 5.95
2007-08 5488.00 3.11

54
The Department has developed a market outlook to effectively
respond to the business challenges with a view to increase the Revenue
Receipt of the Department. Various steps being undertaken by the
Department to respond to the market challenges are as below:
• The Department of Posts is providing market oriented
products like Speed Post, Business Post, Express Parcel Post,
Bill Mail Service, Direct Post, Logistics Post and various
e-endabled services like e-Post, e-Payment and Instant
Money Order Service.
• Customized solutions and value additions are being
provided in response to specific requirements of
customers. The various value additions introduced are
as below:
• Collection from customers’ premises.
•C redit facility for corporate customers.
•V olume based discount.
• Internet based Track and Trace system is available to
find out the status of delivery of Speed Post articles.
The revenue earned from the various premium products has been
in increasing trend. Further, the following initiatives have been taken
during the last few years to increase the revenue of the Department
as also its customer base.
(i) Instant Money Order Service
(ii) International Money Transfer Service
(iii) Retailing of Mutual Fund
(iv) Distribution of non-life products of Oriental Insurance Co.
(v) Field Postal Orders
(vi) Implementation of NREGA and National Old Age Assistance
Programme through Post Offices
(vii) Setting up of Postal Finance Marts (PFMs)
(viii) Electronic Clearing Service
(ix) Dematerialization of National Savings Certificates/Kisan
Vikas Patra
As regards, business from Postal Life Insurance and Rural
Postal Life Insurance, the Remuneration received by the Postal

55
Department from PLI and RPLI operations from 2005-06 onwards are
as follows:
(Rs. in Lakh)
PLI RPLI Total
2005-06 7559 4746 12305
2006-07 10077 6885 16912
2007-08 13033 6726 19759
There is increasing trend in PLI/RPLI business and following steps
have been initiated for further growth in business.
(i) Recruitment of additional Direct Agents
(ii) Increased publicity activities
(iii) Sensitizing Senior Officers through workshop and training
to field Staff.
However, the valuable advice of the Committee is well taken and
suitable action will be taken.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 and 9 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that the Gross Expenditure under the Capital
Section has been Rs. 42.25 crore, Rs. 48.36 crore, Rs. 126.69 crore,
Rs. 269.33 crore and Rs. 284.74 crore (Actuals) during the years
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively. During the
last year of the Tenth Plan, against RE of Rs. 380.20 crore, an
amount of Rs. 284.74 crore was spent showing a shortfall of almost
Rs. 100 crore. A sum of Rs. 232.22 crore was allocated for the Capital
Section at BE stage during the year 2007-08. The allocation was scaled
down to Rs. 202.22 crore at the RE stage. As against this, the actual
expenditure upto January, 2008 is a meagre Rs. 33.25 crore  i.e. about
16.44 per cent. The Committee find this gross under utilisation of
funds highly disconcerting, more so because the under utilisation of

56
funds meant for Capital Creation has a direct bearing on the
performance of the various Schemes of the Department. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feel that emergent steps are required to be taken by
the Department to stop this alarming trend. The Committee desire
that the Department should initiate specific corrective measures to
ensure that the allocation of Rs. 426.61 crore for the year 2008-09 meant
for Capital Expenditure are prudently and optimally utilised.
Action Taken by the Government
During the year 2007-08, the allocation of funds under Capital
Section (Plan) was reduced proportionately from Rs. 228.21 crore to
Rs. 198.21 crore. At the final grant stage the capital allocation was
further reduced and retained at Rs. 164.63 crores as per the requirement
of the department.
Annual Plan 2007-08 being first year of the 11th plan, approval for
the schemes had to be obtained from the competent authority before
implementation of the schemes which took time hence there was low
booking till December 2007. Funds to the extent of Rs. 98.09 crores
has been booked upto March 2008.
During 2008-09 the department has already initiated action for early
processing of EFC/SFC memos and obtaining the approval of the
schemes at the earliest in order to implement the schemes by early
July 2008. A fast track monitoring cell has also been set up at the
Directorate level for monitoring of the implementation of the schemes
by fixing a stipulated time frame at each stage. Circles have also been
instructed to monitor the implementation of the schemes by fixing
timeframes at circle level and also of booking the expenditure under
correct account head. Thus department hopes to utilise the approved
outlay of Rs. 600 crores fully.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I )
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that during each year of the Tenth Plan and
the first and second years of the Eleventh Plan, the allocation made
exclusively for North-Eastern Region has been less than the mandatory

57
allocation of 10 per cent of the total Outlay as per the norms fixed by
the Planning Commission. Not only that, during the first four years of
the Tenth Plan, substantial part of the Outlay could not be utilised
and was deposited in non-lapsable pool of resources. Only during the
year 2006-07, the financial achievement was more than 100 per cent.
With regard to physical achievements, the Committee find that whereas
the Department could achieve overall more than 100 per cent of the
target under most of the schemes as reflected elsewhere in the report,
in the case of North-Eastern Region, under six important Schemes of
the Department viz. Departmental Post Offices, Extra Departmental
Post Offices, Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra, Computerisation of
Postal Account offices, Administrative Offices and Staff quarters, the
achievements are nil. Unfortunately, the position during the year 2007-
08 got worse, when the actual expenditure upto January 2008 has
been reported to be nil. The Committee are really perturbed with the
pathetic performance under different Plan Schemes of the Department
in North-Eastern Region. The Committee are not able to accept the
reasons furnished by the Department for such a poor performance
and strongly recommend that the position should be reviewed and
corrective steps taken accordingly. The Department should ensure that
the mandatory allocation of 10 per cent of the total Outlay is earmarked
during the year 2008-09. Not only that, it should be ensured that the
Outlay is meaningfully utilised. The prescribed norms for setting up
Post Offices in these areas should be suitably relaxed to achieve the
physical targets as well as to improve the accessibility of Post Offices.
Action Taken by the Government
During the Tenth plan, the achievement of physical targets were
nil under the following activities during some years of the plan
period—
1. For the plan activities—Departmental Post offices, Extra
Departmental Post offices and Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras the
EFC Committee had approved these schemes only for the first two
years of the plan period and there was no operation of the schemes
for the last three years of 10th plan and no physical targets were fixed
therefore the achievement is also nil. The expenditure incurred during
the last three years was the recurring expenditure incurred on opening
of Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras.
2. In respect of Computerisation of Postal Accounts Offices—there
are only 2 PAOs in North East region, both the PAOs were
computerised during the third year i.e. 2004-05 as there was no other
PAOs left for computerisation there was no physical or financial targets
fixed or achieved during the last 2 years of the plan period.

58
3. In respect of computerisation of Administrative offices and
construction of staff quarters also, the targets fixed during the tenth
plan period was completed during the first 3 years and there was no
any such proposal also received from the circles during the last 2
years. The physical targets achieved has been shown as nil.
4. During the year 2007-08, the expenditure incurred under North
East upto January 2008 was shown as ‘nil’ as all the expenditure of
the department will be booked under the common head of account
3201 and 5201. The bifurcation of the expenditure of the North East
will be compiled after the accounts are finalised and on obtaining the
details of expenditure from Assam and North East circle. However
funds to the extent of Rs. 13.74 crore has been booked so far in NE
region as against the BE allocation of Rs. 31.34 crores. The final figures
are yet to be firmed up. It is hoped that the funds allocated at BE
stage will be fully utilised.
5. During 2008-09 funds to the extent of Rs. 60 crores has been
earmarked for NE region out of the BE allocation of Rs. 600 crores
thus ensuring that the mandatory allocation of 10 per cent of the total
outlay is earmarked for NE region and department is aiming at
utilisation of the amount fully.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 19 & 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee further note that out of 235 proposals for setting
up of Post Offices (as on January, 2008) in North Eastern areas only
45 proposals were found to be justified and 190 proposals are under
examination. The Committee fail to understand as to why such a large
number of proposals for setting up Post Offices in the Region is
pending. The Committee would like to be apprised about the time
since when the aforeasaid 190 proposals are pending. The Committee
hope that as assured to them during the course of oral evidence, the
Secretary would personally review the position within three months
and the Committee may be kept apprised.

59
Action Taken by the Government
All the proposals pending for opening of Post offices in North
East Circle have been examined. Out of 235 proposals, 45 have been
found justified as per prescribed norms. The other 190 proposals have
also been examined but these have not been found justified. Opening
of 45 justified post offices is under consideration. A meeting of the
Standing Finance Committee (SFC) on the Plan Scheme “Access to the
Postal Network” for the Eleventh Five Year Plan was held recently . It
was decided to take up the matter for appointment of 3000 Gramin
Dak Sevaks for manning new Extra Departmental Post Offices proposed
to be opened throughout the country, with the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India. The opening of new Branch Post Offices may
take some time.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 19 and 20 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee observe that out of the proposed Outlay of
Rs. 3619.83 crore for different Plan Schemes during the Tenth Plan, the
Department got Rs. 1350 crore i.e. 37 per cent of the proposed
allocation. Surprisingly, the Department could not utilise even the
allocated Outlay fully during the entire Tenth Plan. The Committee’s
examination revealed that the Department were able to utilise funds
to the tune of Rs. 874.67 crore only which is 68.70 per cent of the
allocated Outlay. The main reason for under achievement of the
financial targets as informed to the Committee during the course of
oral evidence, was the inordinate delay in obtaining sanctions and
getting the clearances. Curiously enough, the Committee’s examination
further revealed that even though the financial targets were under-
achieved, the Department could achieve almost cent per cent physical
targets. The Committee are not convinced with the argument furnished
by the Secretary for the mismatch in physical and financial targets
during course of oral evidence that cost estimates with regard to
electronic equipments were not accurate as they could not foresee how
these equipments could become cheaper. Evidently, there are serious
problems in the whole planning process as well as preparing estimates
for Five Year Plans as a whole as well as for the Annual Plans.

60
The Department should atleast now ensure that the estimates prepared
for the Annual Plans are realistic. Besides, all desired initiatives should
be taken to ensure full utilisation of the scarce resources allocated for
different Plan Schemes.
Action Taken by the Government
All the proposals are projected keeping in pace with the current
trend, customer requirements and the department’s network availability
and the proposals for the five year plan period are processed keeping
the above facts in view. Further department intends to induct
technology into the department to meet the current challenges faced.
The Annual Plan estimates are projected keeping in view the total
outlay approved for the plan period, funds spent so far, and the
remaining funds to be proportionately spread over the leftover years.
Thus the estimates projected during the Annual Plans are realistic.
The department is making all efforts for fuller utilisation of funds
allocated.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 24 and 25 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee further note that the performance under different
Plan Schemes during the first year of the Eleventh Plan i.e. 2007-08
was equally disappointing. As regards financial achievement, the
Department could utilise only Rs. 38.13 crore against the allocated
sum of Rs. 315 crore i.e. just 12.10 per cent of the allocated Outlay.
Even if the funds booked upto February, 2008, as informed by the
Secretary during the course of oral evidence, are taken into
consideration, the Department were able to utilise just Rs. 75 crore.
Not only that the physical achievement under the major Schemes of
the Department viz. Access to the Postal Networks (SPOs), Branch
Post Offices (BPOs), Sub-Post Offices (SPOs), Departmental Sub-Offices
(DSOs) and franchise outlets has been reported to be nil during the
said year. It is surprising to note that whereas during the Tenth Plan,
the achievement of physical targets was cent per cent with the under-
achievement of financial targets to the tune of 31.93 per cent, during
the first year of the Eleventh Plan nothing concrete in physical terms
could be achieved.

61
Action Taken by the Government
Annual Plan 2007-08 is the first year of the Eleventh Plan. The
process for obtaining the approval for the schemes could be initiated
only after the finalisation of the outlays. Thus the first half of the year
was focussed only on obtaining the approvals for the schemes from
the competent authority. The expenditure whatever has been incurred
is only on the spillover payments of the Tenth Plan. However, as and
when the schemes got approved, the implementation process has been
initiated and funds are being utilised. Funds to the extent of Rs. 98.09
crores has been utilised so far and the final figures are yet to be
firmed up.
The achievement of physical targets has been shown as NIL in
respect of the plan activities—Branch Post Offices (BPOs), Sub-Post
Offices (SPOs), Departmental Sub-Offices (DSOs) and franchise outlets
as the scheme is yet to be approved. The SFC memo has been circulated
amongst the Committee members for comments. Pending the approval
of the scheme, action could not be initiated for implementation of the
scheme. However, it is ensured that the scheme will become effective
from the current year and the department hopes to achieve the targets
fully.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 24 and 25 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee are constrained to conclude from the aforesaid
scenario that there are serious problems in the whole planning process.
The first two years of each Five Year Plan are almost wasted in
obtaining various clearances. While expressing serious concerns in this
regard, the Committee strongly recommend that the process of
evaluation of the schemes, restructuring of the schemes, obtaining
various clearances, etc. should be over before 1st April of the first
year of a Five Year Plan so that the targets are realistically achieved.
The Committee would like that their concerns in this regard should
be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission as well as the Cabinet Secretariat.

62
Action Taken by the Government
This will be communicated to Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission/Cabinet Secretariat.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 24 and 25 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Department had planned to set up two AMPCs at Kolkata
and Delhi for which Rs. 71.05 crore were allocated during the Tenth
Plan. In response to the global tender invited, two bids were received.
After technical evaluation one of them was found technically qualified.
Since it was difficult to assess the competitiveness and reasonableness
of the bid amount, the bid was cancelled. The retendering could not
be done as the time left in the Tenth Plan was too short. The Committee
observe that even when the bid failed and nothing concrete could be
done for the two AMPCs, the Department utilised Rs. 12.10 crore out
of Rs. 71.05 crore during the Tenth Plan. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the details of the expenditure particularly when
nothing concrete could be done due to the cancellation of the bid.
Action Taken by the Government
The details of expenditure during the 10th Plan have been given
in the table below:
(Rs. in crores)
Plan Amount Remarks
2002-2003 11.15 In the first year, Rs. 11.15 crore was
spent on building component for Delhi
and Kolkata sites.
2003-2004 0.60 Paid on account of arrears of bills.
2004-2005 0.15 -do-
2005-2006 0.14 -do-
2006-2007 0.06 -do-
Total 12.10
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]

63
Comment of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
Again during the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 25 crore were approved for
the year 2007-08 out of which only Rs. 2.42 lakh could be utilised
upto December, 2007. The reason again is not receiving wider response
for the tenders invited. The Committee further note that to overcome
this deficiency; a meeting with machine manufacturers was held to
understand the reasons. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the reasons that have come out for the poor response of the
tenders during the aforesaid meeting. The Committee further note that
the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) is at the final stage of approval and
these AMPCs are expected to be in operation within 18 months of the
award of tenders. The Committee hope that the tenders would receive
favourable response this time and AMPCs at Kolkata and Delhi would
be set up by the targeted period.
Action Taken by the Government
The plan scheme on ‘Setting up of Automatic Mail Processing
Centres’ is yet to be approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee.
The process for re-tendering for setting up of AMPCs at Delhi and
Kolkata is also underway. The meeting held in December, 2007 was
primarily an attempt to interact with the prospective bidders before
action on setting up of AMPCs could be taken. No apparent reason
was given by the manufacturers who attended the meeting.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Department have also informed that the Gender Budget
Committee of the Department has been formed which has identified
(i) Training (ii) Postal Network (Construction), (iii) Control and
Supervision Circle Office Schemes of gender budgeting. The Committee
are, however, pained to note from the Outcome Budget, 2008-09 of the
Department that gender specific allocation is not feasible in the Schemes

64
identified by the Department. It is inexplicable as to why such Schemes
were identified in the first instance. The Committee regret to conclude
that in the instant case the Department’s deeds have not matched
their lofty words. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department
should make concerted attempts to identify schemes where gender
specific allocations are possible and revert back with concrete and
workable proposals to the Committee at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The plan schemes implemented by the department are of such
nature, the bifurcation of the plan fund allocation exclusively for
women cannot be identified. The schemes are implemented for the
country as a whole and the postal services are easily accessible by all
citizens of the country which include women also. However, efforts
are being made by the department to identify some of the schemes
with gender specifications.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter-I)

65
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
What has caused concern to the Committee is that the expenditure
made on the various activities related to technology induction are not
resulting into bringing down the expenditure of the Department. Rather,
the computerisation is adding to the expenses on electronics,
consumables and stationery. Inspite of this, it is surprising that the
Department have made no efforts to know the actual impact of the
technology induction on the overall expenditure by undertaking a
formal review. The Committee wish to point out that in the prevailing
market environment where the Department have to face stiff
competition on various fronts, it is absolutely essential to bring about
economies. They, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department
should undertake a review to know the actual impact of the technology
induction on the overall achievement of the Department. Besides, all
possible steps should be taken to use the existing manpower and
resources to their optimum utilisation in the enlarged activities of the
Department.
Action Taken by the Government
A detailed study as to the reduction of working expenses of the
Department on induction of technology is under way and the outcome
will be submitted within 3 months.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee have persistently been recommending to charge
expenditure on account of pensionary charges in respect of the
Department of Posts to the common head of account at par with other
Ministries/Departments. However, the Ministry of Finance have not
taken a decision in favour of DoP thus far. The Department of Posts
have informed that they are pursuing the matter at the highest level
with the Ministry of Finance. At the expense of sounding repetitive,
the Committee wish to point out that the liability on this score tends
to distort the overall financial performance of DoP and their case,
therefore, deserves consideration. The Committee would accordingly
like the Department to continue the efforts in this regard.

66
Action Taken by the Government
The matter of charging expenditure on payments of Pension and
Pensionary benefits in respect of Department of Posts to the common
head of account at par with other Ministries/Departments was taken
up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission on the
recommendations of the Standing Committee in their various Reports.
In reply, Ministry of finance has always rejected the request with the
contention with, as per Rule 54 of the Government Accounting Rules
1970, the Department of Posts continues to function on commercial
principles. Now, Ministry of Finance has advised the Department to
take up the matter with Controller General of Accounts and
Comptroller & Auditor General of India as the Government Accounting
Rules, 1990 is drawn up by Controller General of Accounts in
consultation with Comptroller & Auditor General of India under Article
150 of the Constitution of India stating that the proposal envisages
amendment of Rule 54 of Government Accounting Rules, 1990. The
recommedation/observation of Controller General of Accounts is still
awaited. The case is being actively pursued.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee would also like the Government to explore the
feasibility of creating a Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), on
the line of the telecom services after considering all its implications, to
compensate operation of effective Postal services in rural remote and
difficult areas.
Action Taken by the Government
More than 1.30 lakh post offices (out of total number of 1.5 lakhs
post offices) function in rural areas. Most of them are given subsidy
ranging from 66% to 90% of the cost of their operations. This is done
to enable the Govt. of India to meet its Universal Service Obligation.
It is true that this obligation on the part of the Govt. of India
needs financial support to sustain itself in the years to come. Creating
a USO fund is one of the ways in which the financial support to the
rural postal network can be provided. But it is felt that calculation of
USO liability for each private courier on the lines of the telecom
services will be very difficult because the nuber of couriers in our
country is very high unlike telecom sector where there are very few
players. It is not practical to monitor their services and advantages.
As such creation of USO fund has not been found practical anywhere
in the world.

67
An alternative to creation of USO Fund is to reserve a certain area
of mail business exclusively for the Dept. of Posts. Private couriers
can enter this area only by charging certain multiple of postal rate as
minimum price. This encourages customers to patronize postal services
in larger numbers. Accordingly, the Department of Posts can be
compensated adequately to meet their USO commitments.
All these issues are being examined in the proposed IPO
(Amendment) Bill.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee also find that as on January, 2008 out of a total of
634 proposals pending for opening of Post Offices across the various
Circles, 196 requests have been found justified while 242 proposals are
still under consideration. Besides, 196 proposals have been rejected.
The Committee desire that in the justified cases, Post Offices should
be set up expeditiously. Also early decision should be taken on the
proposals still under consideration.
Action Taken by the Government
Proposals for opening of new Post Offices are pending for approval
of the SFC. It is proposed to open about 3000 new Extra Departmental
Branch Offices and 2000 new Sub Offices throughout the country during
the Eleventh Plan period. These will be opened once SFC approves
the proposal.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee further note that the Department also propose to
set up Regional Data centres during the Eleventh Plan and the Scheme
is at the conceptual stage of examination. The Committee trust that all
relevant considerations including the full potential utility of the National
Data Centre will be carefully looked into before taking the final
decision. The Committee would like to be informed of the decision
taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
Data Centre will be set up under the 11th Five Year Plan to
strengthen the infrastructure and enhance customer service by reducing
the un-planned downtimes of e-applications and by providing faster

68
and greater access to remote customers. The Department are examining
the concept of project.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee note that the Post Office Life Insurance Fund
(POLIF) and the Rural Post Office Life Insurance Fund (RPOLIF) are
presently placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Finance where they
form a part of the Special Deposit Scheme (SDS) and earn interest.
Now after the Cabinet approval, this corpus which on 31 March, 2007
stood at the value of Rs. 12628 crore is proposed to be converted into
dated securities over a period of three years. The Secretary, DoP further
informed during the evidence that the corpus of Rs. 15000 crore would
be frozen and converted into tradeable liquidity in three years. The
net accretions of Rs. 1200 crore per year would be invested as per the
IRDA guidelines. The Committee hope that with the implementation
of the aforesaid decision, the revenue by way of interest and returns
through investment of the Department of Posts would increase. The
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the further developments
in this area.
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee will be apprised of the development in the
functioning of Investment Board soon after its formation.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee further find that the Department of Posts are also
involved for the disbursement of pension under ‘National Old Age
Pansion Scheme’ in Bhiar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, West Bengal
and Tamil Nadu. In Bihar, the State Government is remunerating the
Department at the rate of Rs. 18 per account for the supply of Monthly
Income Scheme (MIS) to the State Government over and above the
remuneration being received from the Ministry of Finance, whereas in
the remaining States, payment under the Scheme is made through
money order service on payment of commission at the rate of 5 per
cent of the amount remitted. The Committee welcome this initiative
and would like to be apprised of the total revenue received from State
Government/Ministry of Finance on account of providing service under

69
‘National Old Age Pension Scheme’. Besides, the Committee recommend
that the Department should take the desired initiatives to get involved
in the whole country in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Information on the total revenue received from State Governments
on account of providing service under ‘National Old Age Pension
Scheme’ (NSAP) has been called for from circles concerned. However
no additional remuneration is received from Ministry of finance in
account of providing the service under NSAP . The Department are in
discussion with Ministry of Rural Development. An internal committee
in the Department had been given the task of evolving an accounting
procedure as per the requirements of the Ministry of Rural
Development.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee note that there are 50032 vacancies in Groups A,
B, C and D in the Department. The Government’s restrictions in filling
vacant posts have resulted in the sizeable number of vacancies. The
Committee have further been informed that Committee of Secretaries
is presently examining the issue of exempting certain Departments
from the cut. The Committee hope that the Government would get an
appropriate decision taken in the matter expeditiously so that the
enlarged activities of the Department of Posts do not suffer.
Action Taken by the Government
The decision of Government in the matter is awaited.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/
Department of Posts, O.M. No. 20-6/2008 Bgt. (PA),
dated 31-07-2008]
    N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
13 October, 2008 Chairman,
21 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information T echnology.

70
APPENDIX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-09)
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 10th October, 2008 from
1500 hrs to 1700 hrs in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
7. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Tathagata Sathpathy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
11.D r. C.P . Thakur
12. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
13. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty - Under Secretary

71
WITNESSES
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications)
*** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by
the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. The Committee, then, took up the draft Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Posts) for consideration and adopted the
same.
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above
draft Report and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matters not related to this Report.

72
ANNEXURE
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph no. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 13, 17, 19,
20, 25, 26, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51 & 52
Total: 31
Percentage: 58.49
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 18, 21, 24 & 33
Total : 04
Percentage: 7.54
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies of the Governments have
not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos: 5, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16,
27, 28 & 53
Total: 10
Percentage: 18.87
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos: 4, 9, 22, 23, 30, 34, 38 & 47
Total : 08
Percentage: 15.09

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 October, 2008
Laid  on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 199
Price : Rs. 80.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 16
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 48
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 53
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 65
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009) held on 10.10.2008 .............................. 70
ANNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-
Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) .................. 72

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-09)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
17. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
18. Shri P .C. Thomas
19. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
**20. Shri Errabelli Dayakar Rao
21. Vacant
  *Shri Badiga Ramakrishna, M.P . ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.
26 August, 2008.
 **Nominated w.e.f. 6 october, 2008.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Dr. C.P . Thakur
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009), having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-sixth Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-2009)’ of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Posts).
2. The Fifty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April,
2008 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. The
Department furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report on 1 August,
2008.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10 October, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and covenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
    N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
13 October, 2008 Chairman,
21 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

66
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)]
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)
