CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-eight Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Real Estate Management in Department of
Posts’ pertaining to the Department of Posts (DoP).
2. The Forty-eight Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
21 August, 2007 and was laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on
21 August, 2007. It contained 22 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 and 22
 Total: 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para No.: NIL
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos.: 3, 4, 5, 6, 17 and 18
Total: 06
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos.: 20 and 21
Total: 02
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter–V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Non-Utilization of Vacant Plots
Recommendation (Para No. 2 and 22)
6. In their Forty-Eighth Report the Committee had noted with
concern that despite 1871 plots measuring about 38224902 sq. ft. lying
vacant in various parts of the Country for years together, as many as
21175 Sub-Post Offices & Head Post Offices, out of a total of 25501
such Post Offices, were operating from the rented buildings compelling
the Department to pay an annual rent of more than Rs. 45 crore.
Compounding the problem, several plots had been lying vacant for
more than 50 years, many of those being situated in prime locations
having high commercial value. Further, a large number of
Administrative Offices and Post Offices were functioning in rented
building in several places where plots were lying vacant. Perturbed
with this gross underutilization of vacant plots and the inability of the
Department to carry on the building activities in a phased manner on
the vacant plots, the Committee keeping in mind the handicap of
scarcity of funds faced by the Department, had recommended that an
imaginative use of land asset in a planned way over the years would
have generated the much needed resources for the Department for
development of vacant land in particular. Taking note of the inaction
on the part of the Department which resulted in turning these valuable
vacant plots into non-performing assets, the Committee had impressed
upon the Department that a concrete and time-bound plan of action
should be immediately drawn out for a prudent and effective use of
vacant land owned by the Department.

3
7. The Committee in their earlier Report had also identified
several deficient areas in the real estate management in DoP , which
inter alia included the absence of a nodal authority for prudent real
estate management, non-existence of boundary walls around vacant
postal land resulting in their encroachment over a period of time,
need for evolving an appropriate coordination mechanism with
State Governments, shortage of skilled manpower in Postal Civil Wing,
substandard and unattractive general ambience of the Post Offices,
absence of system for data generation, lack of modern/computerized
infrastructure in the Department and under exploitation of immense
potential of growth of Postal Network, etc. restraining the Department
from optimally and judiciously utilizing their precious real estates for
a long time. Concerned with these sorry state of affairs and the
uncertainty regarding the time likely to be taken for setting up of the
proposed Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to become operational for
taking care of all the matters/problems relating to real estate
management of the Department, the Committee had recommended that
DoP should take all necessary remedial/corrective measures for not
only improving the whole system of real estate management but also
for rendering better quality of Universal Service Obligation by the
Department.
8. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“Adequate number of buildings could not be constructed in the
past due to fund constraints. The Hon’ble Standing Committee is
requested to extend their help in obtaining more funds from the
Planning Commission for construction of more buildings on vacant
plots.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) directed the
Department of Posts to work out a Plan for commercial exploitation
of vacant plots of the Department in consultation with Ministry of
Finance and Department of Urban Development. For achieving this
objective, the DoP has mooted a proposal for setting up a Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV). Draft Cabinet Note has been prepared and
the proposal has been sent to the Cabinet for their approval.
The SPV would attend to the development and management of
Postal estates and commercial exploitation of vacant plots located
at prime locations in the Country. The SPV shall formulate plans
and execute schemes for optimal utilization of postal land. It would
develop postal land with public private partnership so as to
generate non-tariff revenue for Department of Posts from Postal
estates.”

4
The Department have further stated that the following remedial/
corrective measures have been taken:—
“1. A number of periodical statements have been prescribed
for monitoring various aspects of real estate management.
2. Heads of Circles have been directed to hold meetings with
State Civil/Police authorities for removal of encroachments.
3. Decision has been taken to provide boundary wall to
100 plots in the current Plan to prevent their encroachment.
4. Measures have also been taken to strengthen the Postal Civil
Wing. Proposal is being processed for availing services of
BSNL architects to expedite preparation of drawings.
5. A Plan is in process for computerization of the information
flow for accurate and up-to-date information.
6. A scheme for improvement of environment and ergonomics
in offices has been included in the current Five Year Plan.
7. For rendering better quality of Universal Service Obligation
by the Department, substantial outlays have been made for
opening 2,000 Sub Post Offices, 3,000 Branch Post Offices
and 10,000 Franchise Outlets and upgradation of technology/
computer systems.”
9. The Committee note that in accordance with their
recommendation for immediate preparation of a time bound Action
Plan to commercially exploit the vacant plots, the Department of
Posts have mooted a proposal for setting up a Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) which is under the consideration of the Cabinet. The
Committee also note that the SPV , when operationalised, would
attend to the development and management of postal estates and
commercial exploitation of vacant plots located at prime locations,
thereby enabling the Department to generate additional revenue. The
Committee are also aware that like any other project of such
magnitude, the SPV will also require a reasonable gestation period
to be fully functional. However, in view of the fact that the
management of real estates has for years together consistently
remained a grossly neglected area in the Department causing
countless missed opportunities of revenue earning, the Committee
strongly feel that till such time the SPV moves from proposal stage
to fully operational stage, the Department ought to resort to all short-
term measures so that prudent utilisation of these valuable assets of
the Department for generation of additional resources is not delayed

5
further. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
by the Department in this regard at the earliest.
10. The Committee further note that pursuant to their earlier
recommendations, the Department of Posts are taking a number of
remedial/corrective measures at various levels in order to plug the
loopholes and effectively carry out the responsibility of managing
their real estate prudently and providing better quality of services
under Universal Service Obligation. The Committee hope that the
positive momentum displayed by the Department would culminate
in effective management of real estate and improved quality of USO
services.
II. Encroachment of Vacant Land and Court cases
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3, 4 and 5)
11.T aking serious note of 187 vacant plots of high commercial
value being under encroachment and illegal occupation for many years
and the scant attention being paid by the Department towards that
aspect, the Committee had recommended that the Department should
take effective steps to protect their valuable estates. The Committee
had also recommended that the Department should formulate a time-
bound plan on priority basis for construction of boundary walls/fencing
with a view to checking such encroachments besides evolving an
appropriate co-ordination mechanism at State level by associating State
police and civil authorities for meeting the menace effectively. The
Committee had also noted that the Department had paid an amount
of over Rs. 2.26 crore during the last 5 years as the cost of litigation
for cases of encroachment of land and estates related matters. Dismayed
at the absence of any mechanism at DoP level to monitor such cases,
the Committee had desired that these cases should be looked into
thoroughly at DoP level through a permanent standing mechanism
and effective steps be taken to protect these valuable and dear assets
of the Department.
12. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“This issue has been engaging the attention of the Department for
a number of years and boundary walls have been constructed as
and when funds are available. During the year 2005-06 and
2006-07, funds were provided for construction of boundary walls
on 39 plots.

6
It has been decided to construct boundary walls around 100 vacant
plots at prime locations with high commercial value during the
11th Five Year Plan. This will require about Rs. 10 crores and the
Department would provide more plots with boundary walls in
case more funds are made available under Plan. Circles have also
been directed to closely monitor the encroachment cases.
Coordination meetings with local Police and civil authorities at
least once in six months have been prescribed now. A report on
six monthly basis from the Circles has now been prescribed to be
sent to Headquarters of Department of Posts for review/monitoring
of the progress of vacation of encroachments. The Secretary (P)
has written demi-officially to the Chief Secretaries of States
concerned urging them to get the encroachments freed where there
is no court case pending and several Chief Secretaries have also
initiated action on the basis of same.”
The Department have further stated as under:—
“The encroachment took place due to non-provision of boundary
walls, which could not be constructed due to shortage of funds.
***** ***** ***** ***** *****
***** ***** ***** ***** *****
***** ***** ***** ***** *****
The Department is closely monitoring the court cases at the
Headquarters level. For the purpose, all the Head of Circles have
been advised to keep liaison with the Government Standing
Counsels for early disposal of the cases.”
13. The Committee note that in line with their recommendation,
the Department have now prescribed coordination meetings with
local police and civil authorities at least once in six months for
removal of encroachments of vacant land owned by DoP . As
informed, several Chief Secretaries have already initiated action, upon
the request of the Secretary, DoP to get the encroached plots freed.
The Committee also note that the Department are closely monitoring
the Court cases at the Headquarters level. The Committee feel that
these are steps in the right direction and should be persisted with
for an optimum outcome. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the periodic progress made in this regard.

7
14. The Committee, however, regret to point out that the action
taken reply is completely silent about the precise progress made in
the construction of boundary walls. Although funds had been
provided for construction of boundary walls in 39 plots, the
Committee have not been informed about the headway made thereon.
Further, although the Department have projected a figure of
100 plots around which boundary walls will be constructed during
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, no indication has been made about the
target in this regard in the current fiscal (2007-08). All these clearly
show that the departmental machinery for the purpose is yet to be
fully energized, which is a matter of concern for the Committee. In
the opinion of the Committee, it is high time the Department came
out with a concrete and year-wise plan of action with a case specific
approach to construct boundary walls/fencing in order to protect their
valuable assets from encroachment/illegal occupation.
III. Disposal of unwanted plots
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
15. In the Forty-eighth Report, the Committee had observed that
till now the Department have not been able to crystallize their policy
in the matter of utilization/disposal of unwanted land as the
Department gave inconsistent replies to the issue at different points of
examination. Concerned with this highly indecisive state of the
Department on this very crucial matter, the Committee had
recommended that the Department should come up with a well thought
of and clear-cut policy with regard to the utilization or otherwise of
the plots presently lying vacant with the Department.
16. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:
“As stated during the oral evidence, exercise to identify the plots,
which can be disposed of/returned to State Government has been
started. However, the Department is constructing buildings on
vacant plots in phased manner subject to availability of funds.
Besides, formation of the Special Purpose Vehicle is underway for
utilization of vacant plots in prime locations and the Cabinet Note
for formation of the Special Purpose Vehicle has been sent to
Cabinet Secretariat”.
17. The Department of Posts have 1871 plots lying vacant for a
number of years now. Out of these vacant plots, 952 have been
lying vacant for more than 25 years each. Furthermore, 187 out of

8
the 1871 plots are under encroachment for varying periods of time.
There are several plots in the possession of DoP , which they do not
require due to various reasons. In their earlier Report, the Committee
had expressed their concern over the inability of DoP to crystallize
their policy in the matter of utilization of/disposal of unwanted land.
The Committee regret to point out that the latest reply of the
Department once again indicates their indecisive and ambiguous
attitude on such a vital issue. The Committee strongly feel that the
Department have already wasted a lot of time in deciding about the
vacant plots which they do not require and the settlement of this
matter does not brook further delay. They, therefore, desire that the
Department come up with a clear-cut policy in regard to such plots
without any further delay.
IV . Need for Appointment of a Nodal Authority
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
18. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that one
of the main reasons for the sorry state of affairs in the real estate
management in DoP was the absence of a nodal authority for the
management and oversight of their estates. Considering that in this
process of inaction the Department had already lost several
opportunities of resource generation and consolidation, the Committee
had recommended that the Department should take immediate action
in the direction of making functional a nodal authority for management
of all their assets that should be given a clear-cut mandate about its
specific responsibilities and duties.
19. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee is being examined.
However, it is felt that setting up of the Special Purpose Vehicle
for which the Cabinet Note has been put up to Cabinet Secretariat
for approval will greatly help in the matter.”
20. The Committee are disappointed to note the attempt of the
Department to downplay the need and role of a nodal authority to
oversee the management of their real estates. The Committee
disapprove of this attitude of avoiding timely decisions of the
Department more so, when the level of real estate management in
the Department of Posts over the years has been far from satisfactory,
rather virtually non-existent. At the cost of sounding repetitive, the
Committee would like to stress upon the fact that the SPV will take

9
some time to get fully operational. The nodal authority recommended
by the Committee is intended to not only cover this interregnum
but also act as the core in the Department to monitor and coordinate
with the SPV , which as per the indications given by the Department
would be a company and not a part of the Department. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should put in place
a regular nodal authority in place without any further delay.
V. Need for Increase in Budgetary Support
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
21. In their earlier Report the Committee had observed that one
of the major factors which had hampered the efforts of DoP for
augmentation of departmental buildings was the non-availability of
adequate budgetary support as indicated below:
(Rs. in crore)
Plan Amount Sought Amount Allocated
8th Plan 425.00 121.35
9th Plan 525.25 119.62
10th Plan 745.00 98.54
Considering the need for a prudent management of the assets
particularly for discharging the Universal Services Obligation, the
Committee had hoped that the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance would adopt a more realistic approach towards the whole
issue.
22. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“An outlay of Rs. 346.50 crore had been projected for Plan activity
‘Estates Management’ for the 11th Five Year Plan. But due to overall
reduction of total outlay of DoP from Rs. 12353.84 crore to
Rs. 4000.00 crore by the Planning Commission, a revised outlay of
Rs. 126.81 crore has been tentatively projected by the Department
for the Plan activity ‘Estates Management’.
The observations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee will be
conveyed and stressed upon the Planning Commission and Finance
Ministry.”

10
23. The Committee are extremely concerned to note that DoP
have to project a revised outlay of Rs. 126.81 crore against the
originally projected Outlay of Rs. 346.50 crore towards the Plan
activity ‘Estates Management’ during the Eleventh Plan period. Such
a retrograde step has been necessitated due to overall reduction of
the total Outlay of DoP from Rs. 12353.84 crore to Rs. 4000.00 crore
by the Planning Commission. The activities under the head ‘Estates
Management’ have been very adversely affected in the past as well
due to allocation of grossly insufficient funds as can be seen from
the amounts sought and amounts finally allocated during each of
the last three Annual Plans. It may be recalled that non-availability
of adequate budgetary support to DoP has continued to remain one
of the major hindrances in the way of the Department’s efforts
towards augmentation of departmental buildings and prudent
management of real estates. Needless to mention, the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance should consider the issue
in its entirety in a realistic manner in order to enable DoP to utilize
their precious assets for better productivity. The Department, on their
part, should forcefully present their case, of course with a concrete
and effective roadmap.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Introductory
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Indian Postal System is expected to fulfill the Universal Service
Obligation in terms of providing basic postal services throughout the
Country, irrespective of terrain, at an affordable price. For meeting
this requirement, the Department of Posts (DoP) have set up a network
of 1,55,333 Post Offices as on 31st March, 2006. The Post Offices
comprises of Head Post Offices, Sub Post Offices and Extra
Departmental Post Offices. The operational arm of DoP dealing with
administrative aspects is divided into Postal Circles, Regional Offices,
Postal Divisions, Railway Mail Service Divisions, Postal Stores Depots,
Central Stamp Depots, Postal Training Centres and Postal Staff College.
Accommodation for running an Extra Departmental Post Office is
provided by the Extra Departmental Postmaster known as Gramin
Dak Sevak. Accommodation for other categories of Post Offices and
the Administrative Offices is provided by DoP . The Department have
their own as well as rented buildings housing their various offices.
Besides, they have staff quarters. The Department also have vacant
plots of land all over the Country on which construction of
departmental buildings is undertaken with the assistance from Plan
funds. These plots were acquired/purchased/gifted for construction of
postal buildings over a period of time. Thus, land and buildings
constitute an important asset for  DoP , which requires prudent
management. The Committee’s examination has, however, revealed
several disquieting aspects in the real estate management in DoP which
are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been noted for
compliance.
Non-Utilisation of Vacant Plots
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that out of a total of 25,501 Sub-Post Offices
and Head Post Offices in the Country, as many as 21175 are operated

12
from rented buildings. The Department stated that they pay an annual
rent of over Rs. 45 crore on this account. As against this, 1871 plots,
measuring about 38224902 sq. ft. are lying vacant in various parts of
the Country. Several plots have been lying vacant for more than
50 years. Significantly, 403 plots are lying vacant in prime locations
having high commercial value. Further, a large number of Post Offices
and Administrative Offices are functioning in rented buildings in several
places across the Country where plots are lying vacant. All these facts
clearly show the level of unsatisfactory management of real estate,
which persisted in the Department of Posts over the years. The
Committee cannot but express their concern over the matter. The
Department of Posts have sought to explain that construction of
building activities on vacant plots is taken up in a phased manner
and is subject to availability of funds. According to them, during the
preceding Five-Year Plans, the allotment of funds for real estate
management has not been adequate so as to take up a large number
of building projects on the vacant plots available with the Department.
Indeed, scarcity of funds is a contributory factor. But, an imaginative
use of the land  asset in a planned manner over the years would have
generated resources required for various programmes aimed at
improving the overall status of the Department in general and
development of vacant land in particular. Unfortunately, such an
approach was conspicuously absent in the Departmental strategy.
Consequently, these properties of DoP have been rendered into non-
performing assets. The Committee recommend that atleast now, a
concrete and a time-bound plan of action should be drawn for a
prudent and effective use of vacant land owned by DoP . The Committee
particularly desire that an immediate Action Plan should be drawn for
using the vacant plots in prime locations with high commercial value.
Action Taken by the Government
Adequate number of buildings could not be constructed in the
past due to fund constraints. The Hon’ble Standing Committee is
requested to extend their help in obtaining more funds from the
Planning Commission for construction of more buildings on vacant
plots.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) directed the
Department of Posts to work out a plan for commercial exploitation
of vacant plots of the Department in consultation with Ministry of
Finance and Department of Urban Development. For achieving this
objective, DoP has mooted a proposal for setting up a Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV). Draft Cabinet Note has been prepared and the proposal
has been sent to the Cabinet for their approval.

13
The SPV would attend to the development and management of
Postal estates and commercial exploitation of vacant plots located at
prime locations in the Country. The SPV shall formulate plans and
execute schemes for optimal utilization of postal land. It would develop
postal land with public private partnership so as to generate non-tariff
revenue for Department of Posts from Postal Estates.
Renovation/Reconstruction of Dilapidated Buildings
Recommendation (No. 7)
From the information made available the Committee note that as
many as 217 Postal buildings including staff quarters in the Country
are either in a dilapidated or unusable condition. Curiously enough,
out of this, 100 buildings were in Gujarat alone. In the opinion of the
Committee, this does not augur well for a public utility whose services
depend on the reach and spread of its offices. It is all the more so in
the case of  the Department of Posts who are already constrained in
their activities due to the acute paucity of departmental buildings. The
Committee were informed that the Department have made a projection
of Rs. 55 crore for reconstruction of their 55 departmental buildings
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee expect the
Government to make adequate provisions in this regard so that this
much needed activity of the Department does not  suffer due to
resource crunch.
Action Taken by the Government
Eleven departmental buildings have been approved for
reconstruction during the first year (2007-08) of 11th Five Year Plan
subject to the approval of the competent authority. The preparatory
action for preparation of preliminary drawings has been completed for
a number of projects which will greatly expedite the building activity.
For the remaining period of 11th Five Year Plan, more such buildings
will be identified/earmarked for renovation/reconstruction.
Preservation of Heritage Buildings
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee, note that the Department of Posts are operating
37 of their offices from “Heritage Buildings”. These buildings, which
were constructed before 1939 and survive in anything like their original
condition and have significance in Indian history, architecture and
archaeology have been identified as “Heritage Buildings” according to
the guidelines given by the Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural
Heritage (INTACH). The Committee desire that the Department should

14
continue their good work in preserving these invaluable assets of the
nation. The Committee, however, regret to note that presently there is
hardly any interaction between DoP and the Ministry of Culture, etc.
in regard to these heritage buildings particularly for showcasing them
as heritage sites. The Department’s reply that ‘no further interaction
is required in our case’ is indicative of their mindset on the subject,
which urgently requires a transformation. The Committee, therefore,
desire that DoP should explore the tourism potential of these heritage
buildings in consultation with the Ministry of Culture, INTACH, etc.,
so that the Department of Posts reap the benefits therefrom.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to protect the Heritage Buildings of DoP which are
invaluable assets of the nation, a portion of the Plan funds are
earmarked and allotted every year for their maintenance. In the
Eleventh Five Year Plan also, an outlay of Rs. 5.00 crore has been kept
under the sub head “Preservation of Heritage Buildings”.
As regards exploring of the tourism potential of the heritage
buildings is concerned, the concerned Circle Heads have been requested
to explore the tourism potential of the heritage buildings in their Circles
in consultation with local authorities of Ministry of Culture and
INTACH, etc. under intimation to this office so that a policy can be
formed in this regard.
Vacant Space in Departmental Buildings
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Apart from vacant land in sizeable area lying idle in possession of
the Department for decades and its concomitant problems, another
deficiency observed by the Committee in DoP’s real estate management
concerns non-utilization of available space in the existing departmental
buildings. The Committee’s examination revealed that in 99 existing
departmental buildings across the country substantial vacant space has
been lying idle. In certain cases, they have been lying idle for several
decades. It is strange and yet true that as per the information initially
made available to the Committee, vacant space has been lying idle in
Hamirpur, Uttar Pradesh since 1854! When confronted with this startling
disclosure, DoP , later, tried to wriggle out of the issue by stating that
the picture got distorted due to misconstruing the term “vacant space”
as “vacant land’ by U.P . Circle. In the Committee’s opinion neither
way, the Department’s position get glorified. On the contrary, this
further reinforces the Committee’s apprehension about the criminal
negligence of DoP in their asset management, which is deplorable, to

15
say the least. The Department have now informed the Committee that
they have plans to utilize the surplus space for various business and
operational requirements, and Heads of Circles have been given
authority to even rent out the surplus space. As location-wise, the
post offices are generally situated on prime properties, the Committee
desire that the Department should take initiatives well above Heads
of Circle levels so that the vacant space in departmental buildings is
judicially and optimally put to use without any further delay. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken and
achievements of the Department in this regard at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
Instructions and guidelines for renting out of vacant built up space
available in departmental buildings already stand issued at the level
of Headquarters of Department of Posts as per which authority has
been given to Heads of the Circles to rent out the surplus space
available in the departmental buildings. To monitor the achievements,
a half-yearly statement has been prescribed to be sent by the Heads
of Circles to the Headquarters of Department of Posts.
Improvement in General Ambience
Recommendation (Para No. 10 & 11)
It is common knowledge that aesthetics of the buildings and the
general ambience play an important role in the marketing of products.
The Committee are happy to note that in recognition of this, DoP
have engaged the School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi for
creation of new look “Brand Image” Post Offices. In the Committee’s
opinion, the process of consultation in this exercise should be wider.
The Committee suggest that DoP should also consult other reputed
National Institutions in the field so that attractive aesthetic concepts
with mass appeal are successfully developed in the process. While
going for this image makeover, the Committee would like the
Department to ensure that the historicity and glorious legacy of the
Postal Department is appropriately reflected and maintained.
In this context, the Committee have further been informed that
instructions have been issued to all Heads of Circles from time-to-time
to provide ramps and low height counters, etc. for physically challenged
persons, though no specific time frame has been prescribed for the
purpose. The Committee are anxious that while the new buildings, no
doubt, should be designed as per the requirements prescribed under
the Disability Law, even in the existing ones, the requirements/
instructions should be implemented, subject to feasibility , in a time

16
bound manner so that the physically challenged do not face any
problems in utilizing the services of the Post Offices.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Standing Committee that while going
for the image makeover the Department is to ensure that the historicity
and glorious legacy of the Department is appropriately reflected and
maintained, will be kept in view. Consultation with other reputed
National Institutions in the field such as TERI, INTACH, J.J. School of
Architecture etc. will be sought when required.
All the Heads of Circles have been instructed to provide ramps in
the existing Post Offices, wherever feasible, on priority basis and in a
time bound manner so that physically challenged persons are not
inconvenienced.
Strengthening of Postal Civil Wing
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee’s examination further revealed inordinate delays
in execution of projects by the Department of Posts. These delays
were primarily caused due to the unduly long time taken in completion
of civil works procedures. The Department, in turn, attributed this to
the acute shortage of engineers and architects in the Department.
According to them, this has happened because after the constitution
of BSNL and MTNL, a majority of engineers and architects of what
was hitherto Post and Telegraph Civil Wing opted for these Public
Sector Undertakings. The Government side continued to face a lot of
attrition because of the remunerative packages of the PSUs. The
Committee note that as a stop-gap arrangement, the Department have
reached an agreement with BSNL for technical assistance in civil works.
Besides, the Department have also initiated actions to fill up the
vacancies of the engineers and architects. The Committee desire that
the action to fill up the existing vacancies should be expedited so that
Postal Civil Wing becomes functional in right earnest and is able to
contribute towards creation of new infrastructure and maintenance of
the existing one at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
Action regarding filling up of existing vacancies in Postal Civil
Wing has already been initiated. The Department of
Telecommunications, which is the cadre controlling authority for

17
Gazetted Officers of Civil Wing, has been intimated regarding vacancy
position in the Department of Posts and requested for filling up of the
vacant posts in the Department. As regards Junior Engineers, the
departmental examinations for their selection have been conducted and
result is awaited. Staff Selection Commission has also been requested
to provide candidates through competitive examination for recruitment
of Junior Engineers. The Department is in correspondence with
BSNL for providing services of their architects for the Department of
Posts.
Commercial Evaluation of Vacant Land
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are dismayed to note that sufficient importance is
not being attached to commercial evaluation of Postal land on the
plea that it would be required for future developmental work of the
Department of Posts. The Committee, however, did point out during
evidence the enormous worth of the Postal land lying vacant across
the Country, but the Department of Posts appeared to be blissfully
unaware of its market value. Though the Department of Posts have
categorized their vacant plots as plots in prime locations and plots
under illegal encroachment, the status of rest of the plots has not been
specified. The Committee are of the opinion that maintaining a
category-wise record of Postal land—both under use and vacant, will
be useful for its future development. They feel that in the absence of
such categorization and commercial evaluation of land, construction
plans as well as asset valuation for various purposes would become
unrealistic. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department of Posts
not only to activate its machinery to categorize and evaluate vacant
land and maintain records thereof but also to review and update at
fixed periodical intervals. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the further action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has compiled category-wise record of all the vacant
plots, covering plots in category of prime locations, and in category of
plots with no commercial viability.
As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee, the exercise
of evaluation of Postal land (both in use and vacant plots) has been
started and the Circles have been instructed accordingly to determine
the market value of the departmental plots.

18
Performance during Xth Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee regret to note that the Department’s performance
in the matter of achieving the physical targets laid down for
construction of departmental buildings in the Tenth Five Year Plan
(2002-07) has not been encouraging at all. As against the stipulated
targets of 140, 33 and 56 projects for construction of Post Offices/Mail
Offices, Administrative Offices and Staff Quarters, the achievement had
been 106, 21 and 41 projects only respectively. Thus, there have been
shortfalls everywhere. DoP attributed the shortfalls to the general
administrative reasons. The Committee cannot remain satisfied with
this. They, therefore, desire that the reasons for the shortfalls should
be carefully analyzed so that necessary corrections could be carried
out in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Action Taken by the Government
The non-availability of preliminary drawings is found to delay
start of any project. Now, this is being remedied and in order to
achieve the physical targets set out for the 11th Five Year Plan, action
has already been initiated and preliminary drawings have been got
prepared in respect of a number of building projects proposed to be
taken up during the 11th Five Year Plan. The delay in clearance of the
drawings from the local authorities will be taken care of by quick
submission of the drawings and better follow-up/liaison with local
authorities.
BSNL has been approached to provide architectural services in
view of their past experience. There is need to quickly process the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for expediting Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approval for the 11th Five
Year Plan. The EFC Memo has been prepared and is under process.
Its early clearance from CCEA will be watched.
With these steps, it is hoped that there will be no short fall in
achieving the physical targets. The new projects will be commenced as
soon as approval of CCEA is received.
Approach to XIth Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
As regards approach to the 11th Plan is concerned, the Committee
have been informed that the proposals include construction of buildings
for remaining Regional Offices, Head Post Offices-cum-Divisional

19
Offices, Mukhya Dak Ghar and Sub Post Offices with staff strength
of more than 15 starting from higher selection grade downwards,
commercial exploitation of 500 plots of land on which construction
will not be required to be done for departmental purposes for next
twenty years, reconstruction of 55 dilapidated/unused departmental
buildings, 120 new staff quarters, etc. The Committee fervently hope
that considerations like Universal Service Obligation of the Department,
need for provision of better quality of service and products in the
emerging competitive market environment, proper amenities and
working conditions of the staff, etc. will get due attention in the
approach.
Action Taken by the Government
In view of the funds constraints, it is necessary to concentrate on
bigger buildings. However, the Department is keenly aware of its
Universal Service Obligations and will ensure that the same will be
complied with by the Department.
In this direction, the Department has proposed opening of 2000
Sub-Offices and 3000 branch Post Offices in the current Five Year Plan.
Besides the Department is also proposing to open 10,000 franchise
outlets. No buildings are required to be provided for the Branch Offices
and franchise offices as well as for majority of the Sub-Post Offices
which would be housed in rented buildings and hence element of
buildings would not figure as a constraint in fulfilling of U.S.O. by
the Department through opening of above outlets, etc.
Need for provision of better quality of service and products in the
emerging competitive market environment, proper amenities and
working conditions of the staff during the 11th Five Year Plan are
being given proper attention. Substantial amounts have been earmarked
for the 11th Plan for computerization of Post Offices, improvement of
environment, ergonomics, new business projects to meet the needs of
competitive market environment.
Infrastructure and Growth of Postal Network
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee particularly while examining the successive
Demands for Grants have time and again, commented upon various
aspects in relation to the growth of Postal Network. They, therefore,
do not wish to repeat those points here. However, they wish to
emphasize that growth is closely linked to the infrastructural provisions.
Land and buildings are indeed vital contributory factors. During the
course of the examination of the subject the Committee were informed

20
that no survey about the requirement of Post Offices in the Country
had been done by the Department till date. The Committee are really
surprised as to why the Department never realized the need for such
a survey. It could have given them a fair idea of the communication
requirements across the length and breadth of the Country. The
Committee, therefore, desire that a survey may be conducted by DoP
and they be apprised of the results at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
A survey for assessing the need for Post Offices (Branch/Gramin
Post Offices and Sub Post Offices) throughout the Country has already
been started. Information on need of Post Offices has been received
from some of the Postal Circles. A final picture will emerge when
reports from all the Circles become available.
Absence of System for Data Generation
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee are dissatisfied to note that during examination of
the subject different sets of data were furnished to them on the same
aspects. This included the number of vacant plots, the annual rent for
hiring buildings, the number of Post Offices functioning through
departmental and rental buildings, the period(s) since space was lying
vacant in various Circles in the Country, and even the number of
Head Post Offices and Sub Post Offices in the Country. This clearly
shows that there is hardly any authentic system either at the National
level or at subsequent levels, which generate, maintain and update
such data. The Committee consider this as a highly unsatisfactory
position and desire that this should be rectified forthwith.
Action Taken by the Government
The information changes from time to time and it is being compiled
manually, which may sometimes leads to discrepancies due to wrong
information, etc.
The Department has initiated steps to set up a Centralized Data
System by developing a new software which is likely to be installed
at various administrative levels in the Department throughout the
Country to ensure availability of accurate and reliable data from the
field units to the Centralized Data Centre at the Headquarters of the
Department of Posts.

21
Need for Streamlining Real Estate Management in DoP
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
To sum up, the foregoing paragraphs have identified several
deficient areas in the real estate management in DoP that warrant
immediate Governmental attention. The Committee regret to conclude
that DoP had not been careful about their precious assets and had not
made optimum utilization of the same over a period of time. While
conceding the same in evidence, the representatives of DoP have
assured the Committee that with the implementation of the proposed
Special Purpose Vehicle, the system will get streamlined. At this stage,
the Committee are not inclined to share this optimism. Since the setting
up of the proposed Land Development Authority/Special Purpose
Vehicle may take some time, the Committee desire that in the light of
the recommendations/observations of the Committee in the preceding
paragraphs, DoP should take necessary remedial/corrective measures
for not only improving the system but also for rendering better
quality of Universal Service Obligation by the Department. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action taken in
the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The following remedial/corrective measures have been taken:
1. A number of periodical statements have been prescribed
for monitoring various aspects of real estate management.
2. Heads of Circles have been directed to hold meetings with
State Civil/Police authorities for removal of encroachments.
3. Decision has been taken to provide boundary wall to 100
plots in the current Plan to prevent their encroachment.
4. Measures have  also been taken to strengthen the Postal
Civil Wing. Proposal is being processed for availing services
of BSNL architects to expedite preparation of drawings.
5. A Plan is  in process for computerization of the information
flow for accurate and up-to-date information.
6. A scheme for improvement of environment and ergonomics
in offices has been included in the current Five Year Plan.
7. For rendering better quality of Universal Service Obligation
by the Department, substantial outlays have been made for
opening 2,000 Sub Post Offices, 3,000 Branch Post Offices
and 10,000 Franchise outlets and upgradation of technology/
computer systems.

22
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
—Nil—

23
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Encroachment of Vacant Land
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
One of the possible fallouts of occupation/retention of vacant land
for inordinate period(s) is the threat of encroachment by unscrupulous
elements. Not surprisingly, the priceless asset of the Department of
Posts was also not an exception. The Committee note with concern
that out of 1871   vacant plots, 187 plots have been encroached upon.
Pertinently, out of these, 118 plots are under illegal  occupation for
more than ten years. Evidently, this indicates the scant attention hitherto
being paid by DoP authorities to the task of protecting their assets.
4. What has surprised the Committee is the casual attitude shown
by DoP in the matter in utter disregard of the gravity of the issue.
The Department in their initial response merely stated that the
concerned Circles have been instructed from time to time  to review
all encroachment cases personally and to take effective steps to free
the land from encroachment. Further, Secretary, DoP during evidence
held on 26th June, 2007 attempted to minimize the seriousness of the
matter by stating that “out of 1800 plots, only 187 are encroached,
which is, of course, not a very high percentage of the total number of
plots.” However, after the Committee were seized of the matter,
Secretary (Posts) has on 28th June, 2007 written demi-officially to the
Chief Secretaries of the States concerned for help in the removal of
encroachments. DoP have also assured the Committee that all legal
means are being explored to protect the vacant plots. While the
Committee are dismayed over the continuous inaction of the
Department, they hope that DoP will now wake up from slumber and
take effective steps to protect their valuable estates. The Committee
also desire that the  Department should formulate a time-bound plan
for construction of boundary walls/fencing with a view to checking
such encroachments. There is also an imperative need for evolving an
appropriate co-ordination mechanism at State level by associating State
police and civil authorities for meeting the menace effectively.

24
Action Taken by the Government
This issue has been engaging the attention of the Department for
a number of years and boundary walls have been constructed as and
when funds are available. During the year 2005-06 and 2006-07, funds
were provided for construction of boundary walls on 39 plots.
It has been decided to construct boundary walls around 100 vacant
plots at prime locations with high commercial value during the 11th
Five Year Plan. This will require about Rs. 10 crores and the Department
would provide more plots with boundary walls in case more funds
are made available under Plan. Circles have also been directed to
closely monitor the encroachment cases.
Coordination meetings with local Police and civil authorities at
least once in six months have been prescribed now. A report on six
monthly basis from the Circles has now been prescribed to be sent to
Headquarters of Department of Posts for review/monitoring of the
progress of vacation of encroachments. Secretary (P) has written demi-
officially to the Chief Secretaries of States concerned urging them to
get the encroachments freed where there is no court case pending and
several Chief Secretaries have also initiated action on the basis of same.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Paragraph No. 14 of Chapter-I)
Disputes/Court Cases
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee’s examination further revealed that increase in the
incidence of cases of encroachment has, in turn, resulted in outgo of
substantial amounts from the exchequer on account of litigation. The
Committee note that an amount of over Rs. 2.26 crore was spent by
DoP during the last five years against encroachment of land and other
matters. From the details furnished to the Committee, it is seen that
out of the 360-disputes/court cases, five States, viz., Tamil Nadu (55),
Rajasthan (50), Gujarat (44), Maharashtra (41) and Kerala (34) accounted
for the maximum. The Committee are also surprised to note that there
is no mechanism at DoP level to monitor such cases. This situation
calls for an immediate remedy. The Committee, therefore, desire that
these cases should be looked into thoroughly at DoP level through a
permanent standing mechanism and effective steps be taken to protect

25
the valuable and dear assets of the Department. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the precise action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
The encroachments took place due to non-provision of boundary
walls, which could not be constructed due to shortage of funds.
The Department proposes to construct boundary walls around 100
vacant  plots during the 11th Plan to protect the valuable asset for
which funds to the tune of Rs. 10 crores would be required. Boundary
walls can be provided to more plots if more funds become available.
The Department is closely monitoring the court cases at the
Headquarters level. For the purpose, all the Heads of Circles have
been advised to keep liaison with the Government Standing Counsels
for early disposal of the cases. For close monitoring of the cases, a
report on six monthly basis has now been prescribed to be sent to
Headquarters of the Department of Posts.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I)
Disposal of Unwanted Plots
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that one area where DoP have not been able
to crystalize their policy is related to the approach towards utilization/
disposal of unwanted land. During the presentation before the
Committee on 26 December, 2006 the then, Secretary of the Department
of Posts had admitted that, “plots in some localities where the
Department did not need the Post Offices can be disposed of.” Again,
during the oral evidence of the Department on 26 June, 2007, Secretary
of the Department when confronted with the futility of the situation
where the Department were neither able to construct buildings for
years together and were unable to safeguard these plots, had
maintained that, “where there were no prospects of building, the land
may be returned to the Government.” However,  when the Committee
asked for written clarifications in the matter subsequently, the
Department informed in writing that they had no plan for disposal of
vacant plots. It is but obvious to the Committee that the Department
seems to be in a highly indecisive state on this very crucial matter. It
is, therefore, high time that the Government came up with a well
thought of and clear-cut policy with regard to the utilization or
otherwise of the plots presently lying vacant with the Department  of
Posts.

26
Action Taken by the Government
As stated during the oral evidence, exercise to identify the plots,
which can be disposed of/returned to State Government has been
started. However, the Department is constructing buildings on vacant
plots in phased manner subject to availability of funds. Besides,
formation of the Special Purpose Vehicle is underway for utilization of
vacant plots in prime locations and the Cabinet Note for formation of
the Special Purpose Vehicle has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter-I).
Need for Appointment of a Nodal Authority
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee observe that one of the main reasons for the sorry
state of affairs in the real estate management in DoP is that the
Department do not have any nodal authority mandated with the
management and oversight of their estates. The Committee find the
reply of the Department in this context that ‘this is one of the normal
functions of the administrative authorities at various levels. At every
management level, all the authorities have a role to play. This is one
of the normal management functions’ as highly unsatisfactory. Bereft
of a nodal authority, there has been no focus or direction in the asset
management by the various Circles and functionaries at lower levels
in DoP . As a result, on the one hand, these prime properties have
continued to languish and on the other hand the common man has
been deprived of more accessible and better communication facilities.
In this process of inaction, the Department have also lost several
opportunities of resource generation and consolidation. The Committee,
therefore, are of the firm opinion that the Department should take
immediate action in the direction of having a nodal authority for
management of all their assets. This nodal authority should be given
a clear-cut mandate about its specific responsibilities and duties and it
should be made functional without any further loss of time.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is being examined.
However, it is felt that setting up of the Special Purpose Vehicle for
which the Cabinet Note has been put up to Cabinet Secretariat for
approval will greatly help in the matter.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter-I)

27
Need for Increase in Budgetary  Support
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee find that one of the major factors which had
hampered the efforts of DoP for augmentation of departmental
buildings was the non-availability of adequate budgetary support. The
data pertaining to the funds sought by the Department for construction
of buildings from 8th Five Year Plan onwards and the actual releases
theiragainst as indicated below are clear pointers towards this fact.
(Rs. in crore)
Plan Amount Sought Amount Allocated
8
th Plan 425.00 121.35
9th Plan 525.25 119.62
10th Plan 745.00 98.54
Considering the need for a prudent management of the assets
particularly for discharging the Universal Service Obligation, the
Committee are of the view that the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance adopt a more realistic approach towards the whole
issue.
Action Taken by the Government
An outlay of Rs. 346.50 crore had been projected for Plan activity
‘Estates Management’ for the 11th Five Year Plan. But due to overall
reduction of total outlay of the DoP from Rs. 12353.84 crore to
Rs. 4000.00 crore by the Planning Commission, a revised outlay of
Rs. 126.81 crore has been tentatively projected by the Department for
the Plan activity ‘Estates Management’.
The observations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee will be
conveyed and stressed upon the Planning Commission and the Finance
Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter-I)

28
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Sample Market Survey of DoP Plots
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts awarded a
Market Survey on 28 June, 2006 with a view to assessing the possible
revenue generating potential of four plots of land under their
jurisdiction in Mumbai, Chennai, Chakamangalur and Ahmedabad. The
Survey was stated to have been undertaken as per the advice of the
Planning Commission. The Committee have been informed that the
final report and other deliverables were received from the consultant
on 6 March, 2007. The Survey has recommended that the sites in
Mumbai and Chennai should be developed as soon as possible, the
site in Ahmedabad should be developed simultaneously or after the
plot adjoining to it is redeveloped by the owner and the plot in
Chakamangalur should be developed when the local real estate market
matures. Based on the feedback from this Market Survey, the
Department are now stated to have initiated follow-up action. While
the Committee welcome the Survey as a step in the right direction,
they would eagerly await further action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
As intimated against para XV , the proposal for setting up the SPV
has already been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat for approval.
Setting up of Special Purpose Vehicle
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee have been informed that DoP now propose to set
up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the optimum development and
management of Postal Estates. The proposal is to set-up a wholly
owned company with limited liability and 100% equity participation
by the Government and registered under the Companies Act, 1956.
The thrust areas of the proposed SPV would be: (i) to optimize
utilization of Postal Land and properties and to generate non-tariff

29
revenue for DoP from Postal Estates, (ii) to provide functionally useful
modern space for Post Office operations and to improve the general
ambience and aesthetics of Postal Buildings, and (iii) to provide
convenience, modern facilities and amenities to the users of India Post.
According to DoP , it is likely that with the coming into being of the
proposed company, the need for budgetary support for construction
activities is likely to reduce gradually. DoP also assured the Committee
that the proposed SPV would not impinge upon the Universal Service
Obligation of DoP rather, it would facilitate USO in a better manner.
As regards the status of the proposal, the Committee have been
informed that the draft note as approved by the Minister of
Communications and Information Technology has been circulated to
the nodal Ministries/Departments and Planning Commission for their
views/comments. Since the proposal is yet to assume a final shape,
the Committee would await the details.
Action Taken by the Government
Based on the views/comments received from various nodal
Ministries/Departments and the Planning Commission, the Note for
Cabinet has been finalized and has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat
for decision of the Cabinet in the matter.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
10 April, 2008 Chairman,
21 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

30
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th April, 2008 from
1100 hours to 1210 hours in Room G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New  Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri K.V . Thangka Balu — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Narahari Mahato
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Praveen Rastrapal
9. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
10. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
11. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
12. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee under
Rule 258(3) chose Shri K.V . Thangka Balu, M.P . and a member of the
Committee to preside over the sitting.

31
3. The Committee, then took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Forty-eighth Report on ‘Real Estate Management in
the Department of Posts’.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above Draft Reports in the light of the factual verification made by
the concerned Ministry/Departments and present the same to the
House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to the Report.

32
APPENDIX II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which
have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 19 & 22
Total : 14
Percentage: 63.63%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 17 & 18
Total: 6
Percentage: 27.27%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Sl. Nos. 20 & 21
Total: 2
Percentage: 9.09%

FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Real Estate Management
in the Department of Posts’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008
Laid  on the table of Rajya Sabha  on 15 April, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 181
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 23
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting of the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-2008) held on 10.04.2008 .............................. 30
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/observations
contained in the Forty-eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ........................................... 32

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
@15. Vacant
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
(As on 8 April 2008)
  * Vice Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be a member on being inducted to the
Union Council of Ministers on 7 April, 2008.
  @ Vice Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal ceased to be a member on resignation from
Lok Sabha on 7 January , 2008. (Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal was nominated to the
Committee on 5 October, 2007 vice Shri Vishnu Deo Sai ceased to be member of the
Committee w.e.f. 30 August, 2007)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
$27. Vacant
%28. Vacant
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
$ Vice Shri Motiur Rahman passed away on 18 December, 2007.
% Vice Shri Eknath K. Thakur ceased to be a member on epxiry of his term in
Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2008.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-ninth Report on action taken
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Forty-eighth Report on ‘Real Estate Management in Department
of Posts’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Posts).
2. The Forty-eighth Report was presented to the Speaker on
3 August, 2007. The Report was subsequently presented to the
Lok Sabha on 21 August, 2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on the same day. The Department furnished their Action Taken Notes
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-eighth
Report on 2 November, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10 April, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure–II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
10 April, 2008 Chairman,
21 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

59
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-Eighth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Real Estate Management
in the Department of Posts’]
FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)
