11
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by the Government on  the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
ELEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)
ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by the Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of
the  Committee contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2004-05)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………


C.I.T. No. 133
Price : Rs. 20.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations  which  have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations  which  the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 29
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations  in  respect of
which replies of the  Government  have  not
been accepted by the Committee  and  which
require reiteration ..................................................... 39
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in  respect  of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 40
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes  of  the  Nineteenth  sitting  of  the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-05) held on 20.01.2005 .................................. 41
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the  Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Committee ........................................................... 43

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P . P . Koya
9. Shri P . S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K. V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P . C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report on
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Demands for Grants (2004-2005)” relating to the Department of
Information Technology.
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.08.2004 and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.8.2004. The Department furnished Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations contained in the Report on
06.12.2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.01.2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1  March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2004-05) relating to Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.8.2004 and
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24.8.2004. It contained
16 recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total: 13
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 4 and 8
Total: 2
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No: Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. 7
Total: one
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason for
the Department to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations.
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses (DOEACC) Society
(Recommendation No. 15)
6. The Committee note in their earlier Report that there had been
a decline in registration to various DOEACC courses. During 2002-03
and 2003-04, against 92,612 and 75,000 students targeted to be
registered, only 75,884 and 49,391 students respectively were actually
registered. As one of the reason for decline in registration had been
absence of academic recognition of DOEACC Course, the Department
had proposed to secure academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ level
Course so as to increase the acceptability of these courses amongst
students and industry. The Committee had desired the Department to
follow up the matter for registration of DOEACC ‘B’ level courses
lying with IGNOU at the highest level. They further desired to know
whether there had been any proposal from IGNOU to give recognition
to DOEACC to ‘O’, ‘A’ and ‘C’ level course also.
7. The Department of Information Technology in their Action Taken
Notes have stated as follows:
“(a) Academic Recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course: The
matter regarding the academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level
Course has been progressed with All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE). The same was discussed in AICTE meeting
held on October 29, 2003 wherein a Committee was constituted to
evolve a policy framework on the issue of education in the non-
formal sector vis-a-vis formal sector. During the meeting of the

3
said Committee, it was decided that Academic Recognition of
DOEACC ‘B’ Level will be considered by Distance Education
Council (DEC), Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
for which a Sub-Committee consisting of Pro-Vice Chancellor of
IGNOU, ED, DOEACC & Advisor (QA), AICTE was constituted.
A meeting of this Sub-Committee was held on January 27, 2004 in
AICTE based upon the recommendation of which, DOEACC Society
has submitted a formal application for Academic Recognition of
DOEACC ‘B’ Level. This is being constantly followed up with
Prof. S.C. Garg, Pro-Vice Chancellor, IGNOU.
(b) Academic Recognition of the remaining courses i.e. ‘O’ ‘A’
& ‘C’ Levels. It is mentioned that at present there is no equivalent
of ‘O’ Level Course offered in the formal sector of IT Education.
As such, there is no action proposed to be taken by the Society.
However, the DOEACC ‘A’ Level Course has already been
recognized by IGNOU for lateral entry to their MCA Programme.
As regards, the academic recognition of DOEACC ‘C’ Level is
concerned, the matter will be taken up with IGNOU only after
professional recognition is accorded by MHRD to DOEACC ‘C’
Level Course for which the request of the Society has been referred
to AICTE. Accordingly, in the meeting with AICTE on October 29,
2003, professional recognition of ‘C’ Level was discussed in addition
to academic recognition of ‘B’ Level. The matter is being pursued
with AICTE constantly.”
8. The Committee observe that the matter regarding academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ and ‘C’ level courses was discussed in
meeting with All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE)
held on 29 October, 2003 wherein a decision was taken that academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ level courses would be considered by
Distance Education Council (DEC), Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU). However no decision has yet been taken with
regard to DOEACC ‘C’ level courses more so when the matter will
be considered by IGNOU only after professional recognition is
accorded by Ministry of Human Resource Development. The
Committee feel that considerable time has already elapsed and the
matter needs to be expedited. They, therefore, hope that once these
courses get the academic recognition their acceptability amongst the
students and industry would increase and more students would get
registered. This will also enable the industry as well as the students

4
to derive maximum benefit out of these courses. The Committee
desire that a clear decision on the matter may be taken before the
discussion on Demands for Grants (2005-06) takes place.
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
(Recommendation No. 16)
9. The Committee had observed in their earlier Report that NIC
primarily an implementing agency had 3000 people workforce spread
across the country. The manpower remained constant for the last 5 to
6 years whereas the workload had increased fifty to sixty times. Further
NIC had always remained short of talent as the attrition rate was
fairly high as talented hands had been leaving the organization for
greener pastures. The Committee strongly opined that NIC should not
be overburdened with so much of work as it would never be able to
do justice to the assignments entrusted to it resulting in delayed
projects. The Committee pleaded that serious thought should be given
to the functioning of NIC, its manpower requirement, preserving talent,
making congenial environment in NIC by use of modern management
techniques and attracting fresh talents as adopted by multinational
companies.
10. The Department of Information Technology in their Action
Taken Notes have stated as follows:
The Committee has recommended that serious thought should be
given to the functioning, manpower requirement, preserving talent,
congenial environment in NIC by utilizing modern management
techniques and attracting fresh talents as adopted by multinational
companies.
As far as manpower is concerned, there is a backlog of 183 posts
for the last five years for which DIT has already been processing
approval for carrying out recruitment by NIC.
As pointed out by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the
workload of NIC has been increasing to a great extent. This is due to
new responsibilities/tasks being given to NIC. Also advancement in
technology necessitates induction of fresh professionals to handle new
technologies. NIC which was initially in 1985-86, an application
developer, has become a major infrastructure and turnkey solution
provider to the Government. Both NICNET and Data Centres have

5
gown considerably requiring major support. The security requirements
of this infrastructure and applications have also grown exponentially
thus requiring minimal extra professional resources. NIC would need
additional 200 posts at the level of System Analyst (Pay Scale
Rs. 8000-275-13500) in the area of PK 1, Security , Network, Java/open
source, web Development and GIS. The annual financial implementation
at the current salary levels is of the order of Rs. 4.45 crore.
11. The Committee are informed that NIC has a backlog of
183 posts for the last five years for which the Department of
Information Technology has already been processing approval for
carrying out recruitment by NIC. Also there is a need of additional
200 posts at the level of System Analyst in the scale Rs. 8000-275-
13500 in area of PK 1, Security, Network, Java/open source, web
Development and GIS. However, keeping in view the volume of
work assigned to NIC, the Committee desire that the matter of filling
up of backlog vacancies should be given top priority. In regard to
the additional requirement of posts, the Committee feel that NIC
should take urgent steps to tackle the situation in a prudent and
suitable manner.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Tenth Plan Allocation
(Recommendation Para No. 1)
The Committee observe that keeping in view the actual expenditure
during the first two years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 2002-03 and 2003-04
of Rs. 465.35 crore and Rs. 494.63 crore respectively (i.e. Rs. 959.98
crore in total) and Rs. 750 crore allocated for 2004-05 if fully spent
during the year, the Department would be incurring a total expenditure
of Rs. 1709.98 crore in the first three years of the Tenth Plan. Hence,
the Department would be left with only Rs. 1004.02 crore, for the
remaining two years 2005-06 and 2006-07, out of a total Tenth Plan
allocation of Rs. 2714 crore.
The Committee further note that the Department has projected a
demand of Rs. 2500 crore for the last two years of the Tenth Plan and
propose to take up the matter of additional funding with the Planning
Commission in the Mid-term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan.
The Committee are concerned over the huge gap between the
demand and the availability of money on the one side and the fate of
the on-going projects on the other. It is a well known fact that in the
planning process it is not possible to accommodate all the demands
which come from different sectors. According to the Committee, it
may not be an easy task for the Department to get an additional
Rs. 1500 crore in two years.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Information
Technology should approach the Planning Commission with a factual
data of utilization and projected demand to impress upon them the
need for the additional funds. They may keep the Committee apprised
of the developments on a regular basis.
Action Taken by the Government
A budgetary support of Rs. 2,714 crore has been approved for the
Department of Information Technology for the Tenth Plan. Against
6

7
this, DIT is likely to incur an expenditure of about Rs. 1,710 crore on
its plan schemes in the first three years of the Plan. Thus, a balance
of only Rs. 1,004 crore would be left for the last two years of the plan.
This will have a tremendous adverse impact on the programmes of
this Department especially since existing provisions are very limited.
The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the United
Progressive Alliance (UPA) has affirmed the commitment of the Alliance
to promote E-Governance on a massive scale. This also figures
prominently in the address of the President to the Parliament on
7.6.2004. To give effect to this commitment, a thrust in the DIT
budgetary support would be required for the implementation of the
National E-Governance Action Plan. It is also proposed to establish a
National E-Governance Fund with a seed capital of Rs. 1,000 crore.
The Department of Information Technology programmes in
Information Technology, which are also the Core programmes of the
Department, have a close linkage with the larger objectives of the
CMP in regard to development of human resources, employment
generation and improvement of the quality of life of disadvantaged
areas.
Under the circumstances, the DIT Tenth Plan allocations need to
be substantially augmented. The DIT will require a minimum Budgetary
support in the range of Rs. 2,500 crore for the last 2 years of the Tenth
Plan i.e. for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 to run these programmes.
The Department of Information Technology has already included this
issue in the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan document submitted
to the Planning Commission. The Department would apprise the
Standing Committee of the developments after Mid-Term Review of
the Tenth Plan by the Planning Commission.
Budgetary Support for 2004-05
(Recommendation Para No. 2)
The Committee note that Department of Information Technology
had proposed an Outlay of Rs. 1294.38 crore for the year 2004-05 for
its various schemes viz. R&D, Infrastructure Development, Human
Resource Development, PSUs, NIC, ESC & Export Market Development
and other miscellaneous programmes. However, keeping in view the
importance of E-Governance and other IT projects being implemented

8
by the DIT and within the constraints of overall ceiling on the Annual
Plan Budgetary support for 2004-05, the Planning Commission has
given a special consideration and has increased the level of budgetary
support from Rs. 495 crore (RE) in 2003-04 to Rs. 750 crore in the year
2004-05 which is an increase of over 50 percent.
The Committee note that out of the total budget of Rs. 750 crore,
Rs. 215 crore will go to the E-Governance projects which have been
special emphasis in the Annual Plan 2004-05. The Committee feel that
with the remaining Rs. 535 crore, the Department may only be able to
sustain the other schemes/projects without any scope for further
progress.
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has been
able to fully utilize its earlier Plan allocations. Against the allocation
of Rs. 470 crore in 2002-03 and Rs. 495 crore in 2003-04, the Department
is able to utilise Rs. 465.35 crore and Rs. 494.63 crore respectively. This
makes it amply clear that the Department is serious in its assignment
and has the capability to absorb and deliver. In the opinion of the
Committee, this will prove to be a firm ground for the Department
for demanding additional funds.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to seek
more funds at the supplementary grants stage and also strongly
recommend to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance that
they should make suitable higher allocation as demanded by the
Department.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department is seeking more funds at RE stage.
2-3 Per cent allocation by Ministries
(Recommendation Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the Planning Commission had issued an
advisory to all Central Ministries/Departments on 24th April, 1998 to
earmark 2 to 3 percent of their Plan budget for programmes/schemes
relating to Information Technology, but regrettably the same has not
been strictly adhered to by them. While formulating the Annual Plan
2004-05, the Planning Commission has taken an undertaking from all
the Ministries/Departments to earmark a minimum of 2-3 percent of

9
their allocation for promoting Information Technology. The Secretary,
DIT also informed the Committee that he has also requested all Chief
Secretaries of States/UTs to allocate at least 3% of their budget for
E-Governance applications and infrastructure.
The Department of IT is an implementing agency and a programme
manager for coordinating across different Ministries. In case the
Ministries/Departments/States do not allocate the 2-3 percent and do
not adhere to the suggestions of the programme manager in providing
necessary infrastructure, the DIT has less to lose in comparison to
what the stakeholder will lose and the greatest loser will be the nation.
The Committee, therefore, would advise all the departments
concerned to allocate 2-3 percent of their Plan Budget for IT in their
own interest. The Committee also recommend that the DIT should
closely monitor those Ministries/Departments/States who do not follow
their advice.
Action Taken by the Government
A National E-Governance Action Plan has been drawn for
implementation during 2003-07. The Plan seeks to lay the foundation
and provide the impetus for long-term growth of E-Governance within
the country. The plan seeks to implement a number of Mission Mode
Projects at the centre (Central Ministries/Departments), State and
integrated service levels to create a citizen-centric and business-centric
environment for governance, create the right governance and
institutional mechanisms, set up core infrastructure, formulate key
policies and channelise private sector technical and financial resources
into the national E-Governance efforts.
The concerned line Ministries/Departments have been advised to
come up with detailed proposals for allocation by the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance. Further, an Apex Committee for the
National E-Governance Action Plan has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with Secretary , DIT as Member
Convener. The Committee will oversee and provide Policy directions
for the implementation of National E-Governance Action Plan and
ensure inter-ministerial coordination.
Secretary, DIT has advised Chief Secretaries of all States on
May 27, 2004 to allocate atleast 3% of the State Budget for

10
E-Governance applications and infrastructure in line with the
observations of the Standing Committee. A few of the States viz. UP ,
Gujarat, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have already responded. Govt. of
UP , Gujarat and Rajasthan have stated that they plan to allocate 2 to
3% of their plan towards IT Applications. Govt. of Tamil Nadu has
stated that they plan to allocate substantial funds towards E-Governance.
Responses from other States are awaited. Reminders are being issued.
Further, DIT has issued guidelines for technical and financial
support for establishment of State Wide Area Network to all the States.
National E-Governance Fund
(Recommendation Para No. 5)
DIT has proposed a National E-Governance Fund with a seed
capital of Rs. 1,000 crore with a view to strengthening the programme
management structure and leveraging Government budgetary resources
to mobilize non-Government resources and competencies. Core
programmes of the Department, have a close linkage with the larger
objectives of the Common Minimum Programme in regard to
development of human resources, employment generation and
improvement of the quality of life of disadvantaged areas. In order to
fulfil their objectives, the Committee desire that the Department should
urgently work out the modalities of establishing a National
E-Governance Fund.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT is presently evolving programme management structure and
fund mechanism required for the National E-Governance Action Plan,
and, for this purpose, a proposal for hiring the services of a consultant
is under consideration. This exercise would help to formalize modalities
for creating a National E-Governance Fund.
Media Lab Asia (MLA)
(Recommendation Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the role of Media Lab Asia is to facilitate
the invention, refinement, and dissemination of innovations that benefit
the masses. The project is closely working with industry, NGOs, and
Government for this purpose. The basic idea of the Media Lab

11
programme is to take off research end-to-end, from the labs to the
stage of productionisation and prototyping and thereafter field testing
it for demonstrating replicable scalability and sustainability.
The MLA project had been approved for one year exploratory
phase commencing from 1 January, 2002 to 31 December, 2002. The
restructuring of MLA carried on till July, 2003 as a result of which no
funds were utilized during the last two years. The Committee observe
that a full scope nine year restructured programme was initiated from
May, 2003. The restructured MLA carries the earlier vision forward
with the same objectives with an outlay of Rs. 262 crore for the Tenth
Plan.
The Technical Advisory Board (TAB) of the programme
reconstituted in December 2003, has identified four thrust areas namely:
ICT applications in education, primary healthcare, empowerment of
persons with physical disabilities and providing rural connectivity.
Stakeholders’ workshops were conducted in each of these areas to
workout road maps and prepare proposals for large scale deployment
of technologies developed. According to the Department of IT, based
on the conclusions of these workshops, new projects are being initiated
for development and deployment of technologies. The outlay of
Rs. 65 crore earmarked in the year 2004-05 is proposed to be utilized
for ongoing projects and new projects being evolved as well as for
pilot deployment.
The Committee are constrained to note that the Research
Collaboration Agreement (RCA) with Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), USA was not extended and the research projects
taken up directly by Media Lab Asia had to be dropped as a part of
the restructuring whereas the restructured programme has the earlier
visions and same objectives. Precious two years of the Tenth Plan
have been lost without any progress.
The Committee are apprehensive whether the Department would
be able to utilize Rs. 227 crore which is to be contributed by the DIT
to the project in the remaining 3 years of the Tenth Plan.
The Committee are also concerned on the deployment of the
projects which are in a pilot stage. Technologies will be developed but
will they be put to use effectively? Who will monitor the deployment
of Media Lab Asia projects? According to the Committee, the initiative

12
is good but it requires more serious thought and planning at the
ground level.
In view of all these projects in the mind of the Committee, they
recommend that the budgetary provision for the left over programme,
not be allowed to lapse after the Tenth Plan. The Committee further
recommend that the Ministry of HRD, Health and others should also
be associated to play a decisive role in the deployment of technologies.
The Committee desire that they may be kept updated, on a quarterly
basis about the progress of the various programme of MLA currently
under development.
Action Taken by the Government
Media Lab Asia has constituted Core Groups in the areas of ICT
Applications in Education, Primary Healthcare, Empowerment of
persons with disabilities etc. These groups have representatives from
M/o HRD, Health and Social Justice & Empowerment respectively.
These Core Groups will identify the technologies to be developed in
the respective sectors and also recommend a deployment strategy for
Media Lab Asia.
A status note on the projects undertaken at Media Lab Asia would
be sent to the Standing Committee on a quarterly basis.
Hardware Policy
(Recommendation Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the Department of IT has prepared a
draft Hardware Policy and forwarded the same to the Ministry of
Finance for their views. While discussing the Policy with the Cabinet
Secretary, the Department had expressed that it would be able to
finalize the policy paper by July, 2004. The Committee note that the
Draft Paper on “National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing
Policy” was formulated after wide ranging consultations with industry
associations and other stakeholders. Further, a number of promotional
and EXIM policy/procedural measures included in the Draft Policy
paper could not evolve the consensus required. The promotional and
other measures contained in the Draft Paper concerns not only the
Electronics/IT Hardware industry but also, the rest of the
manufacturing sector in the country.

13
The Committee, therefore, desire that keeping in view the vision
of the Hardware Policy to make India one of the key players in the
global electronics/IT hardware manufacturing sector and integrate the
same with the global value-added-chain, the Hardware Policy should
get the approval of the Manufacturing Sector Competitiveness Council.
The Committee also recommend that effort should be made by the
Department to give boost to the hardware sector as this could generate
substantial revenue due to the greater value added nature of the
business.
Action Taken by the Government
The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the United
Progressive Alliance purposes the establishment of a National
Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) to provide a
continuity for policy dialogue to energize and sustain the growth of
the manufacturing industry like food processing, textiles and garments,
engineering, consumer goods, leather and IT hardware. NMCC will be
headed by the Minister of Commerce and Industry, with the following
composition:
1. Minister of Commerce & Industry—Chairman
2. Minister of Finance
3. Minister of Communication & Information Technology
4. Minister of Chemicals
5. Minister of Textiles
6. Minister of Food Processing Industry
7. Minister of Science & Technology
8. Minister of Small Scale Industry
9. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission or his nominee
10. Ten representative of Industry Associations, Export
Promotion Councils, Experts etc. as nominated by the
Chairman.
The functions of the NMCC will be as under:
1. Recommending steps to evolve a macro policy framework
conductive for enhancing the competitiveness of the
manufacturing sector in general;

14
2. Identification of manufacturing sectors which have potential
for global competitiveness;
3. Identification of constraints in such sectors;
4. Recommending national level and sector-specific policy
initiative; and
5. Any other recommendations.
The proposed strategy as per the Draft paper on National
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy was for supporting/
encouraging Electronic/IT Hardware manufacturing in the country
pertaining to the following areas:
1. Tariff Policy
2. Issues related to EXIM policy
3. Setting up of Hardware Manufacturing Cluster Parks
(HMCP)
4. Encouragement to sourcing of locally manufactured products
5. Upgradation of general infrastructure
6. Reduction in transaction time
7. Supporting R&D
8. Marketing “Made in India”
9. Encouraging relocation of manufacturing policy to India
10. Inviting large EMS (Electronics Manufacturing Service)
companies to set up/augment Indian operation
11. Development of Semiconductor Industry
12. Looking beyond the Domestic Market
13. HRD in VLSI Design and Embedded Software
14. Amending Labour laws
15. Patenting
16. Quality Certification
17. Removal of Mandatory custom Bonding for Electronics and
IT units

15
18. Enhancing rate of depreciation on computers
19. Dispensing with Procurement/Rewarehousing Certificates.
As mentioned earlier, the Tariff & Exim policy initiatives have
largely been addressed for the Electronics/IT Hardware manufacturing
sector whereas other promotional measures are common for all other
manufacturing sectors too. Therefore, the key features of the Draft
paper prepared by DIT have been referred to DIPP , the Secretariat for
NMCC.
National Venture Capital Fund for Software and IT Industry (NFSIT)
(Recommendation  Para No. 10)
The Committee note that National Venture Capital Fund for
Software and IT Industry was set up in August 1999, with a corpus
of Rs. 100 crore. The scheme was later handed over to Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) which created a fund called SIDBI
Venture Capital Fund wherein 50 percent of the money was put by
SIDBI, 20 percent of the money by IDBI and 30 percent of the money
by Ministry of IT. Government has a representative nominee. So far
SIDBI has sanctioned assistance to 24 units aggregating Rs. 58 crores.
The rest of the money is in fixed deposits earning interest.
The success rate of SIDBI has been highest amongst all venture
capital funds. The reason being that SIDBI is very conservative in
giving funds. It has the fear of turning valuable capital into non-
performing assets.
The Committee note that the Task Force constituted on ‘Financing
Knowledge based Industries for Small Enterprises Sector Including IT
Industry’ to look into the issues pertaining to availability of Venture
Capital for Small Scale entrepreneurs in the country has not yet
submitted its Reports. The Committee would like to be appraised of
the major recommendations of the Report of the Task Force as soon as
it is finalized and also action taken by the Government on the same.
The Committee further suggest that the Department which is a
1/3rd partner in the Fund should impress upon the NFSIT to sanction
amounts to relatively sound proposals and should not be so
conservative as 50 percent of the Fund is left unutilized. The Committee
would like to be updated quarterly on the performance of the
Companies funded by the Venture Capital Fund.

16
Action Taken by the Government
The status of the NFST set up by SIDBI with contribution from
DIT is given below:
• the fund started its full operations in December, 1999 and
has been investing in innovative and technology oriented
ventures in the field of software and Information Technology.
• The aggregate sanctions made under the fund till date are
Rs. 115.14 crore in respect of 43 companies. However, many
of these sanctions did not result in actual investment in the
past due to various reasons. The net sanctions under the
fund as on September 30, 2004 were Rs. 66.29 crore in
respect of 27 companies after taking into account cancellation
of assistance due to non availment and other reasons.
• Out of the total corpus of Rs. 100 crore, the investible funds
come to Rs. 65 crore, taking into account the Management
fee for the fund (Rs. 2.5 crore p.a. for the fund life of 10
years) and about Rs. 10 crore to be kept aside for the follow
on funding of assisted companies which may be needed in
the latter part of the fund life to augment their capital.
•W ith the aggregate sanctions as on date of Rs. 66.29 crore
in respect of 27 companies, it has almost reached the end
of investment phase for NFSIT.
• NFSIT has constantly been looking out for good investment
opportunities in the IT sector. Proposals are put up to an
Investment Committee comprising outside experts and
representatives of fund contributors (including DIT) which
recommends them to the Board of Directors for approval.
While NFSIT has been selective in funding companies by
way of venture capital, this is in line with the practice
followed in venture capital the world over as the investment
has to be linked to the extent of innovation, prospects of
success and outlook for exit for the fund. It has been the
endeavour that every deserving venture proposal
approaching is provided assistance.
• The investment climate for venture capital slowed down
considerably in the last 2 years following the IT melt down
in 2001 leading to a very substantial decline in the venture

17
capital activity for IT industry. As industry date shows,
number of companies funded by VCs in a year actually
declined. More particularly , venture capital investment in
small companies by most VC players virtually came to a
half. However, NFSIT continued to make investments.
• NFSIT has made a niche for itself as provider of venture
capital for smaller companies in their early stage where as
almost all other venture funds are investing in late stage
and in larger companies.
• The fund has also commenced exits, with one of the investee
companies, TRRS Imaging Ltd., Bangalore, giving the fund
a return of over 30%. The fund has also commenced
redemptions to its contributors. More successful exits are
expected this year.
• Some of the investee companies are performing quite well.
Two of NFSIT funded companies have been chosen by
Earnest and Young for an event to be held next month at
San Mateo, California (title “Global Hotbed Cross Border
Company Showcase”), where about 30 IT companies from
India, China and Israel will be presented to prospective US
Investors so as to make them global players.
• Performance of the fund is periodically reviewed by the
Board Directors of SIDBI Trustee Company Ltd. where
Additional Secretary, DIT is a member. The detailed
performance of the fund including performance of individual
units is also put up to the Board of SIDBI Trustee Company
Ltd. on an annual basis at the time of approval of accounts.
The Task Force on “Financing Knowledge Based Industries for
Small Enterprises Sector’ was constituted by the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries. However, the Department of Information Technology
has requested the Ministry of Small Scale Industries to provide a copy
of the Report of the Task Force and the same would be forwarded to
the Committee as and when received.
Semi-Conductor Complex Limited (SCL)
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
The Committee are constrained to find that SCL was not able to
achieve the targets for sales turnover during the last two years. As

18
against the target to achieve sales turnover of Rs. 83 crore and
Rs. 84.10 crore during 2002-03 and 2003-04, the Company could achieve
the sales turnover of Rs. 40.22 crore and Rs. 54.88 crore respectively.
The Committee are not convinced with the reasons for shortfall in
achievement of the targets like a major order was spilled over to the
next fiscal year due to delay in according product approval time, some
of the orders envisaged did not materialise and demand constraints
affected the sales in certain products. The Committee feel that these
constraints are not new to the Company and timely corrective measures
on the part of the Company could have avoided such major shortfalls.
The Committee further observe that SCL has revised the target for
2004-05 to achieve the sales turnover from Rs. 91 crore to Rs. 70.50
crore keeping in view the current product portfolio and the business
opportunities envisaged by the Company. The Committee disapprove
such a sudden change in targets fixed by the SCL. The Committee
would like to know the reasons as to why these factors were not
considered beforehand while fixing the targets. The Committee
deprecate the lackadaisical approach of the Department in fixing the
targets. They trust that by learning from the past experience, the SCL
would leave no stone unturned to achieve the targets during 2004-05.
The Committee find that during 2002-03, against a target to produce
1138.910K Dies/Devices and 205K System/Board level products, the
achievement remained 373.318K and 85.5014K respectively. Similarly,
during 2003-04, against a target to produce 1228.93K Dies/Devices,
SCL could however produce only 236.550K Dies/Devices. The
Committee are not convinced with the reasons put forth by the
Department for shortfall in targets like orders of some products planned
for production could not fructify, in case of Systems/Board level
products, less production of a product and delay in finalization of
orders for energy meters by the customers, a product could not get
transferred to production on account of iterations needed in product
design for incorporating additional specifications as per customer
requirements and the production plan of another product was reduced
in view of funds constraints of a customer. The Committee feel such
shortfall could have been avoided, had the Company taken timely
remedial measures and ensured proper co-ordination.
The Committee deplore the sudden revision of the targets laid
down for the year 2004-05. They note that SCL has scaled down the
targets laid down earlier for producing 1300 K Dies/Devices to produce

19
907K dies/devices. The Committee, however, trust that the Company
would explore all ways and means to ensure that the targets are
achieved in time and in totality.
The Committee observe that various committees including
Disinvestment Commission had considered various alternatives for the
revival of the SCL. However the matter of merger of SCL with BEL
and that of merger of SCL with Society for Integrated Circuits
Technology and Applied Research (SITAR)/the Gallium Arsenide
Enabling Technology Centre (GAETEC) have not materialized. The
Committee further find that the Planning Commission had suggested
that the Department of IT should form a small group of experts in the
Department to suggest two-three alternative plans for revival of SCL
and desired that the Group should submit the Report within two
months. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
by the Department in this regard. Subsequently, the Committee desire
that SCL should get the Report examined by business experts and
make viable and feasible plan for profitable functioning of SCL. The
Committee are of the view that SCL should also aggressively look to
the disinvestment option with the Companies in the Semi-conductor
Industry.
The Committee are informed that SCL has implemented VRS
during the year 2004 and given voluntary retirement to 46 employees
(21 executives and 25 non-executives). The Committee would like to
know from which source the funds have been procured by the
Company to implement the VRS during this year.
Action Taken by the Government
SCL made its best efforts in terms of constant follow-up/co-
ordination with customers to avoid spilling over of the major order to
the next fiscal as well as in expediting finalization of the envisaged
orders to achieve the set targets for 2002-03 and 2003-04. Corrective
measures were also taken by the Company for securing additional
orders as well as increasing the revenues from other products in its
endeavour to cover the expected shortfall. These measures, however,
did not fructify despite intense efforts. Also, the constraints faced by
the company in competing in the commercial market segment due to
its infrastructural and consequent technological limitations, unviable
scale economies compared to overseas companies who operate on a
global scale and at much higher level of technology compared to that

20
in SCL, limited and fragmented available/addressable domestic market
as well as lack of experienced technical manpower due to attrition in
the past, have been major handicaps in improvement of its performance.
Therefore, even as SCL has been fulfilling its role vis-a-vis the strategic
sector in terms of meeting the IC requirements of the strategic
organizations like ISRO, DAE, DRDO for their mission specific and
critical projects, its commercial performance has not been upto the
desired level since the volume of business from the strategic sector is
not large enough (Rs. 15-20 crore a year) to make SCL’s operations
viable.
In so far as the revision of the targets for 2004-05 from Rs. 91 crore
to Rs. 70.50 crore and the corresponding revision of the physical targets
is concerned, this got necessitated mainly because of the need to revise
revenue targets in respect of a product segment (telecom systems) as
higher level of business was envisaged earlier keeping in view certain
expected orders/tenders which, however, did not fructify. Also,
unexpected fall in prices of another product segment (Electronic Energy
Meters) resulted in revision of the revenue target set earlier. Due to
the above, the company had to revise its targets from
Rs. 91 crore to Rs. 70.50 crore for the year 2004-05. SCL would make
all efforts to realize the set target.
As regards the alternative plans for revival of SCL, this was
discussed in a brain storming session held on 01.6.2004 as part of the
incisive analysis exercise of Company’s operations, by a group of senior
officers from the DIT, outside experts from NPL, C-DOT, NIC alongwith
the Board of Directors of SCL and other company officials. From the
meeting it emerged that SCL was essentially catering to the strategic
needs of DOS, DRDO and DAE. In this context, sharing of the
company’s operational expenses by the strategic organizations and DIT
could be looked into. Subsequently, a meeting was also held under
the chairmanship of Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of
India on 16.9.2004 to address, inter-alia, the current utilization of SCL’s
facilities by various user departments and the future role of SCL
covering R&D, prototyping etc. At this meeting, it was reaffirmed that
the raison d’etre for SCL has all along been to cater to the needs of
the three Strategic Departments viz. DOS, DRDO and DAE; SCL has
continued to fulfill this role over the years. The volume of business
from the Strategic Departments, however, is not enough to make SCL
commercially viable. SCL needs budgetary support from the
Government to sustain the operations of the wafer fab and continue

21
its core R&D activities. Additional funds would also be required in
due course towards replacement of obsolete equipment and upgradation
of technology to cater to the future needs of the Strategic Departments.
The requirement of funds to sustain the operations at SCL and for
carrying out R&D activities should be equally shared by the three
Strategic Departments and DIT. Follow-up action on the
recommendations emerging from this meeting is underway.
As regards the disinvestment option with companies in
Semiconductor industry, while the disinvestment Commission in its
report (Nov. 2002) following the disinvestment study had recommended
no disinvestment of SCL on strategic grounds, the company has been
making sustained efforts to seek strategic alliance with overseas
Semiconductor companies. It is only recently that a Company viz.
M/s. Analog Integrated Corporation (AIC), USA has shown interest in
a tie-up for foundry business which would enhance capacity utilization
of the wafer fabrication facility at SCL. The proposal in this regard is
expected to be finalized shortly.
As regards funds utilised on the Voluntary Retirement Scheme
(VRS) implemented recently (5.5.2004—15.6.2004) against which 46
employees were given voluntary retirement, the Company has sourced
these funds from its working capital.
Vidya Vahini Programme
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the Department of Information Technology
conceived “Vidya Vahini” programme as a pilot project to make full
use of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) and internet
to transform the learning environment from mono-dimensional to multi-
dimensional and the same has been implemented in 7 districts of the
country. The Committee are informed that further replication of the
programme in schools across the country would be carried out by the
Ministry of HRD/State Governments as part of the scheme
“Introduction of ICT in schools”. The Committee desire that the
Department of IT should follow-up with the Ministry of HRD/State
Governments for successful replication of the Vidya Vahini Programme
and provide them the technical and other support, if necessary.

22
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) has
revised its CLASS Programme and formulated a Scheme “Introduction
of ICT in Schools”. The Scheme incorporates all the key features of
the Vidya Vahini Programme. The Scheme has been approved by the
Expenditure Finance Committee. Further, MHRD is in the process of
obtaining the approval of the Cabinet for implementing the Scheme.
In this regard, MHRD has circulated a Draft Note for the Cabinet for
seeking approval of the Scheme.
Community Information Centres (CICs)
(Recommendation Para No. 13)
The Committee appreciate the effective implementation of the
Community Information Centres (CICs) Project in the North-Eastern
States. So far DIT have set up CICs at 487 block headquarters in
North-Eastern States, out of which 486 CICs have been established
and all are operational. The Committee note that the scheme is being
replicated during 2004-05 in the State of Jammu & Kashmir for setting
up 139 CICs. CICs in the 60 Block Headquarters of J&K State would
be made operational during 2004-05.
The Committee further observe that a proposal is in the pipeline
to set up 328 CICs in the State of Uttaranchal. The estimated cost is
around Rs. 70 crore to be incurred over 4 years. The project would be
implemented by the State Government, which will mobilise a
contribution of 10 percent of the outlay. The DIT’s support will be to
the extent of Rs. 63 crore. The project will be implemented in two
phases. This would necessitate an additionality in the Plan Budgetary
support at the rate of Rs. 18 crore per year. The Committee recommend
that similar efforts should be made for setting up of CICs in other
States of the country. The Committee further observe that recurring
expenditure on the maintenance of the CICs is being provided for as
RE Plan by the Government. The Committee are of the opinion that
once the infrastructure is in place, maintenance should be funded by
the State after the successful continuance of the project for a limited
period, say 3 years.

23
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Information Technology (DIT) is pursuing similar
efforts for setting up CICs in other States of the country depending
upon the availability of additionality in the Plan Budgetary Support.
As set of guidelines are under preparation in DIT under its National
e-Governance Plan for Community Information Centre in other
States.
DIT proposes to set up 328 CICs at the village level in an
entrepreneurship modern Uttaranchal. Another model being
contemplated is for setting up of CICs in the schools for imparting
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) based education in
the Government Schools located in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands
and Lakshadweep Islands. During school hours these CICs would be
utilized for education purpose and off—school hours by the general
population to access citizen-centric services. The project would be
handed over to the administration of Union Territories after 3 years
for maintenance, control and operations.
Manpower for Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) Design
(Recommendation Para No. 14)
The Committee regret to note that allocation made for the scheme
has always been revised downward. During 2002-03, BE was
Rs. 2 crore which was reduced to Rs. 70 lakh at RE stage and the
same was fully utilised. Also during 2003-04, though the Department
proposed an outlay of Rs. 125 crore, the Planning Commission
approved only Rs. 3.5 crore. The allocation was reduced to
Rs. 37 lakh at RE stage, which was fully utilised. The Committee note
that during 2004-05, the Department proposed an outlay of
Rs. 20 crore, however, the Planning Commission approved Rs. 10 crore.
In this connection, the reason given by the Department that the
institutions were not able to absorb more funds is disturbing. The
Committee are of the opinion that either the programme content is
not popular to attract students or there is lack of awareness among
the students. The Committee strongly feel that the reasons for such a
phenomenon should be gone into by a high level team of experts and
adequate measures taken to ensure better utilisation of funds provided
for the scheme.

24
According to the Committee, a much better plan has to be drawn
up for an effective curriculum, which enhances the potential for
employment, in consultations with the Semi Conductor industry players
and suitable measures taken to effectively improve the curriculum in
ongoing basis. The curriculum could be passed on to C-DAC which is
already offering training courses in the field.
Action Taken by the Government
The project “Special Manpower Development for VLSI design and
related software (SMDP) was initiated in March 1998 for a duration of
5 years and was to end in March 2003. The project has been extended
by 2 years upto March 2005. The project involves 7 Resource Centres
(RCs) and 12 Participating Institutions (PIs). The main activities of the
project are:
• Instruction Enhancement Programme (IEP) for training
faculty of PIs
•T raining of laboratory technicians
• Setting up of VLSI design laboratories
• Development of Learning Materials (LMs) on various
topics
•T eaching of various courses on VLSI design and related
software at:
— B.E./B.Tech level (Type IV manpower)
— M.E/M.Tech. level in the areas of Electronics,
Communications, Computer Science, Instrumentation etc.
(Type III manpower)
— M.E./M.Tech. in VLSI design & Micro-electronics (Type II
manpower)
— Ph.D. in various aspects of VLSI design and related software
(Type I manpower):

25
It is borne out from the number of students of each type passing
out each year from 12 PIs as given below that the programme is
popular amongst students:
1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement
Type-IV-B.E./B.Tech. 500 523 500 682 500 736 500 752
Type-III-M.E./M.Tech. 36 70 48 92 54 144 60 154
Type-II-M.E./M.Tech. — 10 50 35 75 52 100 73
Type-I-(Ph.D) — — — ———— 5
Total 536 603 598 809 629 932 660 984
As regards low utilisation of funds, especially in 2003-04, the
allocation of Rs. 3.5 crores made by Planning Commission during
2003-04 was for the SMDP-Phase I (on-going) as above, and also for
starting the second Phase of SMDP . The second phase of the SMDP
involving the existing institutions of SMDP Phase I and additional
institutions, has been evolved by a Working Group set up in April
2003 consisting of Members from MHRD, AICTE, UGC, Industry
Associations (NASSCOM & MAIT) and experts from leading Academic
Institutions & R&D laboratories. The Working Group has prepared a
Detailed Project Report (DPR) which includes the model curriculum
for M.Tech in VLSI design taking into account the latest developments.
As suggested by the Committee, the model curriculum has been passed
on to C-DAC.
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses (DOEACC)
Society
(Recommendation Para No. 15)
During 2003-04, 75,000 students were targeted to be registered,
against which only 49,391 were actually registered. Similarly 1,50,000
candidates were targeted to appear in various levels of Exams, against
which only 1,30,057 candidates were actually admitted. Also during
2002-03, against 92,612 students to be registered and 1,77,329 candidates

26
to be admitted, 75,884 students were registered and 1,60,028 candidates
were admitted.
The reason for decline in registration during 2003-04 is stated to
be absence of academic recognition of DOEACC Courses in addition
to the continuing impact of the slowdown in the global IT market.
The Committee note that in order to fulfil the targets of 2004-05 to
register 82,500 students and to admit 1,65,000 candidates to various O,
A, B & C level courses, the Department has proposed to secure
academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course. This would also
increase the acceptability of DOEACC Courses amongst students and
industry. All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) has
constituted a Committee to look into the matter of recognition of
qualifications awarded by non-formal sector institutions including
DOEACC. The said Committee has advised the Society to approach
Distance Education Council, Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) for academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level qualifications.
This application for academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level is
under process by IGNOU. The Society is also monitoring a publicity
campaign to raise the level of awareness in regard to DOEACC Courses
amongst students and parents.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the matter should suitably
be followed up with IGNOU at the highest level for registration of
DOEACC ‘B’ Level courses. They would further like to know whether
there is any proposal from IGNOU to give recognition to DOEACC to
‘O’, ‘A’ and ‘C’ Level courses also.
Action Taken by the Government
(a) Academic Recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course: The
matter regarding the academic recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level Course
has been progressed with All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE). The same was discussed in AICTE meeting held on
October 29, 2003 wherein a Committee was constituted to evolve a
policy framework on the issue of education in the non-formal sector
vis-a-vis formal sector. During the meeting of the said Committee, it
was decided that Academic Recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level will be
considered by Distance Education Council (DEC), Indira Gandhi
National Open University (IGNOU), for which a Sub-Committee

27
consisting of Pro-Vice Chancellor of IGNOU, ED, DOEACC & Advisor
(QA), AICTE was constituted. A meeting of this Sub-Committee was
held on January 27, 2004 in AICTE based upon the recommendation
of which, DOEACC Society has submitted a formal application for
Academic Recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ Level. This is being constantly
followed up with Prof. S.C. Garg, Pro-Vice Chancellor, IGNOU.
(b) Academic Recognition of the remaining courses i.e. ‘O’ ‘A’ &
‘C’ Levels. It is mentioned that at present there is no equivalent of ‘O’
Level Course offered in the formal sector of IT Education. As such,
there is no action proposed to be taken by the Society. However, the
DOEACC ‘A’ Level Course has already been recognized by IGNOU
for lateral entry to their MCA Programme. As regards, the academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘C’ Level is concerned, the matter will be
taken up with IGNOU only after professional recognition is accorded
by MHRD to DOEACC ‘C’ Level Course for which the request of the
Society has been referred to AICTE. Accordingly, in the meeting with
AICTE on October 29, 2003, professional recognition of ‘C’ Level was
discussed in addition to academic recognition of ‘B’ Level. The matter
is being pursued with AICTE constantly.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I)
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
(Recommendation Para No. 16)
The Committee observed that NIC is primarily an implementing
agency having 3000 people workforce spread across the country. Thus
most of the funds allocated to NIC are spent on salaries, increments
etc., and merely 15 to 20 per cent. is left as capital budget. The
manpower has remained constant for the last 5 to 6 years whereas the
workload has increased fifty to sixty times. NIC has an institutional
mechanism which gives it the flexibility to engage indirect additional
manpower in response to the requirements of a particular project.
However, NIC is always short of talent as the attrition rate is fairly
high as talented hands leave the organizations for greener pastures.
According to the Committee, as NIC is the IT backbone of the
country, it should not be overburdened with so much of work where
the volume of work to manpower ratio is 50:1. NIC will never be able
to do justice to the assignments entrusted to it resulting in delayed
projects.

28
The Committee feel that serious thought should be given to the
functioning, manpower requirement, preserving talent, congenial
environment in NIC by utilizing modern management techniques and
attracting fresh talents as adopted by multinational companies.
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee has recommended that serious thought should be
given to the functioning, manpower requirement, preserving talent,
congenial environment in NIC by utilizing modern management
techniques and attracting fresh talents as adopted by multinational
companies.
As far as manpower is concerned, there is a backlog of 183 posts
for the last five years for which DIT has already been processing
approval for carrying out recruitment by NIC.
As pointed out by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the
workload of NIC has been increasing to a great extent. This is due to
new responsibilities/tasks being given to NIC. Also advancement in
technology necessitates induction of fresh professionals to handle new
technologies. NIC which was initially in 1985-86, an application
developer, has become a major infrastructure and turnkey solution
provider to the Government. Both NICNET and Data Centres have
grown considerably requiring major support. The security requirements
of this infrastructure and applications have also grown exponentially
thus requiring minimal extra professional resources. NIC would need
additional 200 posts at the level of System Analyst (Pay Scale
Rs. 8000-275-13500) in the area of PK 1, Security , Network, Java/open
source, Web Development and GIS. The annual financial implementation
at the current salary level is of the order Rs. 4.45 crore.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
National Action Plan on E-Governance (NEGAP)
(Recommendation Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Common Minimum Programme
(CMP) of the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) has affirmed the
commitment of the Alliance to promote e-Governance on a massive
scale. In order to give effect to this commitment, the Department of
Information Technology needs adequate budgetary support for
implementation of the National e-Governance Action Plan (NEGAP),
which has been elaborated by the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) in collaboration with the Department of
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances.
The Committee further note that the Department of Information
Technology intends to strengthen the core infrastructure, including
establishment of State-wide Area Networks up to the level of Blocks
and National/State level Data Centres, promotion of common service
delivery centres and replication of successful e-Governance applications
on a pilot scale, for which the Department had proposed an outlay of
Rs. 630 crore for 2004-05. The Committee are concerned to note that
the Planning Commission has approved only Rs. 215 crore. As a result
the Department would not be able to extend the network infrastructure
up to block level in the first 18 months as it was planned and will
take it up in a phased manner.
However, keeping in view that provisions are not necessarily being
made in the Plan Budget and that many initiatives are funded on the
non plan side, the Committee are convinced with the line of action of
the Planning Commission that Rs. 215 crore is sufficient in the initial
phase and the Department should assess the realistic requirement of
additional funds before making a demand for more funds.
29

30
While appreciating the efforts in doing the study on the e-readiness
index of States and UTs, the Committee feel that the e-readiness of
States and UTs has to be re-assessed annually on an ongoing basis in
order to get them into e-Governance mindset. The Committee also
desire that the Department should formulate the proposals for
additional requirements of funds on e-Governance keeping in view
the level of implementation and execution of the plan.
Action Taken by the Government
Keeping in view the allocation of Rs. 215 crore made for
e-Governance in the current financial year, implementation schedules
has been redrawn and as such there won’t be any need for additional
funds during the current financial year.
Centre for Development of Advance Computing (CDAC)
(Recommendation No. 8)
The Committee observe that the allocation for C-DAC for the year
2004-05 is Rs. 40 crore which is substantially higher than allocations of
Rs. 10 crore and Rs. 25.50 crore made during 2002-03 and 2003-04
respectively. However, the Committee learn that the year 2004-05 would
be the first full year of consolidated and expanded C-DAC, emerging
as the largest and most premier R&D institution in ICT in the country.
The Committee desire that keeping in view the broad objectives of
C-DAC during the year 2004-05, the allocation of Rs. 40 crore made
should be optimally utilised. If need be, the request for additional
requirement of funds should be placed before the Planning Commission
in Mid-term appraisal of the Annual Plan.
An ongoing exercise to identify potential users and applications
(Commercial), effective marketing of the potential of Grid Computing
and the benefits, packaging of appropriate solutions through timely
development of appropriate software and Middleware for various
commercial applications could increase the prospects of additional
revenue earnings through C-DAC. In this connection, the Committee
may be apprised of the action taken by the Department of IT with
regard to suggestion made by the Planning Commission that C-DAC
should develop an appropriate business model ensuring that its R&D
activities could be carried out in a sustainable manner. In view of the
Committee, the Commercial applications had to be an integral part of

31
the high-end research. One of the super computing nodes could be
devoted to storage of large-scale data to meet the business requirements
of commercial organizations like banks, insurance etc.
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee’s Observations and C-DAC’s Proposed Plans as
regards these Observations. Allocations for C-DAC for 2004-05 is
Rs. 40 crore, which is substantially higher than the allocations of
Rs. 10 crore and Rs. 25.50 crore made during 2002-03 and 2003-04
respectively.
The year 2004-05 is the first full year of consolidated and expanded
C-DAC, emerging as the largest premier R&D institution in ICET
(Information, Communication and Electronics Technologies) in the
country. It has 14 Labs in 10 locations, with close of 1800 people
workforce. Its technical agenda has been realigned carefully, reflecting
its core competency built over the year, adding emerging technology
areas of great importance and synergising the skill sets available at its
various centres into an coordinated action plan. The core R&D focus
areas identified are as follows:
— High Performance Computing (HPC) and Grid Computing
— Multilingual Computing, Applied Artificial Intelligence and
Speech Processing
— Power Electronics, Agri-Electronics, Real Time Systems,
Embedded Systems and VLSI Design
— Cyber Security
—B roadband, Wireless and Internet Technologies
— Geomatics
— Health Informatics
— Software (including OSS/Linux), Multimedia, Graphics and
Database Technologies
— e-Governance and ICT for Addressing Digital Divide
— Education and Training (including e-Learning).

32
Higher fund allocation for 2004-05 as compared to previous years
is due to the following reasons:
— This, being the first full year of consolidated and expanded
C-DAC, we are making aggressive efforts to consolidate our
core competence in areas where we excel, invest in new
areas, disruptive technologies and national importance areas,
so that we can contribute our best on an ongoing basis.
Our activities in the above mentioned R&D areas are focused
towards those of societal importance, strategic sectors,
disadvantaged sections, etc. on the one hand and those,
which compete in the market on the other hand. We see
our contributions to the former for bringing national benefits,
whereas, the latter is important to us to generate internal
revenues (IR).
— Sufficient R&D funding is important to us at this stage of
consolidation and core competency building. Only when we
reach this stage, we can confidently move up the value
chain and progress to the next round of technology map at
research, development, prototyping level with reasonable
amount of internal revenues invested in the same.
— Grid computing is a major research area for the year. It
involves the communication fabric at high-speed across at
premier scientific R&D and academic institutions for sharing
of computing resources. It also involves upgrade of PARAM
series of computers with next generation interconnection
fabric (including associated VLSI chips), new performance
chip-sets and additional grid-enabled applications. It also
involves high-performance needs of multi-vendor,
interoperable grid computing environment of various
users.
— There is also a crying need to modernize infrastructure and
meet the manpower expenses of core staff to ensure that
our momentum on core competency areas are not lost.
Keeping in view the broad objectives of C-DAC during the year
2004-05, the allocation of Rs. 40 crore made should be optimally

33
utilized. If need be, the request for additional requirement of funds
should be placed before the Planning Commission in Mid-term
appraisal of the Annual Plan.
C-DAC has already planned to optimally utilize the current
allocation of Rs. 40 crore. The R&D area-wise allocation of this amount
has been planned as follows:
R&D Area-wise Break-Up of Proposed Grant-in-Aid Allocation
For Financial Year 2004-05
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. R&D Areas Funds
Earmarked
for the
activity
1. High Performance Computing (HPC) 8.00
2. Grid Computing 14.50
3. Multilingual Computing, Applied 4.00
Artificial Intelligence and Speech Processing
4. Power Electronics, Agri-electronics, Real Time 4.00
Systems, Embedded Systems and VLSI Design
5. Cyber Security 1.50
6. Broadband, Wireless and Internet Technologies 3.00
7. Geomatics 0.50
8. Health Informatics 0.50
9. Software (including OSS/Linux), 3.00
Multimedia, Graphics and Database Technologies
10. e-Governance and ICT for Addressing Digital Divide 0.50
11. Education and Training (including e-Learning) 0.50
Total 40.00

34
The above is the proposed plan of expenditure for the allocated
core grant. We anticipate additional requirement of funds to the tune
of Rs. 10 crore as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Planned Activity Funds
Required
1. Collaboration with TIFR for development of 3.50
mathematical libraries for HPC systems
2. Set up of VLSI Lab and MEMS Lab at C-DAC, Noida 1.29
3. Setup of Linux HPC Technology Excellence Centre 0.60
4. Adding new R&D initiatives in Scientific & 1.50
Engineering computing such as Earthquake
Engineering, Systems Biology , Air Quality
Management, Content-based Image
Retrieval and Visualization, Multiscale
Modeling & Simulations and Water
Resource Modeling
5. Campus-wide Networking at C-DAC, Noida 0.90
6. Infrastructure creation at C-DAC, Noida 1.30
7. Shifting of Hyderabad office to JNTU 1.00
campus and setup of HPC infrastructure
Total 10.09
C-DAC should develop an appropriate business model ensuring
that its R&D activities could be carried out in a sustainable manner.
C-DAC’s current sources of funding are as follows:
— core funding , which is important to C-DAC for core
competency building in the fast moving and highly
competitive areas of ICET (Information Communications and
Electronics Technologies). This involves the use of core
funding primarily for research work and technology
development phase.

35
— Sponsored project funding is used on top of the core funding
for enhancement of our core competencies/technology base
to enable technology to be converted into usable product
prototyping or field level effort to meet real user needs.
— Internal Revenue (IR)  is generated by the commercialization
of the R&D outputs. IR is re-ploughed for growth of
respective group strengths in various areas and lab reserves.
The flow of funds from one source to another for effective
utilization of funds is shown in the value-chain model of Figure 1.
(IV) Infrastructure
(V) Skills acquisition
(vi) Upgradation
(vii) adding new areas
(VIII) Prototype development
(IX) Productization and user trials
(X) Project execution
(XI) Business model
Market positioning
(XIII) Transfer of Technology ......
(XIV) Partnership development
(XV) Interface with Indutry
(XVI) Sponger bonding with users.
Figure 1. C-DAC’s value-chain model.
The Following is the proposed business model for C-DAC to
convert the R&D efforts into products, solutions, programmes and
services of practical relevance to users and markets.
1. Direct User Interfacing . In this method, C-DAC will directly
interface with the end user for development and deployment of
technologies. This approach is suitable for high-technology, high-cost
and limited volume products. For example, the PARAM systems and
turnkey solutions based on PARAM systems can be handled using
this approach. Several specialized turnkey solutions like some of the
e-Governance applications, which involve deployment of outputs of
C-DAC’s multiple R&D areas into the solutions can also be handled
effectively by this approach.
Core Funding
(Used for capacity/
competence building)
Sponsored Projects
(Used for research/
technology development)
Internal Revenue through
Products, Solutions & Services
(Used for growth and maturity)

36
2. User Interfacing Through Partners. In this method, end user/market
requirements are jointly met by C-DAC and one or more partners.
The model leverages on the strengths of the partners involved for
providing solutions/products by creating win-win situation for all. For
example, C-DAC can play the role of technology developer with a
partner who takes the role of technology deployment. The C-DAC
and ATNF (Apollo Telemedicine Network Foundation) partnership
arrangement for deployment of C-DAC’s telemedicine system in two
North Eastern states of India is an example of this model, being used
on an experimental basis.
3. Technology Transfer . This approach is suitable for reach of
products/solutions to a specific segment/sector. It is also useful for
those products/services/solutions for which C-DAC’s strengths lies only
in technology development and not in productization and marketing
of the associated products/solutions/services. A recent good example
of this approach used by C-DAC was technology transfer of Tetra
(Terrestrial Trunked Radio) Digital Professional Radio system developed
by its Thiruvananthapuram centre to SRT, UK for tapping the UK
market. Similar arrangement is being worked out for this technology
for Chinese market.
4. Distributed Network. This approach is suitable for high-volume,
low-priced products to address a large clientele base. This requires
appointment of a set of distributors and dealers who will be trained
to market our products/solutions/services to the potential users.
C-DAC has successfully used this approach for the propagation of its
multilingual products.
5. e-Commerce. Since C-DAC deals with the area of Communication
and IT, several of its products fall in the category of software products.
Such products can be marketed using e-commerce technologies.
C-DAC has used this model for some of its software products.
6. Hybrid Approach . A combination of two or more of the above
mentioned approaches is often necessary for converting the R&D efforts
into products/solutions/programmes/services of practical relevance to
users and markets and then their actual deployment and use in the
market place. For example, a partnership arrangement and/or transfer
of technology for productization and manufacturing of a technology
developed by C-DAC may be necessary and then distribution/dealers
network may be required for the propagation of the jointly developed
product into the market place.

37
Having elaborated on the business model of converting C-DAC’s
R&D efforts into marketable products/solutions/programmes and
services, we would also like to emphasize on the following points:
— Scaling up/mass production of a developed technology
requires a suitable production methodology , pricing strategy,
market position strategy, etc. which go far beyond
technology per se. This will require a full-fledged business
and marketing team in C-DAC, which is as strong as
C-DAC’s R&D arm. This, in turn, will call for providing
approval for additional manpower requirement for this
purpose.
— Given the inherent high-risk nature of this field, due to
technology obsolescence, time-to-production and market and
intense competition, it will be necessary to allow C-DAC to
operate with full flexibility.
While we are willing to increase internal revenue from the market,
our role as an R&D lab with a nation-building objective, should not
get diluted by forcing us to depend dominantly on IR. Therefore, 50:50
approach for core R&D funding and IR generation would put us in a
balanced position in respect of deep R&D commitment vis-a-vis market
positioning leading to revenue generation and would also provide us
an incentive to perform well in demanding and competitive market
place.
In summary, C-DAC is willing to model its operations on 50:50
revenue model of government funding and IR generation, provided
government funding is increased to match its IR generation on
year-to-year basis.
The commercial applications had to be an integral part of the
high-end research and one of the supercomputing nodes could be
devoted to storage of large scale data to meet the business requirements
of commercial organizations banks, insurance, etc.
The idea of making commercial applications the integral part of
the high-end research is welcome. C-DAC has made a few efforts in
this direction. The development of Strategy Development (SD 2000)
package on PARAM 10000 and its deployment to MDR, Singapore is
an example of it. Similarly, development of Bourse Analyzer for
National Stock Exchange is another example of the same. Use of one
of the Supercomputing nodes for storage of large-scale data to meet

38
business requirements of commercial organizations like banks/
insurance, etc. is not a feasible solution in the current form. The main
reason is that the operations of banking and insurance sectors are
highly critical in nature and require dedicated systems backed with
suitable fail-over arrangements. As the two supercomputing facilities
of C-DAC are being used for research and development by various
scientific and engineering organizations of the nation, including
C-DAC’s internal members, it will not be possible to devote these
systems for commercial use by organizations like banks/insurance, etc.
However, a separate PARAM configuration, which has been suitably
configured for the end user’s needs and also has necessary fail-over
arrangements, can be easily deployed to commercial organizations to
serve their requirements.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-NIL-
39

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
Sponsorships for Media Lab Asia
(Recommendation Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the Department has so far been able to
get only one sponsorship from M/s Tata Sons for Media Lab Asia
research thus contributing Rs. 1.5 crore against a target of Rs. 35 crore.
The Committee feel that the programme lacks sponsorship because of
its complexities and the short-sightedness of the Department towards
its outcome.
The Committee desire that the Department should have a
continuous dialogue with various industrial houses who spend on
universal obligation for identifying the lacunae in their efforts so as to
take steps to attract more sponsorship.
Action Taken by the Government
Media Lab Asia would initiate a dialogue with the industry to
attract more sponsorship for the programme.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 1 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
40

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 20 January, 2005 from 1100 hours
to 1325 hours in Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P . Karunakaran
6. Dr. P .P . Koya
7. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
8. Col. G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
10. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Vijay J. Darda
13. Shri Ashwani Kumar
14. Shri Balbir K. Punj
15. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
16. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
17. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
18. Shri Motiur Rahman
19. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
41

42
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its First Report on ‘Demands for Grants’ (2004-05) relating
to Department of Information Technology.
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Action Taken
Reports with some amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to House on a date and time
convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIRST REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15 and 16
Total: 13
Percentage: 81.25%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos: 4 and 8
Total: 2
Percentage: 12.5%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No: Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. 7
Total: 1
Percentage: 6.25%
43