9
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION &
 BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Working of Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP)’]
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)
NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION &
BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Seventh Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of Directorate of
Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.12.2004


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government. ..................... 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 15
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration ........................................ 18
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature. .................. 21
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2004-05)
held on 25.11.2004 .................................................................. 22
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-Seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee ................................................................................ 24

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on its behalf, present this Ninth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-Seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Working of Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity” relating
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
22.12.2003 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2004. The Ministry
furnished Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in
the Report on 27.5.2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
its sitting held on 25.11.2004.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Working of Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP)”
relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22
December, 2003 and was laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 23
December, 2003. It contained 16 recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under.
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 48, 49, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65 and 66
Total : 12
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 55 and 56
Total : 2
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 50 and 53
Total : 2
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are
of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case for any reason it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to them urgently and in no case later
than six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. ADVANCE PLANNING OF THE ENTIRE PUBLICITY PROGRAMME
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
6. The Committee in its 57th Report on “Working of DAVP” had
desired that the entire publicity at the national level for various media
units under the Ministry of I & B should be planned in advance, in
consultation with the Ministries concerned. Accordingly, the matter
should be taken up with the Planning Commission for release of
sufficient funds. The Committee further desired that publicity of such
programmes should be done through the various media and intensity
of these publicity campaigns be built up gradually through the media
for getting the desired results.
7. The Ministry of I & B in its Action Taken Notes has stated as
follows:
All Campaign Officers of DAVP have been instructed to get in
touch with the client Ministries/Departments and finalise the publicity
needs in advance.
Ministry of I & B has been consulting various Ministries/
Departments for their requirements for publicity of their schemes/
policies through its various media units. Secretary (I & B) had held
meetings during January, 2003 with the officers of various social sector
Ministries/Departments such as Health, Rural Development, Social
Justice & Empowerment, Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation,
Family Welfare etc. and the officers of Media Units of I & B and
Planning Commission to work out strategies for effective publicity of
their 10th Plan schemes. The Ministries/Departments informed about
the important schemes/policies/themes, which they wanted to publicise
through media units of M/o I & B. Based on their inputs/suggestions,
a “Communication Strategy” was prepared to effectively communicate
government schemes to the people for mobilising their support. The
“Communication Strategy” was sent to PMO for consideration.

3
Similar meetings were held by Secretary (I & B) with the officers
of M/o HRD. Health and Family Welfare and the media units of
M/o I & B to evolve a strategy for educating masses on health, hygiene
and literacy. Representatives from private sector were also invited in
the meetings to have their suggestions/inputs. A Task force was set
up under the Chairmanship of a faculty member of Indian Institute of
Mass Communication (IIMC) for preparing an “Approach Paper” to
outline the strategy for creating a truly extensive mass movement
persuading people to take active steps to improve their health, hygiene,
educational and literacy status. The Approach Paper so prepared has
been forwarded to Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
for approval.
8. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the efforts made
by the Ministry in this regard. The Ministry had gone in for a
“Communication Strategy”, a long term measure and an “Approach
Paper” to outline the strategy for a mass movement. According to
the Committee, these are time consuming efforts and by the time
they take off they would probably have lost their shine.
9. Today, we are moving in fast track mode. Priorities, programme
funds, methods, strategies, outlook, media is changing and moving
with great speed. The Committee had desired the Ministry of I &B
to get the requirements of various Ministries/Departments for
publicity of their schemes/policies annually i.e. for the next one year
in advance and publicise those schemes/policies within that year. In
doing so, the Ministry of I & B would be able to project its
requirement to the Planning Commission on a year to year basis
and get funds on some realistic assessment of requirement. On the
other hand, the Ministry of I & B/DA VP would be able to work on
the latest technologies of publicity and bring before the mass media
the latest issues in hand as desired by the different Ministries/
Departments. The Ministries/Departments would in turn be bound
to settle their accounts annually from their budgetary allocations for
the year.
10. Health, Rural Development, Social Justice & Empowerment,
Urban Development, Education, Information Technology, Sports,
welfare of the tribes etc. are all life long issues which require regular
publicity. The advertisements on these issues should be brought out
at appropriate timings. According to the Committee, base issues being
attempted through Strategies and Approach Paper tend to be out of
place and time and do not leave the desired impact.
11. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the Ministry of I & B should plan the publicity well in advance

4
within the financial year and place their demand before the Planning
Commission based on sound and solid proposals from Ministries/
Departments.
B. ERC RECOMMENDATION WITH REGARD TO RELEASE OF
ADVERTISEMENTS
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
12. In their earlier Report the Committee had observed that
Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC) had given a recommendation
to amend Allocation of Business Rules thereby deleting the reference
relating to release of advertisements by various Ministries through
DAVP . However, according to the Government of India Allocation of
Business Rules, production and release of all display advertisements
of the Government of India through media and the Press, posters,
folders, Calendars leaflets, slides etc. should go through DAVP . The
Committee were disappointed to note that though Ministry of I & B
was not in favour of amending the Allocation of Business Rules as
recommended by ERC, there was lack of effort on their part in proper
implementation of Allocation of Business Rules. Neither any monitoring
mechanism existed to ensure that various Ministries/Departments had
been following these rules strictly and that no Ministry was releasing
advertisements outside DAVP nor were some effective steps taken to
curb such practices except writing to the Ministries on this aspect. The
Committee, therefore, desired that Ministry of I & B should set up a
monitoring mechanism to take note of instances where advertisements
were being released directly by the Ministries/Departments outside
DAVP . The Committee further desired to explore the possibility of
release of funds for such advertisements directly to DAVP instead of
to that Ministry which had sent the advertisement directly.
13. The Ministry of I & B in its action taken notes has stated as
follows:
DAVP has been co-ordinating the work related to issue of
advertisements on behalf of the Central Government and, in the process,
have acquired expertise in both preparation of material as also its
display in the media. The Directorate is able to secure favourable terms
from the Print Media and the benefits are being flown back to the
client Ministries/Departments & their subordinate offices.
The matter of routing advertisements of PSUs/Autonomous Bodies
under Government of India through DAVP had already been considered
in their deliberations by Central Economic Board, 1959, 158th Report
of Estimates Committee of Parliament, 47th Report of the Committee
on Public Undertakings, 173rd Report of PAC and the Committee of
Secretaries, 1991.

5
Further, the Committee of Secretaries, in their meeting on 19.02.1991
reiterated that all Ministries/Departments should generally use the
services of DAVP for their publicity requirements, but for their creative
advertisements the Ministries may engage specialised or other voluntary
agencies. However, they should go through DAVP for placing their
advertisements in their newspapers and other media.
The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2002) has
observed that ‘DAVP’ being the nodal and centralised agency caters to
the publicity requirements of the Central Ministries/Departments had
competitive rates, the Ministries publishing advertisements directly by
ignoring DAVP should not normally be allowed to do so as it may
entail extra expenditure.
However, if autonomous bodies of the Government of India choose
to release advertisements either directly or through advertising agencies
to publications, DAVP rates may not be automatically applicable to
them.
In pursuance of the recommendations of Standing Committee on
Information Technology (2002), Secretary (I & B) vide his D.O. Letter
No. 1/62/2001-MUC dated 1.7.2002 and dated 6.8.2002, addressed to
all Ministries/Departments/Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous
Bodies, has requested them to route their advertisement through DA VP ,
also advising them to issue appropriate directions to the chiefs of all
PSUs/autonomous bodies to continue to release the advertisements
through DAVP . Major publications, in due course would accept the
reality and co-operate with DA VP , provided, if all Ministries/
Departments and Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies
continue to release their advertisements through DAVP .
14. The Committee find that a lot of discussion has taken place
during the previous years to prevail upon the Ministries/Departments
to utilize the services of DA VP for their publicity requirements.
However, the Departments and PSUs prefer to violate the instructions
and place advertisements directly and do not route them through
DA VP .
15. The DA VP has no monitoring mechanism at present to keep
a check on the release of such advertisements and has also made no
commitment to the Committee for establishing any such monitoring
mechanism in their action taken reply to the recommendation of the
Committee except for issuing a D.O. letter requesting them to route
their advertisement requirements through DA VP . Simultaneously the
Committee urges DA VP to improve their response system and quality
of services to the various Departments of the Govt. in order to
become their first choice.

6
16. The Committee fail to understand as to why the Ministry is
soft pedaling the issue and why no effort is being made to keep a
track of Ministries/Departments violating the norms for
advertisements.
17. The Committee once again, stress upon the Ministry to set
up a monitoring cell which may keep track of violations. These
violations may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee. The
Committee also reiterate their desire to explore the possibility of
release of funds for such advertisements directly to DA VP instead
of to the Ministry which had sent the advertisements directly.
C. RECLASSIFICATION OF NEWSPAPERS
Recommendation (Para Nos. 58 & 59)
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee had found that the criteria
adopted by DAVP for classification of newspapers i.e. small newspapers
were those which were having a circulation of 25,000 copies, medium
newspapers were those which had circulation of 50,000 and big
newspapers were those which have a circulation of 75,000 copies had
not been revised since 1980 when the existing classification of
newspapers was done. The Committee observed that in 1980 it was
very difficult for the small and language newspapers to touch the
figure of even one lakh but now it would not be difficult for them to
attain this figure. Still these papers could not be put in the category
of leading newspapers.
19. The Committee was in agreement with the views of the Indian
Newspaper Society (INS) that classification of newspapers should be
done not only on the basis of their circulation, but revenue should
also be taken into consideration. Though small newspapers had grown
and fell in the category of big newspaper as per the present
classification, yet the revenue earned by these newspapers could not
be compared with really big newspapers as for instance the Times of
India. The Committee was surprised to note that no thought was given
to the need to revise the classification of newspapers. They desired
that in view of the phenomenal growth in the circulation of newspapers
during the last two decades, reclassification of newspapers should be
done immediately taking into consideration their circulation as well as
revenue earned by them.
20. The Ministry of I & B in its Action taken Notes has stated as
follows:
DAVP has already taken up consultations with RNI and newspaper
associations such as Indian Newspapers Society (INS), Indian Language

7
Newspapers Association (ILNA) and Indian Federation of Small &
Medium Newspapers on the issue.
21. The Committee note with satisfaction that DA VP has taken
up consultations with RNI and newspaper associations such as Indian
Newspapers Society (INS), Indian Language Newspapers Association
(ILNA) and Indian Federation of Small & Medium Newspapers on
the issue of reclassification of newspapers. The Committee hope that
consultation process would be taken up on priority basis so that
issue of reclassification of newspapers is decided at the earliest and
the Committee are informed of the final outcome.
D. DAVP ADVERTISEMENTS TO LOCAL NEWSPAPERS OF J & K
Recommendation (Para No. 65)
22. The Committee in their Report on “Working of DAVP” had
apprised the Ministry of I & B/DAVP that during their tour to Srinagar
in June, 2003 it was learnt that the local newspapers of Jammu and
Kashmir were not getting the DAVP advertisements. The Committee
did not approve such a discriminatory attitude of the Ministry of I &
B and desired that matter should be looked into urgently under
intimation to the Committee.
23. The Ministry of I & B in its Action Taken Notes has stated as
follows:
At present, DAVP has on its panel 13 dailies and 1 weekly
published from Jammu & Kashmir. The Advertisement Policy envisages
that a newspaper/journal should have a minimum paid circulation of
not less than 2000 copies per publishing day for empanelment, in case
of J & K it is only 500 copies. It is also laid down in the Policy that
Panel Advisory Committee (PAC) may make exceptions in respect of
print area on publications brought out from J & K. Once empanelled,
publications get advertisements from DAVP and preferences indicated
by clients are taken into account when advertisements are released
through DAVP .
24. The Committee observe that as per the Advertising Policy,
the minimum paid circulation per publishing day has been lowered
to 500 copies instead of 2000 copies for empanelment of newspapers
published in the State of J & K. However, the Committee would
like to know the number and amount of advertisements released in
local newspapers published from J & K during the last 3 years.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 48 & 49)
The Committee is unhappy to note that Directorate of Advertising
and Visual Publicity (DAVP) whose primary objective is to publicise
policies, programmes and achievements of various Ministries/
Departments of the Government through various media is starved of
funds which prevents it from playing an effective  role. DAVP does
not have sufficient funds even to publicise the aims and objectives of
an important policy document like ‘Tenth Five Year Plan’. Neither the
Tenth Five Year Plan has been translated nor it’s summary has been
brought out in various Indian languages to make the people aware of
the priorities of the Government, due to shortage of funds even though
the Tenth Plan has already commenced in April 2002. The Committee
is perturbed to learn from the Secretary, Ministry of I&B that it is
easier to get funds for visible items like equipment, buildings etc. but
extremely difficult to get the same for publicity of important events.
The Committee recommends that to make the DAVP play a meaningful
role and also to inform and educate the people of the developments
made, adequate funds be allocated to DAVP as per estimates submitted
by the Ministry of I&B to the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance.
The Secretary, I&B stated before the Committee that they themselves
had been conservative in placing the demands for more funds,
assuming that “it is no use asking for funds when we will not get
that”. The Committee believes that the estimates presented by he
Ministry of I&B to the Planning Commission regarding DAVP’s fund
requirements is extremely conservative. The Committee shares the views
of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting that there should be
sustained and long term planning to publicise programmes of the
Ministries to make the people aware of them and ensure their
cooperation and participation. The Committee desires that the Ministry
of I&B/DAVP should be proactive in its approach and revise their
projections and funds so as to meet the genuine needs of DAVP .
8

9
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry/DAVP is making efforts for realistic projection of
funds for publicity activities by DAVP . The Tenth Plan approved outlay
is Rs. 1500 lakhs which is more than 9th Plan outlay . However the
recommendations of the Committee have been noted regarding
projection of funds by DAVP to meet the genuine needs for publicity.
Recommendation (Para No. 57)
The Committee is perturbed to note that a full page advertisement
on acquisition of small piece of land was published in an English
paper from Chennai and its several other editions published from
different places. The road building department run by the Government
of India had released the advertisement. This is an aberration of the
Advertisement Policy and requires immediate attention of the Ministry
of I&B. The Committee considers it to be mere wastage of Government
funds. It desires that in future, proper care should be taken so as to
ensure that such advertisements are published only in language
newspapers of that area/region.
Action Taken by the Government
Though DAVP , while releasing advertisements takes into account
the preferences indicated by clients, DAVP has noted the observation
of the Committee and will make further efforts for cost effective
utilization of resources.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 58 & 59)
The Committee finds that the criteria adopted for classification of
newspapers i.e. small newspapers are those which have a circulation
of 25,000 copies, medium newspapers are those which have circulation
of 50,000 copies and big newspapers are those which have a circulation
of 75,000 copies has not been revised since 1980. With the phenomenal
growth in the circulation of newspapers during the last two decades,
the Committee is of the opinion and criteria for classification of
newspapers needs immediate revision.
The existing clarification of newspapers was done in 1980 when it
was very difficult for the small and language newspapers to touch the
figure of even one lakh. At present it is not difficult for them to attain
this figure. But still these papers cannot be put in the category of

10
leading newspapers. Over the years, the whole concept of newspaper
classification has changed. The Indian Newspaper Society (INS) has
suggested that classification of newspapers should be done not only
on the basis of their circulation, but revenue should also be taken into
consideration. Though small newspapers have grown and fall in the
category of big newspaper as per the present classification, yet the
revenue earned by these newspapers cannot be compared with really
big newspapers as for instance the Times of India. The Committee
shares the concern of INS in this respect. The Committee is surprised
to note that no thought has so far been given to the need to revise the
classifications of newspapers. The Committee is of the view that
reclassification of newspapers should be attempted.
Action Taken by the Government
DAVP has already taken up consultations with RNI and newspaper
associations such as Indian Newspapers Society (INS), Indian Language
Newspapers Association (ILNA) and Indian Federation of Small &
Medium Newspapers on the issue.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 21 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 60 & 61)
The Committee notes that during 2001-02, DAVP was unable to
achieve the physical targets. The physical targets for outdoor publicity,
printed publicity, exhibitions, and advertisements were kept at 300,
209, 450 and 21,500; whereas the achievements remained 288, 198, 329
and 17,787 respectively. Even though the shortfall is marginal in the
case of outdoor and printed publicity, it is quite disquieting in the
case of exhibitions and newspapers advertisements. The Committee is
not convinced by the reason given by the Director, DAVP that though
physical targets could not be met, the financial targets were achieved.
The Committee is of the view that utilization of the financial allocations
without fulfillment of the physical targets indicates that there has been
some lacunae in the planning process. The plea given by the Secretary,
Ministry of I&B that generally it would be true but in case of publicity,
the measurement of output would be little difficult, does not hold
good in case of an organization like DAVP which claims to have gained
expertise over the years in publicity.

11
The Committee further notes that during 2002-03, the targets were
more or less achieved. However, it has been so by lowering them or
when kept at the level of the previous year. The targets for the year
2002-03 for outdoor publicity, printed publicity, exhibitions, audio-visual
publicity and advertisements had been 300, 208, 450, 5500 and 16450
and during the year 2001-02 these were 300, 209, 450, 5600 and 21500
respectively. The Committee finds that there was no growth in the
various activities of the DAVP in 2002-2003. It would like to be apprised
of the reasons for this stagnation.
Action Taken by the Government
Publicity jobs undertaken by DAVP are from client Ministries/
Departments who mostly pay for them. The number of advertisements,
printed publicity jobs etc. depend upon the requirements of DAVP’s
clients, availability of funds etc. DAVP’s performance is further
constrained due to staff shortage occurring in the wake of
recommendations of Expenditure Reforms Commission. However, the
concern expressed by the Standing Committee regarding shortfall in
achievement of targets particularly for exhibitions and newspapers
advertisements has been noted. This will be kept in view while setting
targets and steps will be taken to achieve it. In fact, achievements in
respect of newspaper advertisements and exhibitions have already
shown improvement. The number of advertisements released by DAVP
has increased from 18,397 during 2002-03 to 20,485 advertisements
during 2003-04. The number of exhibitions organized during 2002-03
and 2003-04 were 497 and 581 respectively against the target of
450 exhibitions in each year. It will be constant endeavor of DAVP to
further improve in these areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 62)
The Committee notes that DAVP has 35 filed units in it’s Exhibition
Wing. The target was kept constant to hold 450 exhibitions during
each of the last three years and hence no growth. As the exhibitions
are being held in interior places, there is a need for holding more
exhibitions. The Committee feels that in a country like India, there are
many important national issues and people should also know about
the important developments such as the problem of terrorism, problem
of AIDS and other such issues. Efforts should be made to ensure that

12
more exhibitions are held at prescribed periodicity so that the proper
message gets percolated effectively to masses. Exhibitions at schools/
colleges in the interior areas should also be held.
Action Taken by the Government
DAVP usually covers rural areas and interior places whenever it
organizes exhibition programmes, particularly through its mobile van
units. The Directorate has prepared a set on AIDS for NACO for vide
display in various parts of the country. In addition, there are other
socially relevant themes like ‘Healthy Mother Healthy Child’ and
‘Women’s Empowerment’ on which exhibitions are regularly organized.
The Committee’s recommendations to organize exhibitions at schools/
colleges in the interior areas has been noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 63)
The Committee would like to know whether DAVP has ever sought
the help of voluntary organizations working in the rural/semi-urban
areas for holding exhibitions or asked them to organize the exhibition
themselves if publicity materials were provided to them or sought
their assistance in identifying problems of an area. There are a large
number of non-governmental voluntary organizations engaged in
various activities for the upliftment of masses, spread of literacy,
environment and health beside eradication of social evils. Their
involvement and active associations will be of great help in achieving
the desirable results.
Action Taken by the Government
Exhibition unit of DAVP has put up many exhibitions in
collaboration with voluntary organizations and non-government
organizations. Their support is crucial in selection of venue for publicity.
Some of the units are regular participants in melas/fairs etc. organized
by voluntary organizations/non-government organizations. Publicity
materials brought out by DAVP are widely distributed on such
occasions. Some organizations have also been provided with exhibition
kits to organize exhibitions on their own.
Recommendation (Para No. 64)
The Committee is unhappy to note that newspapers and periodicals
had to wait for several years to receive payments of their advertisements

13
bills and in some cases payment of the bills was not made for more
than a decade, as a result, arrears accumulated into crores of rupees.
The Committee notes that DAVP has vigorously pursued the matter
with the various Ministries/Departments and autonomous bodies for
release of money for payment of pending bills. Moreover, the whole
system of payment to newspapers for advertisements has been
computerised and made transparent. The Committee hopes that DAVP
would make every effort to make timely payment of advertisement
bills.
Action Taken by the Government
DAVP has already introduced electronic clearing system for settling
bills and efforts are being made to widen the scope of the system.
Client Ministries are also being persuaded to pay the outstanding
amount in respect of expenditure incurred on advertisements.
Recommendation (Para No. 65)
The Committee, during its study tour of Srinagar learnt that the
local newspapers of Jammu and Kashmir were not getting the DAVP
advertisements. The Committee takes a serious view of this
discriminatory attitude and desires the Ministry of I&B/DAVP to look
into the matter urgently. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the facts in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
At present, DAVP has on its panel 13 dailies and 1 weekly
published from Jammu & Kashmir. The Advertisement Policy envisages
that a newspaper/journal should have a minimum paid circulation of
not less than 2000 copies per publishing day for empanelment, in case
of J&K it is only 500 copies. It is also laid down in the Policy that
Panel Advisory Committee (PAC) may make exceptions in respect of
print area on publications brought out from J&K. Once empanelled,
publications get advertisements from DAVP and preferences indicated
by clients are taken into account when advertisements are released
through DAVP .
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 24 of Chapter I)

14
Recommendation (Para No. 66)
It is disquieting to note that 98 percent of the classified
advertisements are not published in the periodicals at all. Only two
percent of the display advertisements are going both to the newspapers
and the periodicals. No doubt, advertisements, other then display, which
include recruitment advertisements of UPSC/SSC, tenders, admission
notice, results etc. because of their nature, cannot be given in periodicals
because they come to market at least a week in advance of their
scheduled date yet, the Committee feels that advertisements on various
campaigns which are not day specific can justifiably be given to
periodicals. The Committee hopes that the DAVP will look into the
matter.
Action Taken by the Government
Most of the clients who release their advertisements through DAVP
want their advertisements released in dailies and only very rarely in
periodicals. Even in the case of non-day-specific advertisements, the
tendency among clients is to go in for dailies. However, DAVP has
noted the observation of the Committee and will continue to persuade
its clients to release their advertisements in periodicals also.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
The Committee notes that the rates for advertisement approved by
the DAVP have been revised from time to time. The rates were revised
in the year 1975, 1976, 1995, 1999 and recently with effect from
1 October 2002. Every time rates were revised, it was preceded by
discussions with various newspaper bodies and suggestions were
sought regarding fixation of rates for advertisements. However, there
has been consistent demand for card rates. The Committee notes that
the report given by Rate Structure Committee (RSC) constituted in
September, 2001 has become effective from 1 October, 2002. The
Committee understands that further rates revision would be on the
basis of escalation formula. The Committee hopes that the report
submitted by the Rate Structure Committee will meet the expectations
of various newspaper bodies. The card rates should be a tool to ensure
growth of print media as a whole. Thus, it should leave sufficient
margins to newspapers and periodicals.
Action Taken by the Government
The Rate Structure Committee constituted by the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting before starting its deliberations, had
requested individual newspapers as well as newspaper associations to
make available the detailed break up of card rates and how these card
rates were determined, what factors were taken into account while
revising the card rates and how much weightage was given to various
components. No details/break up, however, were made available to
the Committee on card rates except the general statement that name/
frame and circulation play a major role in determination of card rates.
The Committee also observed that various discounts were being offered
to customers on the card rates. However, details and the methodology
of determining the actual discount on card rates were not made
available to the Committee. It was in view of this that the Committee
felt that card rates could not form a reasonable, fair and rational basis
15

16
for DAVP advertisement rate determination. The Committee’s task, as
observed in the Report, was to evolve a normative and uniform rate
structure for DAVP advertisements. The Committee did not subscribe
to the view that the loss, if any, in the cover price realization over and
above the cost of the newspaper should be subsidized by the
Government. The volume of space devoted to advertisements/news
varies from newspapers and also from time to time depending mainly
on the availability of advertisements. The rate structure formula arrived
at is expected to hold good for a reasonable period of time. The
Committee was of the opinion that such a rate structure could not be
formed on the basis of varying factors such as shifting percentages of
space devoted to advertisements/news, operational losses, readership
profile—which is extremely difficult to verify—and other factors like
percentage of advertisement revenue to the total revenue etc.
It may also be mentioned here that in respect of certain objections
raised at different for a and through representations, the rates
recommended by the Rate Structure Committee and effective from
1st October, 2002 have generally been accepted by all newspapers.
Recommendation (Para No. 56)
The Committee notes that during 2000-01, 3.81 percent of the total
amount of advertisement was given to small newspapers, 17.83 percent
to medium newspapers and 78.36 percent to big newspapers. In the
following year i.e., 2001-02, share of small, medium and big newspapers
in the total amount of advertisement was 4.80 per cent, 16.10 per cent
and 79.10 per cent respectively. Further during 2002-03, 7.39 per cent
of the total amount of advertisement was given to the small
newspapers, 19.35 per cent to the medium newspapers and 73.27 per
cent to the big newspapers. It is thus clear that small and medium
newspapers are not getting the fair share of the amount spent on
advertisements by the Government during the last 3 years. The
Committee is of the view that basic thrust of the Advertisement Policy
is not taken seriously by the DAVP and no efforts have been made to
encourage small and medium newspapers.
Action Taken by the Government
It is true that the share of small and medium newspapers in the
amount spent on advertisements by the Government is less than the
share of amount released to big newspapers. This is because DAVP
rates are determined on the basis of circulation figures. Thus, the basic

17
rate for circulation up to 5,000 in the first slab is only Rs. 3.73 per col.
cm., whereas for circulation from 95,001 to 1,00,000 is Rs. 74.62 per
col. cm. In 2001-2002, the committed figure of expenditure on
advertisements for small and medium category of newspapers
numbering 1909 was Rs. 18,52,22,464 which formed 20.90% of the total
expenditure. During the same period, the amount released to big
newspapers was Rs. 70,10,33,912 which formed 79.10% of the total
commitment although their number was only 173. Total insertions
during the period in small and medium category stood at 92,170 which
was 59.41% of total insertions occupying 59.58% of total space. The
big category of newspapers got only 40.49% of total insertions and
40.42% of total space even though the amount released to them was
bigger. During the period 1.4.2003 to 2.2.2004, DA VP had on its panel
2332 publications belonging to the small and medium categories which
got 69.64% of total advertisement space and 64.50% of total insertions.
However in monetary terms, only 33.02% of the total amount was
released towards advertisement charges to them. In the big category,
although there was only 170 publications on panel, 66.98% of the total
amount released was bagged by them; spacewise, only 30.36% of the
total space was given to these publications and the percentage of
insertions stood at 35.50%.
Also, the clients show a preference for a media list predominantly
consisting of big newspapers. DAVP has, however, been trying to
include small and medium newspapers so that government’s policies
and programmes are publicized in semi-urban and rural areas.
DAVP on its own, in addition to the three mandatory
advertisements released to all newspapers on its panel on Independence
Day, Republic Day and Gandhi Jayanti has endeavoured to release
advertisements exclusively to small and medium newspapers in
connection with Shaheed Diwas (Martyrdom of Bhagat Singh),
Ambedkar Jayanti and Birth Anniversary of Sardar Patel.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee desires that the entire publicity at the national
level for various media units under the Ministry of I & B should be
planned will in advance, in consultation with the Ministries concerned
and accordingly, the matter should be taken up with the Planning
Commission for release of sufficient funds. Publicity of such
programmes should be done through the various media. Intensity of
these publicity campaigns should be built up gradually through the
media for getting the desired results.
Action Taken by the Government
All Campaign Officers of DAVP have been instructed to get in
touch with the client Ministries/Departments and finalise the publicity
needs in advance.
Ministry of I&B has been consulting various Ministries/
Departments for their requirements for publicity of their schemes/
policies through its various media units. Secretary (I & B) had held
meetings during January, 2003 with the officers of various social sector
Ministries/Departments such as Health, Rural Development, Social
Justice & Empowerment, Urban Empowerment & Poverty Alleviation,
Family Welfare etc. and the officers of Media Units of I & B and
Planning Commission to work out strategies for effective publicity of
their 10th Plan schemes. The Ministries/Departments informed about
the important schemes/policies/themes, which they wanted to publicise
through media units of M/o I & B. Based on their inputs/suggestions,
a “Communication Strategy” was prepared to effectively communicate
government schemes to the people for mobilising their support. The
“Communication Strategy” was sent to PMO for consideration.
Similar meetings were held by Secretary (I & B) with the officers
of M/o HRD, Health and Family Welfare and the media units of
M/o I & B to evolve a strategy for educating masses on health, hygiene
18

19
and literacy. Representatives from private sector were also invited in
the meetings to have their suggestions/inputs. A Task Force was set
up under the Chairmanship of a faculty member of Indian Institute of
Mass Communication (IIMC) for preparing an “Approach Paper” to
outline the strategy for creating a truly extensive mass movement
persuading people to take active steps to improve their health, hygiene,
educational and literacy status. The Approach Paper so prepared has
been forwarded to Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
for approval.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para Nos. 8, 9, 10 & 11 of Chapter I.)
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Committee learnt that Expenditure Reforms Commission
(ERC) has also recommended that Allocation of Business Rules of
the Government should be amended and reference relating to release
of advertisements by various Ministries through DA VP should be
deleted. The Committee notes that according to the Government of
India Allocation of Business Rules, production and release of all
display advertisements of the Government of India through media
and the Press, posters, folders, Calendars leaflets, slides etc. should
go through DA VP . The Committee regrets to note that though
Ministry of I & B  is not in favour of amending the Allocation of
Business Rules as recommended by ERC, there is lack of efforts on
their part for its proper implementation. There does not exist any
monitoring mechanism to ensure that various Ministries/Departments
follow the Allocation of Business Rules strictly and that no Ministry
release advertisements outside DA VP . Even after the Ministry of I&B
has come across such instances, no effective steps have been taken
to curb such practices except writing to the Ministries on this aspect.
The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry of I&B to set up
a monitoring mechanism to take note of instances in which
advertisements are released directly by the Ministries/Departments
outside DA VP . The possibility of release of funds for such
advertisements directly to DA VP instead of that Ministry which has
sent the advertisement directly, should be explored.
Action Taken by the Government
DAVP has been co-ordinating the work related to issue of
advertisements on behalf of the Central Government and, in the process,
have acquired expertise in both preparation of material as also its

20
display in the media. The Directorate is able to secure favourable terms
from the Print Media and the benefits are being flown back to the
client Ministries/Departments & their subordinate offices.
The matter of routing advertisements of PSUs/Autonomous Bodies
under Government of India through DAVP had already been considered
in their deliberations by Central Economic Board, 1959, 158th Report
of Estimates Committee of Parliament, 47th Report of the Committee
on Public Undertakings, 173rd Report of PAC and the Committee of
Secretaries, 1991.
Further, the Committee of Secretaries, in their meeting on 19.02.1991
reiterated that all Ministries/Departments should generally use the
services of DAVP for their publicity requirements, but for their creative
advertisements the Ministries may engage specialised or other voluntary
agencies. However, they should go through DAVP for placing their
advertisements in their newspapers and other media.
The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2002) has
observed that ‘DAVP’ being the nodal and centralised agency caters to
the publicity requirements of the Central Ministries/Departments had
competitive rates, the Ministries publishing advertisements directly by
ignoring DAVP should not normally be allowed to do so as it may
entail extra expenditure.
However, if autonomous bodies of the Government of India choose
to release advertisements either directly or through advertising agencies
to publications, DAVP rates may not be automatically applicable to
them.
In pursuance of the recommendations of Standing Committee on
Information Technology (2002), Secretary (I&B) vide his D.O. Letter
No. 1/62/2001-MUC dated 1.7.2002 and dated 6.8.2002, addressed to
all Ministries/Departments/Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous
Bodies, has requested them to route their advertisement through DA VP ,
also advising them to issue appropriate directions to the chiefs of all
PSUs/Autonomous Bodies to continue to release the advertisements
through DAVP . Major publications, in due course would accept the
reality and co-operate with DA VP , provided, if all Ministries/
Departments and Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies
continue to release their advertisements through DAVP .
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para Nos. 14, 15, 16 & 17 of Chapter I.)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
21

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 25 November, 2004 from
1100 hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room No. G-074, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Sohan Potai
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
12. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
14. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
22

23
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with certain
amendments/modifications:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its Fifty-Seventh Report on “Working of Directorate of
Advertising and Visual Publicity (DA VP)” relating Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting.
(vi) *** *** ***
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a weekend Study
tour to Chandigarh and Amritsar on 17 and 18 December, 2004.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above mentioned Reports to the House.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 48, 49, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63,
64, 65 and 66
Total 12
Percentage 75%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 55 and 56
Total 2
Percentage 12.5%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 52 and 53
Total 2
Percentage 12.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total Nil
Percentage Nil
24