STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF
INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)
68


SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF
INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 February, 2009
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16 February, 2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 201
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2009 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Justification/Urgency of the Amendment ............................... 2
III. Rewording of the existing Proviso ........................................... 5
IV. Possible Misuse of the Amendment......................................... 7
V. Interpretation of the Amendment............................................. 8
VI. Qualifications prescribed for other regulatory Bodies ........ 9
VII. Need for separate qualifications for the Chairperson
vis-à-vis the member of TRAI as in TDSAT ........................... 13
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ............................................... 17
ANNEXURE
The Telecom Regulatory Authority (Amendment)
Bill, 2008 ......................................................................................... 26
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee
(2008-2009) held on 12 January, 2009 ........................... 31
II. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee
(2008-2009) held on 12 January, 2009 ........................... 33
III. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee
(2008-2009) held on 9 February, 2009 ........................... 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2008-2009)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
17. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
(iii)
* Vice Shri Badiga Ramakrishna, M.P . ceased to be a member of the Committee. w.e.f. 26
August, 2008.

(iv)
18. Shri P.C. Thomas
19. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
**20. Shri Errabelli Dayakar Rao
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Dr. C.P. Thakur
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
** Nominated w.e.f. 6 October, 2008.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2008-2009), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-eighth Report on ‘The Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008’ relating to the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Telecommunications).
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2008
and referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker in consultation with
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for examination and report by 31 January,
2009. The Committee obtained the background note and detailed written
replies from the Department of Telecommunications. They also received
suggestions from the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. The
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India and the Department of Telecommunications
on 12 January, 2009. During the course of oral evidence, the representatives
of the Department on being informed about certain infirmities in the
proposed Bill, agreed to get them reexamined by the Ministry of Law
& Justice. As the necessary clarification from the Ministry of Law &
Justice was not forwarded by the Department of Telecommunications to
the Lok Sabha Secretariat in time, the Committee had to seek extension
of time upto to 18 February, 2009 for the finalisation and presentation
of the Report. The Hon’ble Speaker was kind enough to grant extension
of time upto 16 February, 2009 for presentation of the Report.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 9 February, 2009.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Telecommunications & Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
the information in connection with the examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
12 February, 2009 Chairman,
23 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

REPORT
I. Introductory
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) is a statutory
body set up by the Government of India under Section 3 of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997. The Authority consists of a
Chairperson and not more than two full time members and not more
than two part time members. Section 4 of the TRAI Act, 1997 deals with
the qualifications prescribed for the appointment of the Chairperson and
other members of TRAI. The existing Section 4 of the TRAI Act states
as follows:—
“The Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be
appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons who
have special knowledge of, and professional experience in,
telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law, management
or consumer affairs.
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of
Government shall not be appointed as a member unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post
of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of India
or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State
Government for a period of not less than three years.”
2. The proposed Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 relates to the amendment of the proviso of Section
4 of the TRAI Act, 1997. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on
15 December, 2008 and referred to the Committee for examination and
report. The Committee, in the process of examination of the Bill called
for preliminary materials and written replies from the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications) and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
The Committee also took evidence and heard the views of the
representatives of the Department and TRAI. Having examined the Bill
in detail and after broaching upon the proposed amendment, the
Committee have given their considered opinion on several facets of the
proposed amendment.

II. Justification/Urgency of the Amendment
3. As stated earlier the existing proviso under Section 4 of the
TRAI Act, 1997 says as follows:—
“Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of
Government shall not be appointed as a member unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post
of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of India
or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State
Government for a period of not less than three years”.
4. The Government now propose to reword the proviso under
Section 4 as follows:—
“Provided that a person, who is in the service of the Government
or has retired from such service on attaining the age of
superannuation, shall not be appointed as a member unless such
person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to
the Government of India, or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government, for a period of not less than
three years”.
5. DoT have further stated that earlier during the course of selection
of member, TRAI, a person selected by the Selection Committee constituted
for the purpose was not considered to be eligible as the person had
resigned from the Government service at a distant point of time and was
not holding the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, etc., as per the
qualifications prescribed for the post. The matter was, therefore, examined
by the Government of India and it was observed that it would be
unreasonable to expect that a candidate who has served the Central
Government at a distant point of time in the past, even for short durations,
would be ineligible only for the reason of his not having held the post
at the appropriate levels at the Centre. This would place him at a
disadvantage vis-à-vis other candidates who might not be equally well
endowed in the matter of qualifications and experience, but at the same
time did not have the disability by reason merely of having served the
Government. In case, the provisions in the Act, inflicted a disability which
could be considered as unreasonable and having no nexus with the object
of finding an appropriate person to be appointed to the post in question,
it was considered best that the provision of the Act was amended
appropriately. The Government, therefore, felt the need to amend the
proviso in the existing Section 4 of the TRAI Act, 1997 in order to remove
the inconsistency or anomaly in the qualifications of the Chairperson and
other members of TRAI.
2

6. Justifying the intentions/need of the amendment, the Secretary,
DoT submitted during the oral evidence on 12 January, 2009:—
“Sir, this particular amendment has a very specific intention. Its
specific intention being that for somebody who has not been in the
Government service, there is no problem. His selection will depend
on his professional qualification and experience in law, finance,
accountancy, telecommunication, management, whatever it is.
However, if I had been a Government servant and supposing after
ten years of service, I have left the Government service and then
become sort of a Professor in an Indian Institute of Management,
I cannot become eligible for consideration because I was in the
Government and not attained this position of Additional Secretary
or Secretary. But now with this amendment I will become eligible.
It is only to facilitate”.
7. Asked to elucidate further, the witness stated:—
“ Actually we are making it more liberal. Now, these days there
have been young officers who have been joining the IAS for five
or six years and then decide to leave it and now-a-days unlike our
times a lot of management and engineering graduates are getting
into the Service and many of them are professionally qualified than
people at our times, when most of the people had done B.A. or
M.A. and used to get in. So, they have relatively more opportunities
to work outside the Government as they may at some point of time
decide to go and do a Ph.D in Harvard and then come back and
become a professor. So, he becomes ineligible, if he wants to join”.
8. He further added:—
“……….In order to make such people eligible, we are making this
amendment. If, in future, such people get interested and come
forward and if they are found eligible and selected, they should
not be debarred only because they have left Government service
at some point of time and have excelled somewhere else”.
9. The Committee then desired to be apprised of the number of
persons who were selected by the Selection Committee but were not
considered eligible for appointment as Chairperson and members of TRAI
under the existing Section 4 since the inception of the TRAI Act, 1997
for which the Government intended to bring in the proposed amendment.
In reply, it was stated by DoT that only one such person selected by the
Selection Committee was not considered eligible under the existing
Section 4 since the inception of the TRAI Act.
3

10. The Committee asked about the circumstances that led to the
non-appointment of the person in question even after being selected by
the Selection Committee. The Committee further queried whether the
proposed amendment was justified just because one person was denied
appointment as Chairperson/member of TRAI in last more than one
decade. In reply, it was stated by DoT that the person in question was
an ITS Officer who served the Government of India as Deputy Director
General, a Joint Secretary level post from June 1996 to September, 1998.
After leaving the Government Service, he joined a Public Sector
Undertaking, became the CMD of a Telecom PSU from November, 2002
to February, 2007 and retired from that organization in 2007. He applied
for the post of member, TRAI and was selected by the Selection Committee
three years back in 2006 taking his experience in the telecommunications
field into account. He could not, however, be appointed due to the
ambiguity in the qualifications for selection to the post of member, TRAI
as per the requirement under the proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI
Act, 1997. This was examined by the Government and it was felt that
the existing proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI Act, 1997 inflicted a disability
which could be considered as unreasonable having no nexus with the
object of finding an appropriate person to be appointed to the said post.
The proposed amendment was, therefore, necessary so that other eligible
persons would not be denied the opportunity.
11. Justifying the proposed amendment notwithstanding the
number of persons denied appointment in the last decade, the Secretary,
DoT submitted in evidence:—
“There may not be too many cases like that who have left the
Government Service. Now of course too many people leave the
Government Service and then join other professions and get
interested in a job like this……………”
12. When the Committee desired to know whether any consultation
was made with the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India before the
Government brought the proposed amendment, the Authority submitted
that the subject matter of the reference related to the qualification, etc.
for appointment of the Authority itself, was based on the Amendment
Bill introduced by the Department of Telecommunications and no
consultation was made with the TRAI earlier.
13. Asked to state categorically whether the amendment was
required at all, the Chairman, TRAI submitted during oral evidence on
12th January, 2009:—
“This is required if we can improve upon it”.
4

14. In the same context, the Chairman, TRAI further stated:—
“……We have sent a proposal for comprehensive amendment of
the TRAI Act in 2006…..At least let our proposal be examined……”
15. When the Committee desired to know from the Department
of Telecommunications the status of the amendments to the TRAI Act,
1997 proposed by the Authority in 2006, it was replied that the Chairman,
TRAI had sent a comprehensive proposal of various amendments to TRAI
Act in July 2006 to address various issues relating mainly to more
operational freedom to TRAI and administration of broadcasting services.
The proposal was examined in the Department of Telecommunications
(DoT) and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Department
of Expenditure (DoE) in the Ministry of Finance were requested to provide
their comments in September 2006.
16. Before the Department received any comments from the
Ministry of I&B and DoE, the Chairman, TRAI sent a revised proposal
for amendment of TRAI Act in February, 2007. The revised proposal
included new amendments as well as modification of previously suggested
amendments. The revised proposal was examined afresh in the
Department and sent for comments of the Ministry of I&B, DoE and the
Ministry of Law once again in June, 2007. The concerned Ministries/
Departments sought information/clarification on the proposal and the
same were provided to them.
17. In the meantime, the Chairman, TRAI sent further revised
comprehensive proposals in March, 2008 for amendments of the TRAI
Act based on the experience of the recent past. The proposals were again
examined in the Department. The Committee were further informed that
the Department pursued vigorously for comments of the concerned
Ministries/Departments. The proposals have been considered vis-à-vis
the comments of the concerned Ministries/Departments and a draft cabinet
note for consideration of the proposal for various amendments of TRAI
Act was being prepared and likely to be circulated by the month end
(January, 2009).
III. Rewording of the existing Proviso
18. After a scrutiny of the proposed amendment, the Committee
desired to be apprised of the exact difference that the intended rewording
of the line “who is in the service of Government or has retired from such
service on attaining the age of superannuation” would make to the existing
line “who is or has been in the service of Government”. In reply, the DoT
stated that as per the existing provisions, once any candidate had served
5

the Government, he would be ineligible for the post unless he had held
the post of Additional Secretary or Secretary or Additional Secretary and
Secretary for a period of not less than three years. In the proposed
amendment the rewording would restrict the condition only in case of
that candidate who is in the service or who has retired from such service
on attaining the age of superannuation. The restriction would, however,
not be applicable to those Government servants who had retired or
resigned from service prior to attaining the age of superannuation.
19. Asked to indicate the extent to which it would facilitate
induction of more suitable personnel and also augment the impartial
functioning of the Authority, the DoT replied that the proposed
amendment was expected to remove the anomaly and inconsistency in
the qualifications of the Chairperson and other members of TRAI as it
would remove a disability of not being eligible for the post of such
candidate who had served the Government at a distant point of time in
the past, even for short durations, for reason of his not having held the
post at the appropriate levels in the Government but later on while being
in the Government Service or after leaving the Government Service had
excelled in the field of telecommunication, industry, finance, law, etc. As
such, the Selection Committee would have wider choice to find more
suitable personnel for the post of Chairperson and other members of
TRAI. The DoT further stated that this should have the effect of
augmenting the impartial functioning of the Authority.
20. During evidence, the Committee asked the representatives of
the DoT to explain how the rewording of the existing proviso under
Section 4 of the TRAI Act would address the existing ambiguities. In
reply, the Secretary, DoT stated that if somebody had left the Government
service before attaining the age of superannuation, then he would not
be eligible as per the extant provision. The proposed amendment
addressed that infirmity and would render him eligible.
21. Not satisfied, the Committee queried whether the proposed
amendment could be reworded properly to foster transparency as well
as to avoid litigations. In reply, the Secretary, DoT stated:—
“We will consult the Law Department again…………I would request
the Law Secretary to put somebody more responsible. We will rectify
it………..I will get it examined by the Law Ministry once again”.
22. The Secretary, DoT further assured that after having obtained
the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice, the DoT would intimate
the Committee accordingly. After persistent follow up, the Department
reverted back to the Committee stating that the Ministry of Law and
6

Justice (Legislative Department) have examined the issue and indicated
that the said Bill has been properly drafted taking care of the
administrative policy of this Ministry to remove the disability pointed
out. Therefore, it appears that the language of clause 2 of the Bill does
not require any modification. The Department have further stated that
according to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
the Statement of Objects and Reasons states the existing inconsistency/
disability arising out of the existing proviso to Section 4 of the said Act.
The said proviso is being substituted in the said Bill to remove the said
inconsistency/disability. Accordingly, para 3 of the Statement of Objects
and Reasons is in consonance with the provisions of the said Bill.
IV. Possible Misuse of the Amendment
23. Giving his opinion on the justification of the proposed
amendment and its likely misuse, the Chairman, TRAI while tendering
evidence before the Committee, stated:—
“………….Let us take a situation where a person has worked in
Government for two years, and then he has gone abroad and got
education and become a great expert, he can not be selected by the
present Section because he has held the post in Government. Since
he has held the post in Government, he will not be considered.
Now, by this amendment the Government has tried to do away
with that. But the way it has been done, it has opened up a little
bit of floodgates for likely misuse in future”.
24. Asked to state the way the proposed amendment could be
misused, the Chairman, TRAI submitted:—
“…………in the process we feel that a bigger problem has been
given to the posterity because now it could be that a person who
may have been Under Secretary-if I want to help him, I can say
that no disqualification for this Under Secretary and I will consider
him in that category of expert and I will select him. Now he becomes
let us say Chairman or member. There is a possibility of
misuse…………….”
25. On being asked to suggest ways and means to avoid the possible
misuse of the proposed amendment, the Chairman, TRAI stated that in
order to avoid possible misuse, the qualifications for the post of Chairman
of the Authority should be a Secretary to the Government of India or
any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government
for a period of not less than two years or from amongst persons who
have special knowledge of and professional experience in the fields of
7

telecommunications, industry, finance, law etc. For the post of members
of the Authority, he suggested that they should have been Secretary or
Additional Secretary or Additional Secretary and Secretary for a period
of not less than two years or experts in the above mentioned fields.
V. Interpretation of the Amendment
26. Pointing out the rewording of the line, “……………unless such
person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary………..”
in place of the corresponding existing line “……….unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post of
Additional Secretary and Secretary………..”, the Committee asked whether
an Additional Secretary, serving or retired could become the Chairperson
of TRAI who is of Cabinet Secretary rank. In reply, the Department of
Telecommunications stated that an Additional Secretary with not less
than three years of service in the grade, serving or retired could become
the Chairperson/member of TRAI as per the proposed amendment as
well as the existing provision.
27. In such an event, the Committee asked whether there would
not be discontentment amongst the eligible Secretary and equivalent level
Officers. In reply, it was stated that experience showed that no such
situation had been faced by the Government.
28. Drawing the attention of the Department to their reply that the
restriction i.e. not less than three years of service in the post of Additional
Secretary or Secretary would not be applicable to those Government
servants who have retired or resigned from service prior to attaining the
age of superannuation, the Committee queried whether the restriction
would not be applicable even to the Officers of the rank of Under Secretary/
Deputy Secretary/Director/Joint Secretary who have taken voluntary
retirement or resigned from the Government service. The Department
replied in the affirmative and stated that theoretically such a situation
regarding consideration of Officers below the rank of Additional Secretary
would be possible. The Department further stated that, the Search
Committee would, however, be relied upon to select the persons of
appropriate stature and experience so that the above situation would
not arise.
29. During evidence, the Secretary, DoT throwing more light on
the three years service in Secretary/Additional Secretary grades restriction
imposed through the proviso, stated:—
“It is only for the Government service, so that Joint Secretary or
Director level Officers are not considered”.
8

30. Asked to state the rationale for not considering the Joint
Secretary/Director level Officers who might otherwise be competent/expert
in the fields of telecommunication, finance, law etc., he replied:—
“There needs to be some criteria for the Selection Committee to
consider from the applications. The number of applications will
become in thousands. It is because these are senior level
appointments”.
VI. Qualifications prescribed for other Regulatory Bodies
31. When the Committee desired to know about the details of
qualifications prescribed for appointment of Chairperson and
members of other Regulatory Bodies, the following information was
furnished:—
Sl.
No.
Name of
Regulatory
Body
Name of the
Post/
Constitution of
the Regulatory
Body
Qualifications for appointment
1. Securities and
Exchange
Board of India
(SEBI)
Insurance _
Regulatory and
Development
Authority (IRDA)
Chairman and
two other
members (shall
be appointed by
the Central
Government)
Two members
(shall be
nominated by
the Central
Government)
One member
(shall be
nominated by
the Reserve
Bank of India)
Chairperson and
members (shall
be appointed by
the Central
Government)
Persons of ability, integrity and
standing who have shown capacity in
dealing with problems relating to
securities market or have special
knowledge or experience of law,
finance, economics, accountancy,
administration or in any other
discipline which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, shall be useful
to the Board.
From amongst the officials of the
Ministries of the Central Government
dealing with Finance and Law.
From amongst the officials of the
Reserve Bank of India.
From amongst persons of ability,
integrity and standing who have
knowledge or experience in life
insurance, general insurance, actuarial
science, finance, economics, law,
2.
12 3 4
9

accountancy, administration or any
other discipline which would, in the
opinion of the Central Government, be
useful to the Authority.
Provided that the Central Government
shall, while appointing the
Chairperson and the whole time
members, ensure that at least one
person each is a person having
knowledge or experience in life
insurance, general insurance or
actuarial science, respectively.
From amongst persons of ability,
integrity and standing who have
knowledge of, and adequate
experience and capacity in, dealing
with problems relating to engineering,
finance, commerce, economics or
industrial matters, and at least one
member shall be appointed from
each of the following categories,
namely:—
(a) Engineering with specialization in
design, construction, operation
and maintenance of generating
stations;
(b) Engineering with specialization in
transmission and supply of
electricity;
(c) Applied research in the field of
electricity;
(d) Applied economics, accounting,
commerce or finance.
Persons of ability, integrity and
standing and who have special
knowledge of, and such professional
experience of not less than fifteen
years in, international trade,
economics, business, commerce, law,
finance, accountancy, management,
industry, public affairs or competition
matters, including competition law
and policy, which in the opinion of
Central Government may be useful to
the Commission.
12 3 4
3. Central Electricity
Regulatory
Commission
(CERC)
Competition
Commission of
India (CCI)
Chairperson
and members
(shall be
appointed by
the Central
Government)
Chairperson
and not less
than two and
not more than
six other
Members (shall
be appointed
by the Central
Government)
4.
10

5. Petroleum and
Natural Gas
Regulatory
Board (PNGRB)
Chairperson, a
Member (Legal)
and three other
members (shall
be appointed by
the Central
Government)
From amongst persons of eminence in
the fields of petroleum and natural gas
industry, management, finance, law,
administration or consumer affairs:
Provided that no person shall be
appointed as Member (Legal) unless he-
(a) is qualified to be a Judge of High
Court; or
(b) has been a member of the India
Legal Service and has held a post
in grade I of that Service for at
least three years.
(a) Chairperson who is, or has been,
a Judge of a High Court;
(b) One member who is an expert in
the field of coastal aquaculture;
(c) One member who is an expert in
the field of coastal ecology
nominated by the Department of
Ocean Development of the Central
Government;
(d) One member who is an expert in
the field of environment
protection or pollution control
nominated by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests of the
Central Government;
(e) One member to represent the
Ministry of Agriculture of the
Central Government;
(f) One member to represent the
Ministry of Commerce of the
Central Government;
(g) Four members to represent the
coastal States on rotation basis;
(h) One member –Secretary
Persons of ability, integrity and
standing who have shown capacity in
dealing with problems relating to
commerce or commodity markets, or
in administration or who have special
knowledge or practical experience in
any matter which renders them
suitable for appointment on the
Commission.
6. Coastal Aquacul-
ture Authority
(CAA)
Chairperson _
and ten other
members (shall
be appointed by
the Central
Government)
7. Forward Markets
Commission
(FMC)
Not less than
two (but not
exceeding four)
members (one
of them being
nominated by
the Central
Government to
be the Chairman
thereof)
12 3 4
11

32. Indicating the similarity and difference between the
qualifications prescribed for the Chairperson and members of TRAI and
that of the above cited other Regulatory Bodies, the Department stated
that the qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and members
of TRAI provide for special knowledge of or experience in particular
fields similar to that required for such posts in other Regulatory Bodies
in their respective fields. However, the pre-requisite for holding the post
of Additional Secretary or Secretary or both for not less than three years
in the Government for those candidates, who are or have been, in the
service of Government, as provided in the proviso clause of Section 4
of the TRAI Act, is not specifically given in the qualifications for
appointment to such posts in other Regulatory Bodies like SEBI, IRDA
and CERC.
33. Drawing the attention of the Department to the fact that the
pre-requisite of holding the post of certain levels (Additional Secretary/
Secretary) for not less than three years for the candidates from the
Government sector has been a peculiar condition in the TRAI Act whereas
no such clauses have been prescribed for appointment to similar posts
in other Regulatory Bodies like SEBI, IRDA and CERC, the Committee
queried whether it would not be prudent to modify/remove the restrictive
clause for inducting the best talent and effectively addressing the disability.
In reply, the Department stated that it might not be appropriate to
altogether do away with the requirement of the level or status of
Government officers being included in the field of selection for the post
of Chairperson/member, TRAI. The Department further stated that the
level/status was being insisted only in the case of a person working in
Government or who had superannuated from the Government in order
to ensure that a person in senior level in the Government only, applied
for the post, considering the position of the member in TRAI. However,
this condition was not being put in the case of others, including
professionals so that the best talent outside the Government could also
apply for the post.
34. The Committee then asked whether the qualifications prescribed
for appointment of Chairperson/members in other Regulatory Bodies
vis-à-vis that of TRAI were more suited for attracting the best talent. In
reply, the Department stated that since the establishment of TRAI in 1997,
the telecom sector had opened up to the private service providers and
had progressed by leaps and bounds not only in the urban areas but also
in the rural areas. The Department further stated that taking into
consideration the past experience and the progress in the sector, there
was no sufficient ground at the extant stage to effect any change in the
qualifications prescribed for the appointment of the Chairperson and
other members of TRAI except the amendment as proposed now.
12

VII. Need for separate qualifications for the Chairperson vis-à-vis
the member of TRAI as in TDSAT
35. The provisions for the appointment of the Chairperson/member
of TDSAT as stipulated in Section 14 C of the TRAI Act read as under:—
“ A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson
or a member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he:—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been, a Judge of the
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court;
(b) in the case of a member, has held the post of Secretary to
the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government for a period of not less
than two years or a person who is well versed in the field
of technology, telecommunication, industry, commerce or
administration”.
36. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, in a written
note submitted to the Committee, stated that the eligibility provision for
the appointment of the Chairperson/members of the Authority
should be in sync with the provisions for the appointment of members
of TDSAT.
37. Accordingly, TRAI suggested that the provision for appointment
of the Chairperson/members of the Authority could be considered in the
following lines:—
“ A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson
or a member of the Authority unless he:—
(a) In case of Chairperson, has held the post of Secretary to the
Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government for a period of not less
than two years or from amongst persons who have special
knowledge of, and professional experience in,
telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law,
management or consumer affairs;
(b) In case of member, has held the post of Secretary to the
Government of India, or Additional Secretary to the
Government of India, or the post of Additional Secretary and
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent posts
in the Central Government or State Government for a period
not less than two years, or from amongst person who have
special knowledge of, and professional experience in,
13

telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law,
management or consumer affairs”.
38. The Chairman, TRAI while tendering evidence before the
Committee stated:—
“……………..So, we have just in our humble way tried to improve
the draft so that there is no possibility of misuse to the extent we
can think of”.
39. In the above context, the Committee desired to know from the
Department of Telecommunications the basis for prescribing minimum
service of three years as Secretary/Additional Secretary for the candidates
from the Government sector for appointment as Chairperson/Member
in TRAI whereas in TDSAT the minimum number of service for
appointment of members has been kept at two years. In reply, it was
stated that in the case of a member of TDSAT, he should have held the
post of Secretary or an equivalent post in the Central Government or the
State Government for a period of not less than two years, whereas in the
case of TRAI a person should have held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary for a period
of not less than three years. Hence, in the case of appointment of
member, TRAI, an Additional Secretary with three years of service would
be eligible whereas in the case of member, TDSAT, only Secretary level
officers would be eligible. The Department further stated that the
qualifications for the post of member, TDSAT, it being an Appellate
Tribunal and considered at higher pedestal vis-à-vis TRAI, were more
stringent than that of TRAI.
40. Having noted that TRAI was of the view of having separate
qualifications for the posts of Chairperson and the members for the
candidates from the Government Sector, the Committee desired to know
the rationale behind TRAI’s proposal. Justifying the need for prescription
of separate qualifications for the Chairperson vis-à-vis the members of
TRAI, the Chairman TRAI while tendering evidence before the Committee
stated:—
“The first thing is that, as very rightly asked, whether the Chairman
has been given different rank than the members and therefore is
there perhaps a need for making some kind of distinction in the
process of selection/qualifications. This has become compulsive as
the Pay Commission also has given two sets of scales-one for the
Chairman and the other for the members. That was also in this
background.
14

But even more important than that, we thought that as there is
provision for TDSAT, which is the super watchdog body of the
TRAI Act, they have one provision for Chairman and the other for
members. So, accordingly we have suggested here that the
Chairman’s qualifications would entail, apart from the open market
which of course would seek people of eminence, that he should
be in the rank of Secretary to the Government. That is because the
Chairman is of Cabinet Secretary’s rank. So, a minimum of two
years has been suggested (by TRAI). And in the case of Members,
we have suggested that he could either be a Secretary or an
Additional Secretary with combined period of two years,
additionally again from the open market where the eminence
criterion would be the guiding factor. So, we have (proposed) two
sets-one for the Chairman and the other for the Member.
Additionally, we have tried to follow what is also provided in
other Regulatory Bodies that if some kind of expertise is necessary,
minimum one technical representation must be ensured……”
41. In the above context, the Committee desired to know from the
Department of Telecommunications whether it would not be prudent to
prescribe different qualifications for the posts of Chairperson and the
members of TRAI for the candidates from the Government sector. In their
post-evidence reply, it was stated that the Department of Legal Affairs
had opined on 13 January, 2009 that the proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI
Act would not be applicable in the case of the Chairperson. Thus, the
qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and the members, TRAI
would not be the same as per the opinion of the Ministry of Law.
42. During the course of the examination of the Bill, TRAI suggested
that as the Authority has been entrusted with the onerous mandate of
regulating the ever dynamic and technology oriented telecom sector, one
Member of TRAI may be an expert from the telecom sector, in line with
the provisions for appointment of members in Insurance Regulatory
Development Authority and Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
established under their respective Acts.
43. The Chairman, TRAI, justifying the proposal stated in
evidence:—
“………..Given that the telecom is one such authority where
technology is supreme, we have suggested that one member of the
two should be at least a telecom specialist”.
44. When the Committee asked whether it would be appropriate
to appoint an expert in any of the prescribed fields as a member if the
15

Chairperson had already similar expertise, the Chairman, TRAI
responded:—
“………But you are very right. Of the three, if a situation arises
where the Chairman himself is an expert, perhaps there may not
be a need to have one more member from that same field”.
45. Commenting on the mandatory requirement of appointing at
least one expert in the field of telecommunication as member of TRAI, the
Department of Telecommunications stated that the preamble to TRAI
Act, 1997 provided for the establishment of Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India to regulate the telecommunication services and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The DoT further stated that
as the past experience showed, it had invariably been ensured by the
Selection Committee that at least one member of TRAI was drawn from
the telecom sector.
16

PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
I. Introductory
1. Section 4 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
Act, 1997 prescribes the qualifications for the appointment of the
Chairperson and members of the Authority. The proviso to Section 4
reads “Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of
Government shall not be appointed as a member unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post of
Additional Secretary or Secretary to the Government of India or any
equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government
for a period of not less than three years”. According to the Department
of Telecommunications (DoT), the Government felt the need to amend the
above said proviso in order to remove the inconsistency or anomaly in
the qualifications of the Chairperson and other members of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). The Government accordingly
intend to reword the existing proviso as “Provided that a person, who
is in the service of Government or has retired from such service on
attaining the age of superannuation, shall not be appointed as a member
unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary
to the Government of India, or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government for a period of not less than
three years”. The Committee during the course of their examination
have incidentally come to know that the tenure of the present Chairperson
of the Authority is going to end on 21 March, 2009. The Committee’s
examination of the proposed amendment has, however, revealed several
infirmities and inconsistencies in the existing proviso to Section 4 and
its rewording which have been highlighted in the succeeding paragraphs.
II. Justification/Urgency of the Amendment
2. According to the Department, the urgency in proposing the
amendment is justified as it would be unreasonable to expect that a
candidate who has served the Central Government at a distant point
of time in the past, even for short durations, would be ineligible for
the post of Chairperson/member of TRAI for the reason of his not
having held the post at the appropriate levels in the Government. In
the Department’s opinion, this would place such a person at a
17

disadvantage vis-à-vis other candidates who may not be equally well
endowed in the matter of qualifications and experience, but at the
same time do not have the disability by reason merely of having served
the Government at the appropriate levels. But the Committee find that
since the inception of the TRAI Act in 1997, only one person has been
rendered ineligible due to the restrictions in the proviso. The individual
happened to be a Joint Secretary level Indian Telecom Service officer
in the Central Government who left Government service to head a
Telecom Public Sector Undertaking. He was selected by the Selection
Committee for the appointment as member, TRAI, in 2006 but as per
the Department he was not considered eligible under the existing
proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI Act due to the ambiguity in the
qualification prescribed for the candidates from the Government Sector.
The Committee would like to point out that although such ambiguity
in the proviso to Section 4 has been existing since more than a decade,
the Department thought it prudent to propose an amendment only in
December, 2008 after one person was denied appointment more than
two years back in 2006 for the reason of his not having held the
Government post at the appropriate levels. Needless to say, there was
ample time to foresee such a scenario and the alacrity which the
Government have now shown could have been resorted to much earlier.
Although the Committee are convinced with the Department’s argument
that they are making the provision more liberal so that those persons
who leave the Government Service without holding the posts of
Secretary or Additional Secretary and acquire excellence in the
prescribed fields elsewhere are not debarred for appointment as
Chairperson/member of TRAI, yet they feel that the manner in which
the proposed amendment has been drafted may lead to further
ambiguity and open floodgates for litigation, as discussed subsequently,
nullifying thereby the tearing urgency in and justifications for bringing
the amendment.
3. The Committee find that no consultation was made with the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India prior to the introduction of the
proposed amendment. The Committee are aware that the Government
are under no obligation to consult the Regulatory Authority on the
proposed amendment. But when the Authority is entrusted with the
onerous and multifarious mandate of regulating the ever dynamic
telecom sector, there should not be any reservations on the part of the
Government to involve the Authority in the consultation process while
going for any amendment to the TRAI Act, 1997, more so when it
pertains to the appointment of the Chairperson and members of the
Regulatory Body. Besides, the Department could have been benefited
from the advice of the Authority gained by it through practical day
to day experience. Such consultation assumes greater significance in
view of the fact that the Chairman, TRAI had already sent
18

comprehensive proposals to DoT for various amendments of the TRAI
Act in July, 2006, revised proposals in February, 2007 and further revised
proposals in March, 2008. As reported to the Committee, the proposals
of TRAI required inter-Ministerial consultations, which have been
completed by DoT. Furthermore, the proposals have been considered
by the Department of Telecommunications vis-à-vis the comments
received from the concerned Ministries/Departments and a draft Cabinet
Note for consideration of TRAI’s proposal is stated to be under
preparation. The Committee hope that the DoT would consider the
proposals of TRAI in the right earnest before the Cabinet note is
circulated so that any future proposals for the amendment of the
TRAI Act are unambiguous, foster greater transparency and are fully
justifiable.
III. Rewording of the existing Proviso
4. The Committee note that the intention of the Government
behind amending the proviso to Section 4 is to remove the anomaly
and inconsistency in the qualifications of the Chairperson and members
of TRAI by doing away with the disability of not being eligible for
the post on such candidate who has served the Government at a distant
point of time in the past, even for short durations, for reason of his
not having held the post at the appropriate levels in the Government
but who while being in the Government service or after leaving such
service has excelled in the field of telecommunication, industry, finance,
law, etc.. In short, if somebody has left the Government service before
holding the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary for at least three
years and before attaining the age of superannuation, he is not eligible
for the post of Chairperson or member of TRAI as per the extant
provision. According to the Department, the proposed amendment will
remove that anomaly and as such the Selection Committee will have
wider choice to find more suitable personnel. Notwithstanding the
intention of the Government in proposing the amendment, the
Committee have serious reservations on the efficacy of the proposed
amendment in removing the inconsistency/anomaly in the existing
proviso to Section 4. Because the Committee feel that the way the
proposed amendment has been reworded, it will open floodgates for
litigations as it is now unjustly restrictive to persons in Government
service who may not be in the grades of Secretary/Additional Secretary
but be excelling in their respective fields quite like the person who
left Government service, and for whom the Department is proposing
the amendment. The amendment in fact goes against the assertion of
the Secretary of the Department before the Committee that the intention
behind the amendment was to make the existing proviso more liberal.
The Committee’s apprehension was further reinforced when the
19

Secretary, DoT, on being confronted during evidence with the lacunae
in the proposal, readily agreed to get the proposed amendment
re-examined by the Ministry of Law and Justice. After persistent follow-
up the Department finally furnished the opinion of the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) on the reference made at the
behest of the Committee. The Legislative Department have, according
to DoT, examined the issue and indicated that the Bill has been properly
drafted taking care of the administrative policy of the Ministry to
remove the disability pointed out. It, therefore, appears to the Legislative
Department, that the language of Clause 2 of the Bill does not require
any modification. The Legislative Department have also certified that
para 3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons is in consonance with
the provisions of the said Bill. The Committee are at the least perplexed
with such a casual response of the Legislative Department on a
legislative proposal. It seems that the Department have dealt with the
reference by the Committee in a very perfunctory manner. The
Committee find it inexplicable as to how can every thing be in order
in the proposed Amendment and the Statement of Objects and Reasons
when the Legislative Department have deemed it applicable for
appointment of, both the Chairperson and the members of Authority
but their sister Department i.e. the Department of Legal Affairs have
opined as recently as 13 January, 2009 that the proviso, extant or
amended was not applicable in the case of Chairperson. The Committee
expect the Ministry of Law and Justice to be more vigilant on the
matters pertaining to the Parliamentary Committees. The Committee
would also like to apportion a major share of the blame for this mix-
up on DoT, as being the nodal Department they are duty bound to
carefully consider and synchronize the opinions of Department of
Legislative Affairs and the Legislative Department rather than routinely
passing them on to the Committee.
IV. Possible Misuse of the Amendment
5. According to TRAI, the way the amendment has been proposed,
a bigger problem has been given to the posterity as it has opened up
a little bit of floodgates for likely misuse in future. The Committee
also feel that the amendment does leave scope for misuse as even an
officer of the rank of Under Secretary or lower rank who leaves the
Government service, say, just before attaining the age of superannuation
can become Chairperson or member of TRAI which are of Cabinet
Secretary and Secretary rank respectively. Needless to say, such a
situation would lead to allegations of favouritism, etc. regardless of
the proficiency or expertise of such an candidate in any of the prescribed
fields. The proposed amendment, therefore, does not find favour with
the Committee as it would be difficult for the Government to absolve
20

themselves of charges of bias or partisan attitude if they appoint a
person, who has left the Government service at any rank below
Secretary/Additional Secretary (with three years service) but has
otherwise excelled in the fields of telecommunication, law, finance
etc., to the post of Chairperson or member, TRAI.
V. Interpretation of the Amendment
6. The Committee note that as per the proposed amendment as
well as the existing provision, a Government Officer of the rank of Secretary/
Additional Secretary, serving or retired after attaining the age of
superannuation, with not less than three years of service in the grade,
can be considered for appointment as Chairperson/member of TRAI.
The Committee find that the restrictive clause i.e. “not less than three
years of service in the post of Additional Secretary or Secretary” will
not be applicable to those Government servants who have retired or
resigned from service prior to attaining the age of superannuation and
have acquired excellence/expertise in the various prescribed fields. It
implies that the restriction will not be applicable even to the officers
of any rank upto Joint Secretary who have taken voluntary retirement
or resigned from the Government service. The Department of
Telecommunications have also agreed that theoretically such a situation
regarding consideration of officers below the rank of Additional
Secretary to the post of Chairman/member of TRAI is possible. The
Committee feel that there is an apparent contradiction in the provisions.
On one hand a restriction is being imposed upon those Government
servants who have retired on attaining the age of superannuation before
serving as Secretary/Additional Secretary for at least three years whereas
on the other hand such restriction is not applicable to an officer even
of the rank of Under Secretary or even lower who has retired/resigned
from the Government service before attaining the age of
superannuation. As stated earlier, a situation may arise where an officer
below the rank of Additional Secretary resigns from Government service
a few days before attaining the age of superannuation and he will be
considered for appointment to the post of Chairman/member of TRAI
if he finds favour with the Government whereas if an officer of the
rank of Secretary/Additional Secretary retires from the Government
service on attaining the age of superannuation and before completing
three years of service in that grade, he will be denied such an
opportunity. The Department’s reasoning that the Search Committee
can be relied upon to select the persons of appropriate stature and
experience in order to avoid the above situation does not convince the
Committee simply because law should be explicitly clear and things
should not be left at the discretion of a Search Committee or a Selection
Committee. The Department’s logic of thousands of applications coming
21

from Joint Secretary or Director level officers for the post of
Chairperson/member of TRAI and hence not considering them for these
senior level posts is equally unacceptable to the Committee. They feel
that if somebody can acquire expertise by leaving the Government
service, he can also excel in the prescribed fields by remaining within
the Government service as excellence acquired through experience can
not be undermined. The proposed amendment, therefore, while
removing a disability enjoined upon by the extant proviso on a
miniscule number of individuals imposes a greater disability on a far
large number of equally capable individuals who are in Government
service for quite a number of years but are not yet in the grades of
Secretary/Additional Secretary. By imposing such an unjust and
uncalled for restriction, the Department instead of being liberal and
interested in getting the best talent has ended up as being selective
and biased. The Committee’s brief is that TRAI with its multifaceted
responsibilities of regulating an ever evolving and dynamic telecom
sector should be reinforced with the best possible talent from both the
open market as well as the Government Sector. The proposed
amendment which seeks to liberalise recruitment condition for a very
select few while ignoring the surfeit of talent available in Government
Sector does not come upto such expectations of the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to make the
qualifications for the posts of Chairperson and member of TRAI uniform
to all by removing the restrictive clause altogether so that deserving
persons from within the Government Sector are considered for the
said posts at par with the best in the open market and the intake to
the Regulatory Body is not compromised just because of status quoist
mindsets.
VI. Qualifications prescribed for other Regulatory Bodies
7. The Committee note that the qualifications for appointment
of the Chairperson and members of TRAI include special knowledge
of or experience in relevant fields similar to those required for such
posts in other Regulatory Bodies like Securities and Exchange Board
of India (SEBI), Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA),
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), etc. But the
Committee find that the conditionality of holding the post of Additional
Secretary or Secretary or both for not less than three years in the
Government for those candidates, who are or have been, in the service
of Government, prescribed in the proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI Act
is peculiar to the TRAI Act and does not find a mention in the
qualifications for appointment to similar posts in other Regulatory
Bodies as prescribed in their respective Acts. In the opinion of the
Department, the level/status was being insisted upon in order to ensure
22

that a person in senior level in the Government only, applied for the
post, considering the position of the member in TRAI. Based on this
logic they have further stated that it may not be appropriate to altogether
do away with the requirement of the level or status of Government
officials being included in the field of selection for the post of
Chairperson/member, TRAI. While the Committee acknowledge the
requirement of considering Government officials for the post of
Chairperson/member of TRAI, they do not agree with the Department’s
contention that there is no sufficient ground at the present stage, taking
into consideration the past experience and the tremendous progress in
the telecom sector, to effect any change in the qualifications prescribed
for the appointment of the Chairperson and members of TRAI except
the amendment as proposed by the Government. The Committee feel
that the opening up of the telecom sector to the private service providers
and the stupendous growth of the telecom services in the Country are
neither a cause nor an effect of the qualifications prescribed for the
post of Chairperson/member of TRAI. The Government are
constitutionally bound to prescribe such appropriate qualifications for
the post of Chairperson/member, TRAI, that would facilitate effective
regulation of the telecom sector. But while doing so, the Government
should be receptive to the dynamism of the sector instead of relying
only upon the past experience. On one hand the requirement of the
Government servants for being considered to the post of Chairperson/
member is being justified by the Department while on the other hand
the level/status is being insisted only in the case of a person working
in Government or who has superannuated from the Government service.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that such dichotomy needs to
be reconciled by offering a level playing field to all in the interest of
the effective functioning of the Authority ensuring thereby proper
regulation of the telecom sector.
VII. Need for separate qualifications for the Chairperson vis-à-vis
the members of TRAI as in TDSAT
8. The Committee note that Section 14 C of the TRAI Act, 1997
prescribes separate qualifications for the Chairperson of the Telecom
Disputes Settlement & Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) vis-à-vis its members,
albeit, the Chairperson is a judicial officer since the Tribunal is a quasi-judicial
body. In the case of member, TDSAT, a person should have held the
post of Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post
in the Central Government or the State Government for a period of
not less than two years or he should be well versed in the fields of
technology, telecommunication, industry, commerce or administration.
According to TRAI, the eligibility provision for the appointment of the
Chairperson/members of the Authority should be in sync with the
23

provisions for the appointment of members of TDSAT. But according
to DoT, the qualifications prescribed for the post of a member, TDSAT
are more stringent than that of TRAI as the Appellate Tribunal is
considered at higher pedestal vis-à-vis TRAI. The Committee appreciate
the opinion expressed by TRAI. They are, however, not convinced by
the logic extended by the Department as it is not factually correct.
While an Officer of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India
or equivalent with two years service is eligible for the post of member,
TDSAT purportedly a higher body, for the post of Chairperson/member,
TRAI amongst others, an Officer of the rank of Secretary to Government
of India or equivalent with not less then three years service is eligible.
On what grounds the Department have come to the conclusion about
TDSAT being on a high pedestal vis-à-vis TRAI is a moot question.
What further concerns the Committee is that although both TRAI and
TDSAT are governed by one Act, yet there is a prescription of separate
qualifications for the Chairperson, TDSAT vis-à-vis  its members
whereas in case of TRAI, the qualifications prescribed for the
Chairperson and members are one and the same. According to TRAI,
the need for making some kind of distinction in the process of selection/
qualifications of the Chairperson, TRAI vis-à-vis its members has
become compulsive as the Sixth Pay Commission has given two
different sets of scales, one for the Chairperson and the other for the
members of the Authority and more importantly, as mentioned earlier,
there is one provision for the Chairperson, TDSAT and another for the
members of the Tribunal. The Department, responding to the need for
separate qualifications for the Chairperson vis-à-vis the members of
TRAI, have stated in a post-evidence reply that according to the Ministry
of Law and Justice the proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI Act will not
be applicable in the case of the Chairperson which necessarily implies
that the qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and the
members will not be the same. The Committee are really surprised to
note the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice and its endorsement
by the DoT that the proviso to Section 4 of the TRAI Act will not be
applicable to the Chairperson, TRAI when nowhere in the Act nor in
the amending Bill any distinction has been made in the qualifications
for the appointment of the Chairperson, TRAI vis-à-vis the members.
The Committee have a feeling that it is just a post-evidence afterthought
on the part of the Department when they realized the follies of
prescribing similar qualifications for appointment of two posts of
different stature. Such apprehension of the Committee is corroborated
by the fact that in the documents furnished to them in connection with
the examination of the Bill, the Department of Telecommunications
have invariably stated “the Chairperson and other members of TRAI”
which implies that they tend to treat the Chairperson, TRAI as one
of the members in utter disregard to his clearly different stature.
Prudence requires prescription of different qualifications for the
24

Chairperson, TRAI vis-à-vis the members for two simple reasons i.e.
the stature of the Chairperson, TRAI is indisputably higher than that
of a member and more importantly, contrary to the provisions in other
constitutional bodies like the Election Commission, where an Election
Commissioner becomes Chief Election Commissioner, members of the
Authority do not graduate to become Chairperson. The Committee,
therefore, exhort upon the Department to rectify the hitherto committed
mistakes and unambiguously spell out different qualifications for the
appointment of Chairperson, TRAI in the Act itself instead of just
relying upon the casual opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice
who have not even bothered to have a look at clause 2 (f) of the TRAI
Act where it has been clearly stated that “Member” includes the
Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson before proffering their comment,
which is bereft of any legislative support, to the highest law making
body of the land.
9. The Committee agree with the suggestion of TRAI that as the
Authority has been entrusted with the onerous mandate of regulating
the ever dynamic and technology oriented telecom sector, one member
of TRAI should be an expert from the telecom sector, in line with the
provisions for appointment of members in IRDA, CERC, etc.. The
Committee also appreciate to note the reply of the Department that
it has invariably been ensured by the Selection Committee that at least
one member of TRAI is drawn from the telecom sector. But the
Committee feel that if the Chairperson, TRAI is himself an expert in
a particular prescribed field, say telecom, then perhaps it may not be
appropriate to appoint a member who holds similar expertise. Rather,
in the fitness of things, a person who is a specialist in any other field,
as prescribed under the law, should be accorded preference for better
and effective functioning of the Authority.
10. The Committee have arrived at definite conclusions in the
Report after exhaustive examination of several issues involved with
the amendment proposed in the Bill in the light of various documents
procured and consultations held with the Department of
Telecommunications and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
The Committee strongly recommend that various infirmities and
inconsistencies as pointed out in the Report should be given due
attention before the amending Bill is taken up for consideration by
the Parliament.
NEW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
12 February, 2009 Chairman,
23 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
25

ANNEXURE
AS I NTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. LXVIII of 2008
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
24 of 1997
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India Act, 1997, in section 4, for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that a person, who is in the
service of the Government or has retired from
such service on attaining the age of
superannuation, shall not be appointed as a
member unless such person has held the post
of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the
Government of India, or any equivalent
post in the Central Government or the
State Government, for a period of not less
than three years”.
Amendment
of Section 4.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
26

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (hereinafter referred to
as TRAI) is a statutory body set up by the Government of India under
section 3 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997. It consists
of a Chairperson and not more than two full-time members and not more
than two part-time members.
2. The qualifications for the appointment of the Chairperson and
other members of the TRAI are provided in section 4 of the said Act.
In terms of this section, the Chairperson and other members of the
Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
persons who have special knowledge of, and professional experience in,
telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law. management or
consumer affairs. The proviso of the said section further provides that
a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary
or Additional Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary
to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or the State Government for a period of not less
than three years.
3. The provisions of the proviso of the said section has been
considered as unreasonable, inconsistent and having no nexus with the
object of finding an appropriate person to be appointed as Chairperson
or Member of the TRAI as it inflicts a disability in cases where a
person who has served the Government, even for short duration, in one
or other capacity and while being in the Government or after leaving
the Government has excelled in the field of telecommunication or other
relevant field. In these cases, such a person would not be eligible
under section 4 of the said Act only for the reason for his not having
held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary or equivalent post in
the Central Government or the State Government for a period of three
years.
4. In order to remove the said inconsistency in the qualifications
of the Chairperson or other members of TRAI, the amendment to the
proviso of section 4 of the said Act has been proposed to provide that
a person, who is in the service of Government or has retired from , such
service on attaining the age of superannuation, shall not be appointed
27

as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or
Additional Secretary to the Government of India, or any equivalent post
in the Central Government or the State Government, for a period of not
less than three years.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
NEW D ELHI; A. RAJA
The 29th October, 2008.
28

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE T ELECOM R EGULATORY
AUTHORITY OF I NDIA A CT, 1997
(24 OF 1997)
** ** ** ** **
4. The Chairperson and other members of
the Authority shall be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst persons who have
special knowledge of, and professional experience
in, telecommunication, industry, finance,
accountancy, law, management or consumer
affairs:
Provided that a person who is, or has
been, in the service of Government shall not
be appointed as a member unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary
and Secretary to the Government of India or
any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government for a
period of not less than three years.
** ** ** ** **
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
members.
29

RAJYA SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.
_______
(Shri A. Raja, Communication and Information Technology)
30

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th January, 2009 from
1520 hours to 1625 hours in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri G. Nizammuddin
7. Shri Sohan Potai
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
11. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
12. Shri P.C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
14. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
31

15. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
16. Dr. C.P. Thakur
17. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
18. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
1. Shri Nripendra Mishra — Chairman
2. Shri A.K. Sawhney — Member
3. Shri R.N. Prabhakar — Member
4. Shri R.K. Arnold — Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India (TRAI) to the sitting. The Committee, then, took up ‘The Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008’ for examination.
Accordingly, the representatives of TRAI gave their views/suggestions on
the proposed Amendment of Section 4 (proviso) of the TRAI Act, 1997.
The members sought certain clarifications on various issues relating to
the proposed Amendment and the representatives of TRAI responded to
the same.
3. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and for furnishing valuable information that the Committee
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
32

APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th January, 2009 from
1630 hours to 1730 hours in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri G. Nizammuddin
7. Shri Sohan Potai
8. Shri Lalmani Prasad
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
11. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
12. Shri P.C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
14. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
33

15. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
16. Dr. C.P. Thakur
17. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
18. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
1. Shri Siddharth Behura — Chairman, Telecom
Commission & Secretary, DoT
2. Shri Subodh Kumar — Secretary, Telecom
Commission & Additional
Secretary, DoT
3. Shri Kirthy Kumar — DDG (C&A), DoT
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Telecommunications
(DoT) to the sitting. The Committee, then, took up the ‘Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008' for examination. Accordingly,
the representatives of DoT briefed the Committee on the proposed
Amendment of Section 4 (proviso) of the TRAI Act, 1997. The members
sought certain clarifications on various issues relating to the proposed
Amendment and the representatives of DoT responded to the same. The
Secretary, DoT also assured to furnish information on a later date to some
other points raised by the members.
3. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and for furnishing valuable information that the Committee
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
34

APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th February, 2009 from
1500 hours to 1630 hours in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Dube
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
7. Shri G. Nizammuddin
8. Shri Tufani Saroj
9. Shri P.C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
11. Shri Dara Singh
35

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
1. Shri Siddharth Behura — Chairman, Telecom
Commission & Secretary, DoT
2 Shri K. Sridhara — Member (T)
3. Dr. Ashok Chandra — Wireless Advisor
4. Shri J.S. Deepak — Joint Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava — DDG
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) to the
sitting.
3. **** **** ****
4. **** **** ****
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
5. The Committee then took up the Draft Report on ‘The Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008’ for consideration
and adopted the same.
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above
Draft Report in light of the factual verifications of the Department and
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.
36