7
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Working of Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP)’]
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)
SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Working of Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.12.2004


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government. ..................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 12
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration ........................................ 16
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature. .................. 19
APPENDIX
I. Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2004-05)
held on 25.11.2004 .................................................................. 20
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee ................................................................................ 22

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to
submit the Report on its behalf, present this Seventh Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Working of Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP)” relating to the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2003
and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2003. The Ministry furnished
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report
on 24.3.2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
its sitting held on 25.11.2004.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
 7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Working
of Directorate of Field Publicity relating to Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
22 December, 2003 and was laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on
23 December, 2003. It contained 11 recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 24, 28, 29, 40, 47.
Total: 5
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 27, 50, 53, 57.
Total: 4
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 25, 26.
Total: 2
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. Nil.
Total: Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, for any reason it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desires that Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to it urgently and in no case later than
six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of its recommendations.
A. Purchase of Portable Video Projectors (PVPs)
Recommendation Para No. 25
6. In its fifty-fifth report the Committee had noted that 48 Portable
Video Projectors (PVPs), for which supply order was issued on
31 March, 1997 were delivered by the supplier in three instalments,
the last being as late as on July, 1997. The Committee was apprehensive
and failed to understand the urgency for which orders were placed on
the last day of the financial year 1996-1997 when supply against the
earlier supply orders dated 3 December, 1996 and 10 January, 1997 for
3 Nos. and 30 Nos. of PVPs were pending and the supplier was
seeking extension of time repeatedly.
7. The Department, in its action taken notes have stated that in
the year 1996-97, Rs. 60 lakhs were provided under the Plan Scheme
of DFP and administrative approval of the Ministry was given for
purchase of 30 PVPs and related equipment’s. Further, the Ministry
have informed that Plan Scheme of DFP was augmented at the final
Grant stage and additional Rs. 99 Lakhs was provided under the
scheme. With regard, to the placement of order on the last day of
financial year, it has been informed that the final grant 1996-97 was
communicated on 21 March, 1997 and the approval of the Ministry
was issued on 27 March, 1997 for procurement of 48 PVPs and related
equipments. Consequently, DFP placed order on 31 March, 1997.
According to the Department, the supply orders dated 03.12.1996 and
10.01.1997 for purchase of 3 PVPs and 30 PVP were completed on
17.03.1997.

3
8. From the above reply of the Department, the Committee
concludes that there is a lack of proper planning and foresight in
spending the budgetary allocations. This culminates into a frantic
race for expenditure at the end of the financial year.
9. From the sequence of events for the financial year 1996-97, it
is seen that the purchase order for 33 PVPs and related equipment
for Rs. 60 lakhs was placed with the firm on 03.12.1996 and 10.01.1997.
Again the purchase order for 48 PVPs for Rs. 99 lakhs was placed
on 31.03.1997. Obviously, the supply order for 33 PVPs was placed
as late as December, 1996 and January, 1997 because the funds would
have been made available to the Directorate as late as December,
1996 and January, 1997 i.e., at the fag end of the financial year
1996-97, a situation similar to the release of funds for 48 PVPs on
27.03.97.
10. The delay in the supply of PVPs against the provisions in
the contract is another factor, which has been of concern to the
Committee. However, for the financial year 1996-97, the delay in the
sanction for the purchase of equipment is the main factor, which
has caused a disruption in the placement of the order and supply.
11. The Committee are of the considered view that rush of
expenditure towards the end of a financial year should not be
resorted to by the Ministry and sufficient advance planning should
be done for release of budgetary amounts during the early part of
the financial year. The Ministry should also devise an effective
mechanism for monitoring and implementation of the scheme in
time and prevail upon the Department to abide by the provisions of
contract.
B. Irregularities in purchase of PVPs
Recommendation Para No. 26
12. The Committee had pointed out in its earlier report that out
of the 80 PVPs ordered in the year 1997-98, only 39 were received
before the end of that financial year and the remaining PVPs were
delivered in batches extending up-to June 1998. Similarly, the supply
of 58 PVPs ordered during the year 1998-99 actually materialized as
late as in January, 2001. Out of the 48 PVPs for which supply orders
were placed on 3.12.1999 the Committee noted that 15 were received

4
in February, 2001 i.e. after a lapse of 14 months and the orders for the
remaining 33 PVPs was cancelled because the Ministry had realised
that some irregularities were committed. The Committee seriously
viewed the fact, as the award of contract for supply of PVPs and the
second part dealing with annual maintenance contract was completely
ignored which has serious financial implication running into crores.
The Committee in its report also pointed out that the orders were
placed on the last day of financial year and supplies were executed
much after the stipulated ate, repeated extensions were given to the
firm without any convincing justification and above all DFP drew the
cheques in favour of the supplier even though the supply had not
even commenced. The Committee therefore, recommended that Ministry
should look into the matter and to ensure that there was no mala-fide
intention.
13. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has stated that during
9th Plan (1997-2002) administrative approval of the Ministry was given
for purchase of 178 PVPs and related equipments by the DFP under
the Plan Schemes ‘Purchase of Projectors/Generators’. The Ministry
has further stated that after the notice of irregularities committed in
2000, it prima facie held DFP responsible due to which the remaining
supply was cancelled in 2001. The Ministry further informed that a
preliminary inquiry was conducted to ascertain the extent of
irregularities committed and cut-in-pension proceedings have initiated
against the then DF (Retd.) DFP on the advice of CVC. It has further
been informed that a disciplinary proceeding has also been initiated
by Accounts Office/Chief Controller of Accounts to fix responsibility
in the P&AO for the lapses. A system audit by the internal Audit Unit
has also been stated to find out whether the operation of the civil
accounts manual failed in the office of PAO (DA VP).
14. With regard, to the issue of Annul Maintenance Contract (AMC)
the Ministry has stated that it was discussed in detail in the review
meeting of DFP which was headed by Secretary, I&B on 05.02.1998
and it was decided not to enter into Annual Maintenance Contract at
the stage as prices were falling every year. It has also been stated that
DFP will undertake a study of the whole issue of AMC particularly in
the light of the fact that DFPs staff will be imparted training in user
friendly equipment. Also, AMC, if and when entered will be capped
out a maximum of 5% only.

5
15. The matter of forfeiting of security deposit made by the supplier
for non-execution of supply within time and non-adherence of the
spirit of the tender conditions is stated to be under the consideration
of the DFP .
16. The Committee are highly perturbed by the fact that serious
financial of irregularities were committed by the Directorate of Field
Publicity in the process of procurement of Portable Video Projectors
(PVPs) and the decision of the Ministry for not entering into Annual
Maintenance Contract for the PVPs resulted in heavy loss to the
Government exchequer. The Committee are also unhappy over the
inordinate delay in forfeiting the security deposit for non-execution
of supply within stipulated time alongwith non-adherence of the
spirit of the tender conditions. The Ministry should have taken urgent
action in executing the forfeiture rather than leaving it for the
Department of Field Publicity, which is hand in glove in the entire
deal.
17. The Committee  are of the opinion that the Ministry should
take immediate steps towards forfeiting the security deposit of the
supplier and evolving suitable and effective monitoring mechanism
like framing guidelines for use of delegated and discretionary powers
with great care and prudence, conducting periodical review meetings
of the performance of DFP , strictly following all rules regulations
framed for the purpose, to avoid such irregularities in future. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position and action
taken by the Ministry in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee notes that DFP initiated the process for procuring
Portable Video Projectors (PVPs) in 1995-96 from Plan funds. Such
procurement was stated to be necessitated by the advent of Video
technology as well as due to obsolescence of 16 mm sound projectors
which were in use at that time in the Directorate of Field Publicity.
But what followed the procurement of PVPs from the year 1995-96 to
1999-2000, has been proved to be recurring financial improprieties,
gross irregularities, clear favouritism to the supplier firm by flouting
established procedures and norms and causing loss to the exchequer
and defiance of authority as has been brought out in the succeeding,
paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
The powers for purchase of audio video equipments have been
delegated to the Director, Field Publicity. Initially the PVPs were
purchased on experimental basis and from 1996-97 onwards DFP started
purchasing them in a phased manner. During 9th Plan (1997-2002),
administrative approval of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting was
given for purchase of 178 PVPs and related equipments by the
Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP) under the Plan Scheme ‘Purchase
of Video Projectors/Generators’. The PVPs were to be purchased by
the DFP under the delegated powers as per the rules and regulations
in force. However, it came to the notice of the Ministry during the
year 2000 that irregularities were being committed in the purchase of
PVPs by the DFP . Prima facie the irregularities were found to be
committed by the DFP and supply order for remaining PVPs from the
supplier was cancelled. A preliminary enquiry was conducted thereafter
to ascertain the extent of irregularities committed in the procurement
of PVPs. Cut-in-pension proceedings have been initiated against the
then Director General (Retd.) of DFP .
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
6

7
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
28. The Committee finds that the award of contract was continued
with the same firm i.e. M/s Infinity System Pvt. Ltd. Despite it being
a defaulter; rate per unit of PVPs was arbitrarily enhanced at the
request of the supplier on the pretext of enhanced customs duty and
cheques were revalidated without exercising any check/control on the
propriety of expenditure or even receipt of material. The Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) has of course advised initiation of cut-
in-pension proceedings against the then DG, DFP after finding him
responsible for extending undue favours to the firm i.e. M/s Infinity
Systems Pvt. Ltd. but the matter should not rest there. The Committee
wants the Ministry to devise suitable measures to strengthen the
procedure to prevent occurrence of such lapses in future.
Action Taken by the Government
The Director of the DFP is the Head of Department (HOD) and
enjoys all the powers delegated to the HODs under Delegation of
Financial Power Rules (DFPRs). The Ministry does not interfere in the
day to day work of the Directorate and Director is required to carry
out the activities of DFP within its broad mandate under the powers
delegated following rules, regulations and procedures given in the
GFRs/DFPRs and other related instructions issued by the Government
from time to time.
DFP has been advised to exercise their delegated and discretionary
powers with great care and prudence duly following all the rules and
regulations. DFP has been asked to make their officers responsible for
the affairs of the Directorate.
The review of expenditure/monitoring of expenditure is also being
done on a regular basis at the level of PAO/DCAs/CCAs. The Budget
Division of this Ministry is reviewing and analyzing the trend of
expenditure on the basis of figures provided by the DDOs as well as
by the PAOs. Instructions have been issued to avoid bunching of
expenditure towards the end of the financial year.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that wrong
information was furnished to them by the Directorate of Field

8
Publicity and no action has been taken by the Ministry. But for the
media reports, this fact would have gone unnoticed. Stringent action
is required to deal with such cases of wilful neglect and disrespect
of Parliament and its institutions. The Ministry should inform the
Committee about the action taken in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The issue of wrong information furnished to the Standing
Committee of Parliament was inquired into by this Ministry. The then
Director General (Retd.), DFP was warned and displeasure of the
President was conveyed to him for the incorrect information furnished
to the Ministry of I&B for onward transmission to the Standing
Committee of Parliament on Communications. DFP has informed that
all the concerned officials have been instructed to be more careful in
future and have a better co-ordination while submitting reports/returns.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee notes that exhibition of films constitutes one of
the important activities in the publicity campaign of the DFP . The
Committee notes that the mandate of the Directorate of Field Publicity
is of distribution, exhibition showing films and conducting programmes
and not production of films. However, funds had been received from
other Ministries/Government Department/International bodies such as
UNICEF, BBC etc. by the Directorate of Field Publicity directly for
giving publicity to some programmes. In this context, it is pertinent to
note that the Director, DFP submitted proposals to the Ministry of
I&B which happens to be the administrative Ministry to permit
production of films through private producers instead of getting them
made by any of the organs of the Ministry engaged in such activities
like Films Division, NFDC etc. The Ministry also gave permission for
3 films as a special case after Kargil conflict. The Committee is not
convinced by the reasons advanced by the Ministry in this regard
when its own Films Division was having ample infrastructure and
was engaged in production of films. The Committee is surprised to
note that the Director, DFP went ahead and got a number of films
produced through private producers which were financed by sources
other than the Ministry of I&B and funds were taken from these
Government Ministries/International Agencies direct and maintained

9
outside the Ministry of I&B accounts. Thus, proper procedure was not
followed by the DFP . The Committee feels that it is a clear deviation
from the prescribed procedure. Notwithstanding the fact that the matter
has been referred to the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), the
Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry must look into all these
aspects and get the accounts audited to ensure that there was proper
utilization of funds advanced by the different Ministries and other
International Agencies. Proper measures should be taken to prevent
recurrence of such incidents in future. The Committee expresses its
dissatisfaction on the manner in which DFP handled funds advanced
by the other Ministries/Agencies for the procurement of films. There
is no plausible explanation for preferring private producers when other
arms of the Ministry namely Films Division, NFDC and Children’s
Film Society are engaged in production of films. It is a moot point
whether these organizations were consulted at all for production of
films. The Committee therefore, urges the Ministry to take up the
matter with C&AG for auditing the accounts of funds to ensure proper
utilization. The Committee will also like to be apprised of the action
taken on the report of the CVC.
Action Taken by the Government
Directorate of Field Publicity has been time and again reminded
of their mandate and objectives. They have been told that the
production/commissioning of films is not their mandate and they
should not venture into the area of film production. The permission
for production of three films was given in  view of the current tense
situation along the LOC in the State of J&K especially in Kargil Sector
at that time. This was agreed to as a special case and was subject to
approval of the expenditure by the Films Pricing Committee in Films
Division. This exception was not to be quoted by DFP as an excuse
for production of films.
This Ministry does not, in normal course, interfere in the
programmes of DFP as this is a specialized body for carrying out
publicity programmes. DFP has intimated that the Plan of Action for
the special programmes organized on behalf of other Departments/
Agencies have been prepared in consultation with the Departments/
Agencies concerned. Funds are provided by other Ministries/Agencies
on the basis of Action Plan submitted by the DFP . In the case of
M/o Labour, UNICEF, WHO and BBC funds had been provided by
cheques and in the case of NACO and M/o Health & Family Welfare,

10
the funds were routed through Pay & Accounts Office. DFP ought not
to have taken up film production and should have included such
funds under the normal budget under the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting.
It was noticed that DFP was receiving funds from other
Departments/Agencies not following the prescribed procedures.
Consequently, the Personal Deposit Account of DFP has been closed
on the directions of the Ministry. DFP has been advised to get the
funds routed through the Pay & Accounts Office and follow the proper
accounting procedure in respect of the funds received from International
Agencies. DFP has now informed that funds from other Ministries are
routed through the Pay and Accounts Office, New Delhi and
redistributed through the Pay and Accounts Office all over the country
for organizing publicity programmes by the Field Publicity Units. As
desired by the Committee C&AG has been requested for a special
audit.
The production of films by the DFP transgressing their mandate
has also been viewed seriously in this Ministry. Preliminary enquiry
has been conducted into the whole issue of production/purchase of
films/cassettes. Disciplinary proceedings for imposing major penalties
has been initiated on the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission
against the then Director General, Joint Director, Deputy Director
(Programmes), Field Publicity Officer and Assistant Programme Officer
of DFP .
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee notes that selection procedure of themes depends
on the proactive role of the client Ministries as to how they want to
propagate socially relevant events. The Committee feels that DFP can
play a greater role in the present scenario as it has greater penetration
at the grass root level. DFP can also portray the exact depiction of
society and can help in curbing social evils and in strengthening
national integration and communal harmony. The Committee further
wishes that while selecting subjects, the DFP should consult the people
living in the rural and remote areas about their problems. This can
lead to a two-way system of feed back which in the real sense can
fulfill the objectives of DFP .

11
Action Taken
DFP has directed their respective Field Publicity Units to suggest
themes which are relevant in their area of working. The Field Publicity
Units gather people’s reactions to various programmes and policies of
the Government and their implementation down to the village level,
which are then sent to the Government through consolidated feedback
reports for corrective measures and appropriate action.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLY OF
THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
Moreover, the DFP met the expenditure of 3 PVP’s from the Non-
Plan funds during the year 1999-2000 without any reference of advice
from the Ministry. It is also indicative of the inadequate or even non-
existent monitoring system on the part of the ministry. The Committee
gets the impression that the DFP was given a Carte Blanche  to function
in its own way disregarding all established norms. It was the
responsibility of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to ensure
that such irregularities were not committed by the DFP .
Action Taken by the Government
The Director of the DFP is the Head of Department (HoD) and
enjoys all the powers delegated to the HoDs under Delegation of
Financial Power Rules (DFPRs). The Ministry does not interfere in the
day to day work of the Directorate and the Director is required to
carry out the activities of DFP within its broad mandate under the
delegated powers following the rules, regulations and procedures given
in the GFRs/DFPRs and other Government rules/guidelines.
As stated earlier, based on the memorandum submitted by DFP
for the Standing Finance Committee of the Ministry for approval of
the Plan Scheme ‘Purchase of Video Projectors/Generators’,
administrative approval was given for purchase of 178 PVPs and related
equipments by DFP during the 9th Plan. As per the proposal of DFP ,
48 PVPs were to be purchased during the Annual Plan 1999-2000 under
this Plan Scheme. Based on the administrative approval, DFP placed
the order for supply of 48 PVPs during 1999-2000 using their delegated
powers. Subsequently, the supplier made a request to the DFP for
enhancement of price per unit of portable video projector on account
of increase customs duty. To absorb this increase DFP purchased three
PVPs out of the Non-Plan funds during 1999-2000 under their delegated
powers. The matter has been examined in the Ministry and disciplinary
12

13
action has been initiated against the then DG, DFP for this loss to the
Government.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee note that there are large number of filed publicity
units which were created for publicizing and taking the people into
confidence and mobilizing their support in the North-Eastern areas.
The Committee regret to note that Ministry has taken a decision to
declare the cadre of officers who are operating in the border publicity
units as a dying cadre and there are number of vacancies. As there is
a need for looking into the problems of the people living in the North-
East, programmes of national integration and communal harmony
should be dubbed into major dialects, which are understood by the
people of the North-Eastern States. This will ensure a wider diffusion
of information in these areas. The Committee trusts that proper
attention will be paid in this regard and believes that lack of funds
will not hamper progress while implementing the same.
Action Taken by the Government
Funds are being made available under different Plan schemes of
DFP for the benefit of North Eastern region. During the last five year
i.e. 2000-01 to 2004-05 almost 30% of the funds under the Plan are
allocated for the benefit of NE Region.
The matter of Field Publicity Officers (Border) is sub-judice in the
High Court of Kolkata. In view of the recommendations of Expenditure
Reforms Commission and Government policies towards appointments
in the direct entry grade, DFP is facing problems in filling up the
vacancies. However, DFP is carrying out its publicity works in the
North Eastern Region. DFP do not produce the publicity material/
software of their own and procure it as per their needs from the Films
Division, Prasar Bharati, DAVP , etc. Though it is not always possible
to get the films and publicity material in local dialects, the oral/
interactive programmes and special programmes are being carried out
in the local language/dialects.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]

14
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Committee is concerned to note that the performance of the
DFP has hampered due to shortage of staff especially in the field
publicity units where 110 units are functioning without field officers.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps
to address the concern of shortage of staff in the Directorate with
special attention to the grades of field publicity officers.
Action Taken by the Government
As stated in para 50, the Expenditure Reforms Commission has
recommended for winding up of the Directorate of Field Publicity.
However, this Ministry while favouring the continuance of DFP has
taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for right sizing of
the Directorate as a response to the ERC recommendations. The
vacancies in DFP have also been reduced following the instructions/
procedures for appointment in the direct recruitment level. DFP has
taken action to fill up the vacant posts, which are to be filled up by
the direct recruitment as per the Government guidelines on optimisation
of civilian posts.
There are two grades of Field Publicity Officers (FPO) in DFP , one
belonging to FPO (Border) cadre and the other to FPO (IIS) cadre. The
matter of FPO (Border) is sub-judice in the High Court of Kolkata.
Proposal to fill up the vacant posts of FPO (IIS) is under consideration
in the Ministry. The posts which are to be filled up by the direct
recruitment are pending clearance from Screening Committee.
Simultaneously, a proposal is being considered in consultation with
the Deptt. of Personnel & Training for augmenting the posts in
promotion quota.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 57)
The Committee is happy to note that the DFP has been organizing
conducted tours to remote rural areas, especially for those belonging
to the tribal and other backward sections of the society. The aim of
conducted tours has been to generate national integration and
patriotism amongst the people, and also to imbibe the farming practices
practiced in the progressive States. It is a commendable job, which
needs to be encouraged. The Committee, therefore, feels that the

15
frequency of tours should be increased and more and more funds be
allocated for the same. The Committee, would however, like to
emphasize the fact that proper monitoring should be adhered to so
that funds earmarked for conducted tours are not misutilised.
Action Taken by the Government
Conducted Tours was one of the Plan Schemes of DFP during the
9th Plan (1997-2002). This Scheme has since been discontinued in the
10th Plan (2002-2007). As many as 90 Units of DFP are located in
tribal/backward areas of the country and they perform the publicity
work in these areas through film shows, photo exhibitions, arranging
group discussions and holding special programmes like rallies, rural
sports competitions, baby shows, etc.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee finds that 48 PVPs, for which supply order was
issued on 31st March, 1997 were delivered by the supplier in three
installments, the last being as late as in July, 1997. The Committee
fails to understand the urgency for which orders were placed on the
last day of the financial year 1996-97 when supply against the earlier
supply orders dated 3 December, 1996 and 10 January, 1997 for 3 Nos.
and 30 Nos. PVPs were pending and the supplier was seeking extension
of time repeatedly.
Action Taken by the Government
Initially in the year 1996-97, Rs. 60 lakhs were provided under the
Plan Scheme of DFP and administrative approval of this Ministry was
given for purchase of 30 PVPs and related equipments. Subsequently,
the provision under the Plan Scheme of DFP was augmented at the
Final Grant Stage and additional Rs. 99 lakhs were provided under
this scheme. The Final Grant 1996-97 was communicated on 21st March,
1997. DFP submitted memorandum for approval of the Standing
Finance Committee of M/o I&B for utilisation of the fund and
administrative approval of this Ministry could be issued on 27th March,
1997 for procurement of 48 PVPs and related equipments. Consequently,
DFP placed order on 31st March, 1997. The supply orders dated
03.12.1996 and 10.01.1997 for purchase of 3 PVPs and 30 PVPs were
completed on 17.03.1997.
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 8, 9, 10 & 11 of Chapter-I)
16

17
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
 Out of the 80 PVPs ordered in the year 1997-98, only 39 were
received before the end of that financial year. The remaining PVPs
were delivered in batches extending up to June 1998. Similarly, the
supply of 58 PVPs ordered during the year 1998-99 actually materialized
as late as in January 2001. Out of the 48 PVPs for which supply
orders were placed on 3.12.1999, 15 were received in February, 2001
i.e. after a lapse of 14 months and the orders for the remaining
33 PVPs was cancelled because the Ministry had come to realized that
some irregularities were committed. Secretary, Ministry of I&B’s
statement that the real deterioration started from 1998-1999 onwards,
does not impress the Committee for the irregularities were actually
committed much before and even at the time of placing supply orders
as has been narrated above. Even in the award of contract for supply
of Portable Video Projectors, second part of the contract dealing with
Annual Maintenance Contract was completely ignored which had
serious financial implications running into crores. Orders were being
placed as late as on the last day of a particular financial year, supplies
were executed much after the stipulated date, repeated extensions were
given to the firm for effecting the supply without any convincing
justification and all sorts of financial and procedural improprieties were
committed. It is a  matter of grave concern that serious financial
irregularities were committed by the Directorate of Field Publicity by
drawing the cheques in favour of the supplier even though the supply
had not even commenced and the supplier was seeking repeated and
unjustified extensions of time. No punitive action was taken against
the supplier for repeated defaults on its part. The Directorate did not
even bother to inform the Ministry about these irregularities. The matter
came to the notice of the Ministry only when reports appeared in the
media and the Committee took note of it. The Committee is perplexed
at the generosity of the Directorate of Field Publicity in acceding to
each request of the supplier for extension of time which ranged upto
18 months from March, 1999 to July, 2000. The Committee is also at
a loss to understand why three cheques were drawn when there was
only one supply order for 34 projectors. The Ministry should look into
this aspect also to ensure that there was no malafide intention.
Action Taken by the Government
During 9th Plan (1997-2002) administrative approval of this Ministry
was given for purchase of 178 PVPs and related equipments by the

18
DFP under the Plan Schemes ‘Purchase of Video Projectors/Generators’.
The PVPs were to be purchased as per the rules and regulations in
force under the delegated powers of DFP . However, it came to the
notice of the Ministry during the year 2000 that irregularities were
being committed in the purchase of PVPs by the DFP . Prima facie the
irregularities were found to be committed by DFP and the remaining
supply of PVPs from the supplier was cancelled in February, 2001, A
preliminary enquiry was conducted, thereafter, to ascertain the extent
of irregularities committed in the procurement of PVPs and cut in
pension proceedings have been initiated on the advice of Central
Vigilance Commission against the then Director General (Retd.) of DFP .
Departmental Inquiry in the case is going on. Disciplinary proceedings
has also been initiated by the Accounts Office/Chief Controller of
Accounts to fix responsibility in the Pay & Accounts Office for their
lapses. A system audit by the Internal Audit Unit has also been ordered
to find out whether the operation of the Civil Accounts Manual failed
in the office of PAO (DA VP).
The issue of Annual Maintenance Contract was discussed in detail
in the review meeting of DFP taken by Secretary, I&B on 05.02.1998.
It was decided that since the prices were falling every year, it would
not be advisable to enter into an AMC at this stage. DFP may
undertake a study of the whole issue of AMC particularly in the light
of the fact that DFP’s own staff would now be imparted training in
this user friendly equipment. The maintenance facilities for the PVPs
be provided on a regional basis and the AMC, if and when entered
into, may be capped at a maximum of 5% only.
The matter of forfeiting of Security deposit made by the supplier
for non-execution of supply within time and non-adherence of the
spirit of the tender conditions is under consideration of DFP .
[M/o I&B O.M. No. 20/2/04-IP&MC dated 24.03.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 16 & 17 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
19

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 25 November, 2004 from 1100
hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Sohan Potai
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
12. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
14. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
20

21
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with certain
amendments/modifications:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its Fifty-Fifth Report on “Working of Directorate of Field
Publicity (DEP)” relating Ministyr of Information &
Broadcasting.
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
3. The Committee also decided to undertake a weekend Study
Tour to Chandigarh and Amritsar on 17 and 18 December, 2004.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above mentioned Reports to House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 24, 28, 29, 40, and 47
Total: 5
Percentage: 45.45%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the replies
of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 27, 50, 53 and 57
Total: 4
Percentage: 36.36%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 25 and 26
Total: 2
Percentage: 18.18%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total Nil
Percentage: Nil
22