CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Forty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The Role of Prasar
Bharati and its future status’ pertaining to the Ministry of Information
& Broadcasting.
2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker
on the 12.06.2007 and to Lok Sabha on 21.08.2007. The Report was
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha also on 21.08.2007. It contained
26 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 1, 5, 6, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, & 26.
Total: 11
Chapter- II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para No: 15
Total: 1
Chapter- III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos: 2, 3, 4, 9, 13, 16 & 17.
Total: 7
Chapter- IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos: 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 22 & 23
Total: 7
Chapter : V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Organisational Structure
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee in their Forty-seventh report had observed that
out of the stipulated 15 members on the Prasar Bharati Board, 9 key
posts were lying vacant for unduly long period of time. While
deploring the callous attitude of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting in filling up these vacancies, the Committee in the
aforesaid Report had recommended that prompt measures should be
taken for filling up the vacant positions on the Board in order to
enable Prasar Bharati to function efficiently.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“Since the last meeting of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology, three part-time Members have been appointed. DG:
AIR and DG: Doordarshan are also ex-officio Members of the Prasar
Bharati Board. These posts are at present vacant and the process
of filling up both these posts is at an advanced stage. As regards
representatives of the employees on the Prasar Bharati Board, no
one has been elected so far”.

3
8. The Committee are highly dissatisfied to observe that inspite
of their specific recommendation in the Forty-seventh Report to
urgently fill up the vacant posts on the Prasar Bharati Board, the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have been able to achieve
precious little. The key post of the Executive Member is still lying
vacant. More importantly, the posts of DG: AIR and DG:
Doordarshan, who are the ex-officio Members on the Prasar Bharati
Board and the virtual interface between the Board and AIR and DD,
are also yet to be filled up. Last but not the least, no representative
of the employees of Prasar Bharati has so far been elected to the
Board under the specious plea that the status of Prasar Bharati
employees is yet to be clearly defined. Under these circumstances,
the Committee wonder how Prasar Bharati, which is entrusted with
the onerous responsibility of public service broadcasting, would be
able to effectively discharge the mandated responsibilities when its
Board is kept in limbo indefinitely. The Committee in their Fifty-
fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry
presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008 have, in view of this
pressing need, recommended that the vacant positions be filled up
by persons of eminence with vision and immense professional
expertise who are capable of steering the organisation to newer
heights with proper guidance and directional support. The Committee
expect the Ministry to at least now realize the gravity of the situation
and take urgent steps to fill-up the vacant positions on the Board
without any further delay.
II. Autonomy of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3 & 4)
9. Not convinced with the compulsions on the part of the
Government for retaining a whole lot of powers with themselves like
making rules with regard to service conditions, salary and allowances
and investing of funds of Prasar Bharati under Section 32 of the Prasar
Bharati Act, the Committee had opined that the provisions under the
said Section might seriously impede the autonomous character of the
Corporation and come in the way of attaining its avowed objectives.
Recommending corrective measures to accord Prasar Bharati autonomy
in the true sense of term, the Committee hoped that the proposed
move for the capital and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and
funding its public service broadcasting/operations would create a
favourable atmosphere enabling the Corporation to uphold the unity
and integrity of the nation by nurturing the democratic and social
values enshrined in the constitution.

4
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“As has already been submitted at the time of evidence before the
Committee, rule making powers with respect to recruitment, service
conditions, investments and others have been kept with the
Government because of the over dependence of Prasar Bharati on
Government funds. Unless Prasar Bharati has a self-sustaining
model of funding its requirements, such rule making powers are
bound to be there with the Government. The GoM in its meeting
on 5th October, 2007 has taken a view that the erstwhile employees
of Government with Prasar Bharati shall continue to be on deemed
deputation with all benefits that are available to any Government
employee. On the issue of funding, the GoM is yet to firm up its
views.
11. The Ministry have further stated as under:—
“Various models of funding as brought out in the report of
Committee on capital and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati
and funding of Public Broadcasting Service Corporation across the
world are being examined by the Group of Ministers for a final
view. GoM has also expressed a view that Prasar Bharati should
continue to discharge its role as a Public Service Broadcaster. Since
Public Service Brodcasting operations by themselves cannot generate
sufficient revenue, hence Prasar Bharati will have to be substantially
funded either directly by the Government or by other means. GoM
is yet to take a final view of the funding pattern.”
12. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the sorry state of
affairs in which Prasar Bharati has been rendered into due to the
continuous inaction of the Ministry, in sorting out its problems.
Prasar Bharati has been in existence since 1997. Even after a decade,
basic things like organisational, capital and financial restructuring,
personnel matters and service conditions are all in a state of
uncertainty and confusion thereby causing incalculable damage to
the organisation and in the process to the public service broadcasting
service. With these many impediments, nothing has gone right with
Prasar Bharati since inception. Today, it is an unenviable situation.
The Government on the one hand want to retain several crucial
decision making powers till such time a self sustaining model of
funding is worked out by Prasar Bharati. On the other hand, the
organisation is being denied basic functional autonomy, thereby,
rendering it incapable of sustaining itself on its own. The Committee
are of the view that there is no reason why Prasar Bharati cannot

5
generate adequate revenue or develop a self-sustaining funding
pattern, even while performing the role of the public Service
Broadcaster, if they are accorded autonomy in the truest sense of the
term. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government to
consider vesting the rule making powers like service conditions,
salary and allowances and investment of funds with the
Prasar Bharati itself so that the Corporation is able to carry out its
avowed objectives independently and effectively.
III. Financing and Funding Pattern
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9 & 13)
13. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that there
had been no serious follow up to the recommendations of the Sengupta
Committee (1996), Review Committee (1999) and the Committee on
Capital and Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati (2006) which were
appointed to go into the various aspects of working of Prasar Bharati.
The Committee had further observed that the recommendations of the
Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring stood referred to a
Group of Ministers (GoM) who had asked the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting to discuss the Proposals in detail with the Ministry
of Finance so as to enable the GoM to finalise its recommendations.
Acknowledging that funding pattern of Prasar Bharati was a key factor
in determining the autonomy of the Corporation and deploring the
undue delay in arriving at a definite decision on the issue, the
Committee had hoped that the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting would take urgent action, as advised by the GoM, to
end the stalemate.
14. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“It was possible only after the increase in Revenue generation of
the Prasar Bharati. However, 70% (approx.) of funds required by
the Prasar Bharati are provided by the Government under Plan
and Non-plan allocations. However, a Committee has been
constituted by Government with a view to enabling Prasar Bharati
to meet their twin objectives of social obligations as well as financial
independence in an effective manner in the prevailing competitive
market environment. The recommendations of the Committee on
capital and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various
options with respect to funding of Prasar Bharati are before the
Group of Ministers. The Group of Ministers in its last meeting
held on 5th October, 2007 has desired the Ministry to discuss the
proposals in detail with the Ministry of Finance for GoM to finance
its recommendations.”

6
15. The Committee are dissatisfied to note that although the
Group of Ministers (GoM) in its last meeting held on 5 October,
2007 had desired the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to
discuss the capital and financial restructuring proposals for Prasar
Bharati in detail with the Ministry of finance, yet the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting are conspicuously silent about the
compliance to the GoM’s directions in this regard. At the cost of
sounding repetitive, the Committee would like to reiterate the
recommendations made in their Fifty-fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry in this regard that the Ministry
should atleast now work on this aspect with utmost alacrity so that
necessary feedbacks are made available to the GoM without any
further delay to enable them to finalise their recommendations on
this vital issue.
IV . Digitisation of Terrestrial Network
Recommendation (Para Nos. 16 & 17)
16. Distressed at the very slow pace of digitisation of Doordarshan
network which had put Prasar Bharati in a very disadvantageous
position in the prevailing competitive scenario in the electronic media,
the Committee in their earlier Report had emphasised that digitisation
of Doordarshan network should be accorded top priority and pursued
vigorously.
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as
follows:—
“Prasar Bharati has agreed with the recommendations and intimated
that provisions have been projected in the draft 11
th
 Plan for
digitisation of the DD Network. Doordarshan has initiated process
of digitisation by establishing of DVBT transmitters at 4 meters.
Utilisation of the digital transmitter at Delhi to provide mobile TV
service has been started in May 2007. It is proposed to provide
similar mobile TV service through digital transmitter at other metro
cities also. Digitisation of terrestrial transmitter is one of the thrust
areas of 11
th
 Plan. For the digitisation of the transmitter network
Rs. 1166 crore was projected in the 11
th
 Plan. However, due to
reduced overall allocation indicated by planning Commission for
the 11
th
 Plan, this outlay is proposed to be reduced to Rs. 210
crore. With the reduced allocation it will be difficult to complete
the digitisation targets by 2017 (Proposed date for completion of
migration to digital). It is felt that there is a need for enhancement
of the allocation outlay for digitisation under 11
th
 Plan to hasten
the process. In addition, Government may have to look at public

7
private partnership for the digitisation of the network. The Working
Group for the 11
th
 Plan and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India (TRAI) have made a recommendation of this effect, which
are under consideration of the Government. Digitisation of AIR
network is one of the major thrust areas of 11
th
 pPlan. This includes
digitisation of the programme production, transmission facilities
and connectivity. AIR had projected Rs. 3145 crore for digitisation
during the 11
th
 Plan. However due to reduced overall allocation
indicated by Planning Commission for the 11
th
 Plan, this Outlay is
proposed to be reduced to Rs. 955 crore. With the reduced
allocation it will be difficult to complete the digitalisation targets
by 2017. There is a need to enhance the allocation outlay to hasten
the digitisation as well as to complete the migration to digital in
time.”
18. The Committee note that digitisation of Doordarshan
terrestrial transmitter and AIR network is one of the major thrust
areas of the Eleventh plan. Towards that end, a sum of Rs. 1166
crore and Rs. 3145 crore respectively were proposed for the Plan
period. But the Committee are extremely concerned to observe that
the proposed Outlay would be reduced to Rs. 250 crore and Rs. 955
crore respectively due to the overall reduction in the allocation during
the Eleventh Plan as indicated by the Planning Commission. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that migration from terrestrial to
digital transmission is a pre-requisite for quality broadcasting.
Needless to say, with the reduced allocation, it would be very difficult
on the part of Prasar Bharati to complete the digitisation targets by
the end of the Twelfth Plan viz. 2017. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon the Ministry to urgently take up the matter with the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance to get an enhanced
allocation of funds for Prasar Bharati during the remaining period
of the Eleventh plan and even beyond, so that digitisation of
Doordarsan terrestrial transmitters/AIR network is hastened and
complete migration from terrestrial to digital network is achieved
by 2017. The Committee further desire that the feasibility of public
private partnership for digitisation of Doordarshan terrestrial network,
as recommended by the Working Group for the Eleventh plan as
well as the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) may also
be considered in all its ramifications and appropriate measures taken
thereafter.
V. Programme content and production and Human Resource
Development
Recommendation (Para Nos. 19 & 25)
19. In their Forty-seventh Report, the Committee, realizing that
there was much scope for improvement in the quality of the

8
programmes broadcast/Telecast by the All India Radio and
Doordarshan had recommended that more professionally qualified
personnel should be deployed in AIR/Doordarshan to effectively
monitor the content and production of programmes and the Programme
Advisory Committees be made more purposeful. Furthermore, the
Committee on observing the pressing need for induction of creative
and young talent to rejuvenate the organization had recommended
that National productively Council (NPC) which had been engaged by
Prasar Bharati to go into the orgnizational restructuring of the
organizations be asked to expedite the study so that further necessary
action was taken without any delay.
20. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“Prasar Bharati agree entirely and steps will be taken to follow
these directions. All India Radio and Doordarshan have been
constantly aiming for excellence both in terms of content and
quality. New Guidelines for Commissioning of programmes have
been approved by the Prasar Bharati Board. Hence, money
constraint will be addressed by way of capital restructuring and
will further lead to substantial improvement in the quality of
programmes. Joint Programme Advisory Committees have been
set up at many State Capitals. These Committees aid and advise
the concerned AIR and Doordarshan Stations to plan and produce
good quality programme. Overall shortage of manpower is affecting
the content generation and quality of programmes. Lifting of ban
on filling up of the posts and recruitment would help in this
regard.”
21. The Ministry have also stated that the NPC has been asked to
expedite submission of its Report. According to them, the GoM has
recognised the need of filling the vacancies.
22. The Committee acknowledge the fact that shortage of overall
manpower, especially professionally qualified personnel is a definite
and major handicap in the content generation and improvement of
the quality of programmes. Apparently, the main hurdle in taking
any concrete action in this regard is the delay in submission of
report by the National Productivity Council (NPC) which has been
engaged by the Prasar Bharati to go into its organisational
restructuring. The Committee during the course of examination of
the Demands for Grants (2008-09) had been informed that the total
requirement including the vacant posts in Prasar Bharati is 17214.
Such a huge gap between the required and the existing manpower
further emphasizes the need to resolve the issue expeditiously. The

9
Committee feel that enough time has been spent on the plea of the
entire process being put on a hold while awaiting for the report of
NPC. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate the
recommendation made by them in their Fifty-fifth Report that the
NPC should be asked in clear cut terms to give its report by a
stipulated early date and Prasar Bharati should then work out and
submit a comprehensive proposal to the Ministry so that a permanent
solution is worked out by the Ministry in consultation with the
Ministry of Finance. In the meantime, some relief ought to be
provided to Prasar Bharati immediately, so that it is able to augment
its staff strength through some short term measures. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter on
priority.
VI. Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of Employees
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
23. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the
employees of Prasar Bharati had been deprived of the benefits like
accommodation and CGHS facilities and admission of their wards in
the Central School as normally admissible to the Government
employees. Cautioning that such deprivation might breed
discontentment and indiscipline among the employees of Prasar Bharati
resulting in lower output, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry should take up the matter at the appropriate fora to redress
the grievances of the employees.
24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“As regards providing accommodation, CGHS facility and
admission of wards of the employees of Prasar Bharati in the
Central schools at par with the Central Government employees,
the GoM has recommended the same in its meeting held on
05.10.2007. As regards admission of wards of the employees in
Kendriya Vidyalayas, a letter has been sent to the Ministry of
HRD from the Minister of Information & Broadcasting. The matter
relating to CGHS facility in being taken up at Minster’s level with
the Ministry of Health. For extending the facility of accommodation,
the matter is being referred to Cabinet Committee on
Accommodation.
The Ministry have also stated that in its last meeting held on
5 October, 2007, the GoM decided that the employees of Prasar
Bharati will be on ‘deemed deputation’ with all facilities at par
with the Central Government employees.

10
25. The Committee note that pursuant to the GoM’s
recommendation on the provision of accommodation, CGHS facility
and admission of wards of the employees of Prasar Bharati in the
Central Schools at par with Central Government employees, the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting are taking up the issues
at the respective levels. In order to avoid discontentment and low
morale/commitment among the employees of Prasar Bharati, the
Committee desire that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
should urgently and vigorously pursue the matters with the respective
Ministries/Departments to get the above said benefits available to
the employees of Prasar Bharati at an early date, Particularly when
the GoM has already decided to treat Prasar Bharati employees, as
on ‘deemed deputation’ with all facilities at par with the Central
Government employees.
VI. The Future Status of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
26. Noting the fact that a Group of Ministers (GoM) was constituted
by Government on 7th March, 2000 to address some of the problems
plaguing Prasar Bharati as well as to evolve strategies to sustain its
performance in the current tempo, the Committee had desired that the
GoM would give due weightage to their recommendations regarding
several vital issues pertaining to the role of Prasar Bharati and its
future status.
27. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“The recommendations of the honourable Standing Committee have
been placed before the Group of Ministers in its 5th meeting on
5th October, 2007 and a presentation also made before the GoM
by the Ministry. GoM has taken note of the recommendations of
the Committee.”
28. The Committee appreciate to note that their recommendations
on several vital issues pertaining to the role of Prasar Bharati and
its future status have been taken note of by the Group of Ministers.
In view of the imperatives and urgency involved, the Committee
hope that the Government will take positive action at an early date
in removing the serious problems that are besetting Prasar Bharati
so that it becomes a professional, self sustaining and autonomous
public Service Broadcaster in the truest sense.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Functions and Objectives
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Prasar Baharati came into existence on 23rd November, 1997
bringing Akashwani (AIR) and Doordarshan (DD) under one roof
following the enactment of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation
of India) Act, 1990. With its vision of ‘Bahujana Hitaya Bahujana
Sukhaya’ AIR has played a pivotal role in meeting the education,
entertainment and information needs of the people since the time it
was formed in 1923. From a modest beginning in September, 1959
with a small transmitter in Delhi, Doordarshan has grown to be one
of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. As enshrined in Section
12 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 the Corporation would be guided
by specified objectives with emphasis on unholding the unity and
integrity of the country, nurturing the democratic and social values
enshrined in the constitution and projecting the varied culture, tradition
of different regions of the country. In a multi-ethnic and multi-linguistic
country like ours, Prasar Bharati’s role in upholding the unity and
integrity of the nation cannot be over-emphasized. However, having
gone into the role of Prassar Bharati and its future status, the
Committee find that there are several areas relating to the working of
the Corporation which call for specific attention, bold decisions and
systematic follow-up on the part on the part of the Government. These
aspects have been dealt with by the Committee in detail in the
subsequent paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
Statement of facts. Hence comments not required.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-
B (Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]
The Role of Prasar Bharati as a Public Service Broadcaster (PSB)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
With the latest technological innovations and rapid proliferation of
private radio stations and television channels, Public Service

12
Broadcasting attains greater significance. In a Multi-channel scenario
that is mostly driven by market forces, the country can ill afford to
ignore the information and education needs of the rural masses and
the less privileged citizens. As distinct from commercial broadcasters,
the Public Service Broadcaster is meant to foster national integration,
preserve the nation’s cultural heritage, provide platform for interaction
between the common man and policy makers, etc. The Public Service
Broadcaster is also expected to play the role of a catalyst for rapid
socio-economic transformation. This is even more important in a
country like ours with distinct cultures, multiple religions and ethic
diversities. Recognizing the essentiality of Public Service Broadcasting
in our country, the Committee would like to stress that Prasar Bharati
should, at any cost continue  to fulfil its mandate as a Public Service
Broadcaster.
Action Taken by the Government
As stressed by the Committee, Prasar Bharati has to continue to
fulfil its mandate as public Service Broadcaster. Both Doordarshan and
All India Radio have been continuously striving to fulfil its role in the
regard. The GoM is also of the view that Prasar Bharati should continue
to discharge the mandate given to it under Section 12 of the Prasar
Bharati.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-
B (Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee find that AIR devoted about 51% and DD-I about
46% of the time for programmes on art and culture, women’s education,
environment, sports, rural development, etc. Both AIR and Doordarshan
continue to broadcast regular programmes on farm and home, family
welfare, National Rural Health Mission, AIDS awareness through special
programmes ‘Jeevan Hai Anmol’ ‘Jassos Vijay’ ‘Kalyani programme’
etc. According to the Ministry, Prasar Bharati has been able to play a
crucial role in determining the direction and thrust of broadcasting in
India and setting standards through programmes that are meaningful
and absorbing. As a major step forward in this direction, Doordarshan
has been executing a major project under which literary classics in
various Indian Languages are selected for making serials on them by
award wining producers after which they are dubbed in other Indian
languages and telecast in other regions of the country. While taking
note of the distinguished role being played by Prasar Bharati as an
agent of social transformation and development, the Committee are of
the considered view that, with multiple players now in the field of

13
broadcasting, Prasar Bharati can ill-afford to dilute in any way its
avowed objective of public Service Broadcasting. On the other hand
there is an urgent need to find innovative ways and means of stepping
up its coverage of the rural areas and difficult terrains.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Baharti is taking steps and would continue to take them to
step up its coverage.
Regarding the suggestions to find innovative ways and means of
stepping up its coverage of rural areas and difficult terrain, steps have
been proposed in the 11th Plan in this regard. Some of these include:
Multi channel DTH service is proposed to be augmented to provide
additional channels to cater to diversified requirements of the masses
in puristic country like ours.
For coverage of A & N islands, DTH service in C-Band is expected
to be started by 2008.
To increase the coverage in rural areas, narrow casting the
programmes for farming community through HPTs and LPTs in
consultation with Ministry of Agriculture.
Up gradation of some transmitters and installation of number of
LPTs by All India Radio is proposed in 11th Plan to extend the coverage
for rural areas and difficult terrain.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-
B (Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
With Public Broadcasting not being a financially viable proposition,
the need for revenue generation is the first and foremost hurdle for
Prasar Bharati in carrying on its mandate as a Public Service
Broadcaster. Endowed with social obligation of public broadcasting,
the Corporation has serious limitations for competing with other
commercial broadcasters in the country . In that sense, the CEO, Prasar
Bharati was emphatic in his view: “We should not compete with
commercial broadcasters and our major objective should not be revenue
earning.” Therefore, maintaining a balance between Public Service
Broadcasting and revenue generation has been a formidable challenge
before Prasar Bharati ever since its inception. At the same time the
Committee note that sharing of social obligation in broadcasting by
commercial broadcasters is, in fact, another important issue that needs

14
to be addressed. They also note that the role of Public Broadcasting is
well defined all over the world and the Public Broadcaster is given a
clear-cut mandate with definite resources. In this background, there is
need for Prasar Bharati to carry on Public Broadcasting functions
efficiently at optimum cost and at the same time achieving maximum
profitability on commercial broadcasting operations. It is also inevitable
that Prasar Bharati should continue with its role as an agent of
enrichment and empowerment of the masses, the strong dictates of
financial self-reliance notwithstanding. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Government should formulate specific strategy to
ensure that social obligation is shared by all the players in the
broadcasting sector and to ensure definite financial support to Prasar
Bharati in order that Public Service Broadcasting continues to be its
hall mark. They expect the Government to take prompt measures in
this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The need for casting Public Service Broadcast obligations on the
Private Commercial Broadcasters has already been recognized by the
Government in the Draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bills,
2007 prepared by the Ministry and under consultation with various
stakeholders. Detailed provisions have been made in Section 13 (copy
of the relevant proposed provisions enclosed). The provisions not only
provide for a minimum percentage of domestically produced content
to promote indigenous media/entertainment industry but also cast
minimum obligations on all channels for public Service Broadcasting
in the programme and advertising content.
2. It also provides for financial penalties for non-compliance and
creation of a Public Service Broadcasting Council to discharge the
responsibility of ensuring compliance to the Public Service Broadcasting
obligations. The details of the Public Service Broadcasting Council are
given in Chapter-4 of the Draft Bill (copy of relevant provisions
enclosed).
3. It has been argued by media and industry organizations that
functions proposed for the Council can be performed by the Regulatory
Authority itself and there is no need of a separate Council. The Ministry
is at present preparing a formulation whereby the Regulatory Authority
will be required to submit its recommendations on the Public Service
Broadcasting obligations to the Government after further detailed
consultations with stakeholders, rather than incorporating such
obligation in the Act itself. The proposals for the Council is also being
dropped and the responsibility being given to the Authority itself.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]

15
13. Public Service Broadcasting Obligations: Every broadcasting
service provider shall discharge such public service broadcasting
obligations as the Central Government may prescribe form time to
time in accordance with limits indicated below:
(a) The share of content produced in India shall be as prescribed
by the Central Government and shall not be less than 15%
of the total content of a channel broadcast during every
week.
(b) The share of public service/social messaging through
advertisements and such other promotional materials/
messages shall be as notified by Central Government from
time to time and not more than 10% of the total commercial
time of channel broadcast during every week.
(c) The share of public service/socially relevant programme
content shall be as notified by Central Government from
time to time and more than 10% of the total programme
content of a channel broadcast during every week.
Provided that the Central Government may provide a time frame
to comply with any one or more of the obligations as mentioned
above.
Provided further that Central Government may lay down policy
Guidelines to either exempt or to allow partial compliance or the
permissible manner of compliance with respect to an individual
broadcaster or certain categories of broadcasters.
(2) In the event of failure to comply with the public service
obligation, every content-broadcasting service provider shall be liable
to pay such amount to the Authority as may be calculated by the
Authority in the manner prescribed by the Central Government towards
its public service obligation.
(3) (i) Public Service Broadcasting Constituted under the Act shall
discharge the responsibility of ensuring compliance of public
service broadcasting obligations by broadcasters and shall
suggest to the Authority the amount of penalty to be a
broadcaster for non-compliance of its obligation as laid down
under subsection (1).
(ii) Public Service Broadcasting Council will also lay down
regulations from time to time as to what will constitute
public service/socially relevant programming or messaging
and how its share is to be calculated.

16
(4) The amount of penalty paid shall be deposited in a fund to
be called the “public service broadcasting obligation fund”
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC SERVICE BROADCASTING COUNCIL
30. Establishment of Public Service Broadcasting Council, term
of office of members thereof.— (1) There shall be established, by
notification a Council, to be known as the Public Service Broadcasting
Council.
(2) The Broadcasting Council shall consist of—
(i) a President and five other members to be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst persons of eminence in
public life, media and civil society organisations; and one
representative of Prasar Bharati.
(ii) at least two persons in the Council should be women.
(3) The President of the Broadcasting Council shall be a whole-
time member and every other member shall be a part-time member
and the President or the part-time member shall hold office as such
for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his
office.
(4) The President of the Broadcasting Council shall be entitled to
such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of
service in respect of leave, pension (if any), provident fund and other
matters as may be prescribed:
Provided that the salary and allowances and the conditions of
service shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President of the
Broadcasting Council after his appointment.
(5) The other members of the Broadcasting Council shall be entitled
to such allowances as may be prescribed.
31. Powers and functions of the Public Service Broadcasting
Council.— The Public Service Broadcasting Council shall exercise the
following powers and functions:
(i) Ensure effective compliance of public service broadcasting
obligations cast upon broadcasting service providers as per the
provisions of this Act, and in the event of failure of a licensed service

17
provider to meet such obligations, suggest to the Authority the amount
of penalty to be levied and collected as per guidelines laid down by
Central Government;
(ii) make recommendations to the Central Government on whether
a broadcasting channel deserve to be categorized as a public service
broadcasting channel;
(ii) institute national awards for public service broadcasting;
(iv) defy from time to time as to what will constitute public
service/socially relevant programming or messaging;
(v) produce or organize the production of benchmark quality
content, public service messages and programmes that private television
can use to fulfil its public service broadcasting regulations;
(vi) create and administer mechanisms to provide free airtime for
public service content created or funded by civil society groups and
NGOs etc., which may also indulge starting a public service
broadcasting channel;
(vii) support formal training courses, workshops, seminars,
discussions, research in Public Service Broadcasting for content
producers, media watchers, critics and those working in the social
sector.
32. Powers of the President: The President shall have powers of
general superintendence and direction in the conduct of the affairs of
the Council and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings
of the Council, exercise such powers of the Council, and shall discharge
such functions of the Council, as may be prescribed.
33. Removal or resignation of President and members: (1) The
Central Government may remove from office the President or any
member of the Council who:
(a) Ceases to be a citizen of India; or
(b) Is adjudged an insolvent; or
(c) Is convicted or any offence involving moral turpitude; or
(d) Is, in the opinion of the Central Government, unfit to
continue in office by reason of infirmity or body or mind;
or

18
(e) Acquires such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Chairperson or member;
(f) Abuses his position so as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to public interest.
(2) The President or any other member may resign his office by
giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on
such resignation being accepted, the President or the member shall be
deemed to have vacated his office.
34. Meetings of the Council or its Committees: (1) The Council
may constitute committees of the Council for specific purposes, and
make regulations for the transaction of business at the meetings of the
Council as well as its committees.
(2) The Council or its Committee shall meet at such time and
place and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings as may be provided by regulations.
(3) The President shall preside at the meetings of the Council or
its Committee, and if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting,
any other member elected by the members present at such meeting
shall preside at the meetings.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his office if he
absents himself for three consecutive meetings of the Council without
the leave of the President.
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Council
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present
and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the president, or
in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second
or casting vote.
35. Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings: No act or proceedings
of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) Any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Council; or
(b) Any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
member; or
(c) Any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting
the merits of the case.

19
36. Secretary and other officers and employees of the Council:
(1) Secretary of the Council shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the
Council. Subject to the provisions of section 32 of the Act, the Secretary
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Council
as may be delegated to him by the Council.
(2) The Central Government shall make available to the Council,
a panel of not less than three officers of the rank of the Joint Secretary
to the Government of India, and the Council may select one of them
and recommend his appointment as Secretary of the Council to the
Government.
(4) The Council may appoint such officers and other employees,
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act in the manner as provided by the regulations.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Council shall be
such as may be determined by regulations.
37. Finance, Accounts and Audit: (1) The Central Government
may for enabling the Council to discharge its functions efficiently, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to
the Council in each financial year such sums of money as the
Government considers necessary by way of grants-in-aid.
(2) The Council shall have its own fund and all the receipts of the
Council shall be credited to the fund. All money belonging to the
fund shall be deposited in one or more Scheduled Banks in such
manner as the Council may decide and Council may spend such sums
as it thinks fit for performing its function under this Act.
(3) The Council shall be able to collect any amount or donation or
grant from any government or non government body as a contribution
towards public service broadcasting obligation fund.
(4) The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time each
year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year
next ensuing showing:—
(a) The expenditure which is proposed to be met from the
internal resource of the Council; and
(b) The expenditure which is proposed to be met from public
service broadcasting obligation fund.

20
(c) The sums required from the Central Government to meet
other expenses, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to
the Central Government.
(5) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor General.
(7) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General
has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to
inspect the offices of the Council.
(8) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by him
in his behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(9) The Council shall, after the end of each financial year, submit
to the Central Government a report on its activities during the
preceding financial year and containing such information relating to
the proceedings and policy of the Council, as the Government may
prescribe from time to time.
(10) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
38. Furnishing of returns, etc. to the Central Government:
(1) The Council shall furnish to the Central Government at such time
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central
Government may direct, such returns and statements and such
particulars in regard to any proposed or existing program for the
promotion and development of the public service broadcasting, as the
Central Government may, from time to time, require.

21
(2) The Council shall prepare once every year in such form and at
such time as may be prescribed, an annual summary of its activities
during the previous year and copies of the report shall be forwarded
to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
39. Power of the Council to make regulations: (1) The Council
may, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act
and the rules or guidelines issued thereunder, for enabling it to perform
its functions under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:
(a) The manner of appointment of officers and other employees
of the Council;
(b) The salary and allowances payable to and other conditions
of service of the officers and other employees of the Council.
(c) The times and places at which meetings of the Council may
be held and, the procedure to be followed in regard to the
transaction of the business at such meetings.
(d) The delegation of powers and functions to the President,
members and other officers of the Council.
(e) The documentary record to be maintained by the licensees.
(f) The manner in which broadcasters shall establish and
operate the system of self-certification of public service/
socially relevant programming or messaging.
(g) Constitution of public service/socially relevant programming
or messaging and calculation of its share.
(h) Any other matter in respect of which provision is, in the
opinion of the Council, necessary for the performance of its
functions under this Act.
Provided that the regulations under clauses (a) & (b) above shall
be made with the prior approval of the Central Government.

22
New Technologies
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that there is constant need for inducting
innovative technologies for remaining competitive and effective in an
era of convergence and also for widening the audience/viewership
network of Prasar Bharati. K-band transmission by Doordarshan was
started in December, 2004 and the number of TV Channels on DTH
platform is now being increased from 33 to 50. In principle approval
for high definition TV (HDTV), which produces five times more visual
information than a conventional TV picture, has been received and the
proposal for setting up production and transmission facilities at 4 Metro
cities have been included in the 11th plan proposal. The Committee
note that induction of other new technologies like Internet Protocol
TV (IPTV), Mobile TV , Webcasting, SMS based interactivity etc. are at
different stages of implementation or consideration by Doordarshan.
AIR proposes to introduce multi-media service with multiple channels
of programmes in satellite mode duly supported by terrestrial mode
in metropolitan cities. There are also proposals for harnessing latest
technologies in digital radio broadcast systems and introducing value
added services like Dynamic Label, Interactive Text Transmission,
Broadcast Website Multimedia object Transfer, etc. which will not only
cater to the needs of various sections of the listeners but also provide
scope of enhancing its revenue earnings. With plethora of new TV
and FM channels entering into fray, both Doordarshan and AIR need
to give thrust to induction of the latest technologies emerging in the
broadcasting sector. The Committee stress that the new technologies
be inducted at the earliest in order that Prasar Bharati may be able to
reap the benefits of the same well in time.
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has stated that they are keeping a close watch on
new and emerging technologies in the field of radio and TV
broadcasting. These technologies are adopted in the AIR and
Doordarshan network depending upon their suitability and availability
of resources. Some initiatives recently taken/planned in near future
include:
• Ku-band DTH transmission
• Mobile TV pilot project
• HDTV pilot project
• Automation of transmitters

23
• Interactive services
•W eb-casting
•A rchival management
• Digital multi-media service through terrestrial and satellite
mode
For survey, experimentation and adoption of new technologies in
the network an amount of Rs. 40 crores was projected under
11th Plan. However due to reduced overall allocation indicated by
Planning Commission for the XI Plan, this outlay is proposed to be
reduced to Rs. 20.00 crores. Further an amount of Rs. 210.00 crores
and Rs. 165 crores has also been proposed for modernization of DTH
and introduction of HDTV respectively.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]
Programme Content and Production
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee feel that what will determine the relevance and
competitiveness of Doordarshan and AIR will be the content and
delivery of the programmes. The CEO of Prasar Bharati hit the nail on
the head when he admitted candidly that in any programme, the dulha
is the programme content while all other allied actors are baratis.
Notwithstanding the tall claims made by the Ministry before the
committee that constant improvement are being made in the content,
style of presentation, format and technology of programmes on the
basis of feedback received from the listeners viewers through Audience
Research Units and from IRS and TAM data, the general impression
gathered by the Committee is that there is much scope for improvement
in the quality of the programmes broadcast by AIR and Doordarshan.
Specific attention of the Committee was drawn to the absence of
strategisation and existence of a kind of tokenism in Prasar Bharati.
When compared to the advancement being made by the media in
general, the Committee feel that there is much scope for improvement
in the quality of programmes by AIR and Doordarshan. Prasar Bharati
needs to deploy more professionally qualified personnel for monitoring
programme content and production. There is also need to make the
Programme Advisory Committees and Programme Monitors more
effective and purposeful. The Committee trust that Prasar Bharati will
accord highest priority to content and delivery of programmers and
orchestrated efforts will be made to bring about an overall improvement
in the sphere.

24
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati agree entirely and steps will be taken to follow
these directions.
All Indian Radio and Doordarshan have been constantly aiming
for excellence both in terms of content and quality.
New Guidelines for Commissioning of programmes have been
approved by the Prasar Bharati Board. Hence, money constraint will
be addressed by way of capital restructuring and will further lead to
substantial improvement in the quality of programmes.
Joint Programme Advisory Committees have been set up at many
State Capitals. These committees aid and advise the concerned AIR
and Doordarshn Station to plan and produce good quality programme.
Overall shortage of manpower is affecting the content generation
and quality of programmes. Lifting of ban on filling up of the posts
and recruitment would help in this regard.
 [Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I)
Marketing
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
It is bewildering to note that with 225 Radio Stations and 361
Transmitters owned by AIR covering 91.42% of the country by area
and 99.13% by population and despite broadcasting programmes in as
many as 24 languages and 143 dialects, the listnership of AIR as per
the market report in 2004-2005 stood at 53% in case of urban areas,
58% in case of rural areas and a paltry 30% in metro cities. Likewise,
Doordarshan operates 26 channels with 64 Doordarshan Kendras and
1400 transmitters covering 90% of India by population, but the market
share of DD-1 is 47.4%, DD News is 12.9% and DD Sports is 2.3% as
per IRS Survey. The market share of advertisement revenue of
Dooordarshan is only 20% with the remaining 80% being shared by
private channels, indicating the need for refocussing marketing and
advertisement approach and initiatives by Prasar Bharati. The

25
Committee, therefore, emphasise the urgency of strengthening the
marketing set up in Prasar Bharati. They trust that the Corporation
would rise to the occasion and do the needful in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati realizes the need and urgency for strengthening its
marketing setup and has initiated certain steps and would strive to
enlarge then in due course.
All India Radio and Doordarshan has a vast network covering
major percentage of the country’s population. While fulfilling its
mandate as a Public Service Broadcaster, Prasar Bharati has definitely
shifted to augmenting revenue generation during the past few years
but even today public broadcast programmes are broadcast/telecast
even at the cost of revenue loss.
In the direction of Marketing, Prasar Bharati has made considerable
efforts by opening up various marketing Divisions in different parts of
the country and these units are definitely delivering the goods. The
magnitude of the problem is not only the lack of marketing efforts or
the absence of skilled marketing professionals but the reasons are
manifold. There was a time, only a few years back when the overall
revenue of AIR was Rs. 69.00 crores whereas marketing Division Delhi
alone procured business to the tune of more than Rs. 70.00 crores in
the year 2005-2006.
As on date though a very few private players are operating as
compared to the vast network of AIR and Doordarshan yet these have
been successful in capturing a large share of advertising spends.
Reasons are quality, content and innovative style of presentation of
these channels and not only the marketing efforts. In order to compete
with other private channels Prasar Bharati need a total revamping of
their programme also.
Strengthening marketing set up in Prasar Bharati and induction
and deployment of professionals in the field is a welcome step provided
all other aspects are also taken into consideration. However, in this
direction a few steps have already been taken. The requirement of
professionals at lower and middle level has already been submitted
by various Marketing Divisions.
The staff of AIR/Doordarshan having experience of commercial
activities and wider prospective of the organization is better equipped
for marketing. To bring professionalism, the other option could be

26
having the existing staff trained from Marketing/Business Institutes.
To motivate them for better results an incentive scheme could also be
evolved which would benefit the organization in the long run.
The overall revenue figures given below for the last few years
clearly indicate that Prasar Bharati has been able to market their
channels effectively and it also proves that the initiatives by Prasar
Bharati in the direction of Revenue Generation have given positive
and encouraging results:
Gross
2001-2002 711.89 crores
2002-2003 686.06 crores
2003-2004 673.75 crores
2004-2005 831.47 crores
2005-2006 1220.32 crores
2006-2007 1136.78 crores
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The weak point of Prasar Bharati, according to the Committee, is
the non-existence of a professional marketing set up. This was
corroborated by a representative of Prasar Bharati who conceded, “we
accept that we are weak in marketing”. Going to the genesis of the
problem, it was brought out tellingly that it originated from the
historical background in which AIR and Doordarshan enjoyed total
monopoly in broadcasting sector where marketing efforts were not
called for. Although Prasar Bharati has made some efforts in this
direction by setting up Marketing Divisions in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Kochi, Guwahati and
Thiruvananthapuram utilizing the existing manpower, it lacks the
required professionalism and drive in the absence of skilled marketing
professionals. There is an urgent need to restructure the marketing set
up in Prasar Bharati through induction and deployment of professionals
in the field. However, it is heartening to note that setting up of a
professional marketing infrastructure is part of the terms of reference
given to the national Productivity Council engaged for making a study
on the organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati. The Committee
attach utmost importance to professional marketing set up in Prasar
Bharati and desire that the move should be pursued vigorously. All

27
out efforts should to made to strengthen marketing set up in Prasar
Bharati and to step up its advertisement revenue. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati realizes the need and urgency for strengthening its
marketing set up and has initiated certain steps and would strive to
enlarge them in due course.
All India Radio and Doordarshan has a vast network covering
major percentage of the country’s population. While fulfilling its
mandate as a Public Service Broadcaster, Prasar Bharati has definitely
shifted to augmenting revenue generation during the past few years
but even today public broadcast programmes are broadcast/telecast
even at the cost of revenue loss.
In the direction of Marketing, Prasar Bharati has made considerable
efforts by opening up various marketing Divisions in different parts of
the country and these units are definitely delivering the goods. The
magnitude of the problem is not only the lack of marketing efforts or
the absence of skilled marketing professionals but the reasons are
manifold. There was a time, only a few years back when the overall
revenue of AIR was Rs. 69.00 crores whereas marketing Division Delhi
alone procured business to the tune of more than Rs. 70.00 crores in
the year 2005-2006.
As on date though a very few private players are operating as
compared to the vast network of AIR and Doordarshan yet these have
been successful in capturing a large share of advertising spends.
Reasons are quality, content and innovative style of presentation of
these channels and not only the marketing efforts. In order to compete
with other private channels Prasar Bharati need a total revamping of
their programming also.
Strengthening marketing set up in Prasar Bharati and induction
and deployment of professionals in the field is a welcome step provided
all other aspects are also taken into consideration. However, in this
direction a few steps have already been taken. The requirement of
professionals at lower and middle level has already been submitted
by various Marketing Divisions.
The staff of AIR/Doordarshan having experience of commercial
activities and wider prospective of the organization is better equipped
for marketing. To bring professionalism, the other option could be

28
having the existing staff trained from Marketing/Business Institutes.
To motivate them for better results an incentive scheme could also be
evolved which would benefit the organization in the long run.
The overall revenue figures given below for the last few years
clearly indicate that Prasar Bharati has been able to market their
channels effectively and it also proves that the initiatives by Prasar
Bharati in the direction of Revenue Generation have given positive
and encouraging results:
Gross
2001-2002 711.89 crores
2002-2003 686.06 crores
2003-2004 673.75 crores
2004-2005 831.47 crores
2005-2006 1220.32 crores
2006-2007 1136.78 crores
Another recent initiative in the direction of revenue generation is
the recruitment of 6 Marketing Executives Grade-I by Prasar Bharati.
These professionals have been placed in different marketing Divisions
of the country including Delhi and Mumbai.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee also note with concern that the fate of the
employees of Prasar Bharati who are not eligible for any additional
benefits from Prasar Bharati because they are on “deemed deputation
without deputation allowance”, but are at the same time being deprived
of the normal benefits admissible to government employees. It is
distressing to note that the extended period for retention of
accommodation allotted from the General pool to the employees of
Prasar Bharati on ‘Deemed deputation’ would end on 21st November,
2007 although Prasar Bharati’s own project for construction of staff
quarters is nowhere near completion. Likewise, they are eligible only
for OPD facilities under the Central Government Health Scheme
(CGHS) which has been extended to them on cost-to-cost basis at par
with the employees of other autonomous bodies. The wards of the
employees of Prasar Bharati are also being deprived of the facility for

29
admission in Kendriya Vidyalayas. It is only logical that all the benefits
entitled to Government servants should continue to be provided to
the employees of Prasar Bharati till such time their services are
absorbed in Prasar Bharati. Undoubtedly, these factors have left the
employees of Prasar Bharati in the lurch, being deprived of the benefits
on either side. In Committee’s view this would only breed
discontentment and indiscipline among the employees resulting in low
morale and commitment. The Ministry cannot remain a mute spectator
in such circumstances. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
should take up these issues at the highest level so as to redress the
grievances of the employees.
Action taken by the Government
As regards providing accommodation, CGHS facility and admission
of wards of the employees of Prasar Bharati in the Central schools at
par with the Central government employees, the GoM has
recommended the same in its meeting held on 05.10.2007. As regards
admission of wards of the employees in Kendriya Vidyalayas, a letter
has been sent to the Ministry of HRD from the Minister of Information
& Broadcasting. The matter relating to CGHS facility is being taken
up at Minster’s level with the Ministry of Health. For extending the
facility of accommodation, the matter is being referred to Cabinet
Committee on Accommodation.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 25 of Chapter-I)
Human Resource Development
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note with concern that Prasar Bharati is plagued
with a peculiar phenomenon wherein with the stated overstaffing on
one side, there are as many as 90 radio stations across the country
which are being run by programme executives in the absence of Station
Directors and Assistant Station Directors and there is also dearth of
personnel to take up important specialized functions in Accounts,
Costing,, Finance, Human Resource Development, Marketing, Legal,
Information Technology, Audit, etc. At present the organization has
more number of staff on the programming, administrative and

30
engineering categories. The crux of the problem as identified by a
representative of Prasar Bharati seems to be “rising average age of
employees and lack of fresh blood”. Obviously it calls for induction of
young and creative talent to rejuvenate the organization. The Committee
note that National Productivity Council has been engaged to go into
the organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati including managerial,
organization and financial aspects. The Committee trust that the study
would be expedited and the organizational restructuring, including
introduction of suitable VRS depending on the need, would be taken
up with a view to strengthening the human resource base of Prasar
Bharati. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the whole exercise being undertaken by Prasar Bharati.
Action Taken by the Government
The National Productivity Council has been engaged by Prasar
Bharati to go into the organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati.
The NPC has been asked the expedite submission of its report.
2. The GoM has recognized the need of filling the vacancies on a
priority basis and has desired the Ministry to work out a
comprehensive proposal in consultation with Finance Ministry.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 22 of Chapter I)
The Future Status of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that a Group of Ministers was constituted by
Government on 7th March, 2006 to address some of the problems
plaguing Prasar Bharati as well as to evolve strategies to sustain its
performance in the current tempo. The GoM is to examine various
issues pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati and strengthening
the organization in respect of personnel administration, finance,
programming, engineering, commercial and marketing activities with
a view to giving it adequate strength to compete with private television
and new FM radio channels while retaining its identity as a Public
Service Broadcaster. The Group is also expected to resolve the various
financial and administrative issues that will eventually lead to the

31
restructuring of Prasar Bharati. The GoM has so far held three sittings,
viz. on 18th May, 2006, 14th August, 2006 and 31st August, 2006. The
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had, during
evidence, given an assurance that the recommendations of the
Committee on the subject would be placed before the GoM before
they take any final decision on the various aspects relating Prasar
Bharati. With the Committee having dealt with and made important
recommendations regarding several vital issues pertaining to the role
of Prasar Bharati and its future status, they trust that the GoM will
give due weightage to their recommendations on these matters. The
Committee would await the decision of the Government on these
matters.
Action taken by the Government
The recommendations of the honourable Standing Committee have
been placed before the Group of Ministers in its 5th meeting on
5th October, 2007 and a presentation also made before the GoM by
the Ministry. GoM has taken note of the recommendations of the
Committee.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 28 of Chapter-I)

32
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring had also
worked out the future investment requirements of Prasar Bharati. After
considering as many as six investment options for AIR, it was felt that
Option IV with a total investment of Rs. 5900 crores envisaged for the
next 10 years would be the best suited for balanced growth of
broadcasting in the country. With this level of investment, the income
projected by 2014-2015 was Rs. 1180 crores with a surplus of Rs. 1563.38
crores over a period of 10 years. Similarly out of the four options
considered for Doordarshan, Option IV with an investment requirement
of Rs. 3531 crores with provision for DTH with terrestrial and full
digitalization seemed to be inevitable in view of technological
changeover throughout the world towards digital broadcasting. The
income projected under the option by 2014-2015 was Rs. 1645.34 crores
with an overall deficit of Rs. 11,695.61 crores requiring Government
support of Rs. 11,625.01 crores for Public Broadcasting Services over
the period of ten years. During evidence the Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting exuded considerable optimism that
although the investment requirements were quite high,, if the money
could be invested, it would create a state-of-the-art infrastructure in
the terrestrial and DTH network and would take Prasar Bharati to
greater heights. The Committee have, nonetheless, not gone into the
merits and demerits of each option, which they expect the Ministry to
do. With no soft options left, the Committee are of the firm view that
Government would have to take a few bold decisions to make Prasar
Bharati viable and competitive. They are of the view that, having done
so much of ground work, the question of capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati should be pursued vigorously until it
reaches the logical conclusion. At the same time, the Committee feel
that the Herculian task of financial self-sufficiency in Prasar Bharati
may not become a reality without mobilization of maximum resources
internally. The Committee, therefore, also suggest that in the coming
years Prasar Bharati should strive tirelessly to become financially self-
reliant in order to reduce over-dependence on Government allocations.

33
Action Taken by the Government
The role of Prasar Bharati is determined by the statute. Therefore,
certain funding by State either through budget grant and/or licence
fee and/or Public Broadcasting Service Fee would always be required
to fulfill its obligation towards Public Service Broadcasting. The issues
of financial viability have to be balanced with the role of the Public
Broadcaster assigned to Prasar Bharati under the Act. Elements of
dependence on budgetary support, therefore, are inevitable under any
programme of capital restructuring. Section 17 of the Prasar Bharati
Act 1990 is relevant in this regard.
2. The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007 has desired
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in details with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations..
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]

34
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Organizational Structure
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that the Prasar Bharati Board consists of
a Chairman; six part-time members; three whole time members
consisting of an Executive member, a Member (Personnel) and a
Member (Finance); two Ex-Officio Members, viz. DG, Doordarshan and
DG, AIR; one representative of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and two representatives of the employees of the
Corporation. Out of the stipulated fifteen members on the board, as
on 4th December, 2006 only six were in position with the key posts
like that of the executive Member, Member (Personnel), Member
(Finance) etc. remaining vacant. The new CEO, Prasar Bharati joined
the Corporation on 2nd January, 2007 after the post having remained
vacant for more than six months. It is astonishing to note that there
are positions on the Prasar Bharati Board which have been lying vacant
for more than three years. With the power of general superintendence,
direction and management of the affairs of the Corporation having
been vested solely on the Prasar Bharati Board, it is a matter of qualm
as to how the truncated Board could discharge its responsibilities
effectively in meeting the emerging challenges being faced by Prasar
Bharati. It is, therefore, not surprising to the Committee that the
performance of Prasar Bharati has remained lacklustre ever since its
formation. The Committee deplore such a callous attitude on the part
of the Ministry in not taking prompt measures for filling up the vacant
positions on the Board of Prasar Bharati. They therefore, recommend
that prompt steps be taken for filling up all the existing vacant positions
on the Board and they be apprised of the outcome thereon.
Action Taken by the Government
Since the last meeting of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology, three part-time Members have been appointed. DG : AIR
and DG: Doordarshan are also ex-officio Members of the Prasar Bharati
Board. These posts are at present vacant and the process of filling up
both these posts is at an advanced stage. As regards representatives of
the employees on the Prasar Bharati Board, no one has been elected
so far. The latest copy of the current Board of Directors is enclosed.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 8 of Chapter-I)

35
PRASAR BHARATI BOARD
Chairman
M.V . Kamath
Chief Executive Officer
B.S. Lalli
Member (Finance)
A.K. Jain
Member (Personnel)
V. Shivakumar
Part-time Members
Ms. Chitra Mudgal
M.L. Mehta
R.N. Bisaria
Dr. Sunil Kapoor
Mr. George Verghese
Ms. Mamata Shanker
Representative of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
Additional Secretary
Ex Officio Members
Director-General (Doordarshan)
L.D. Mandloi
Director-General (Akashvani)

36
Autonomy of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee observe that it was with the objective of ensuring
plurality and diversity of views and ideas to enable citizens to arrive
at informed judgement on issues of concern to them that the Prasar
Bharati was set up an autonomous body under the Prasar Bharati Act,
1990. Primarily, Prasar Bharati was expected to organize and conduct
public broadcasting services to inform, educate and entertain the public
and ensure a balanced development of broadcasting on Radio and
Television. As compared to the other Public Sector Undertakings, Prasar
Bharati was expected to act independently of the Government.
Notwithstanding the noble ideals for attaining autonomy, the Committee
note that Section 32 of the Prasar Bharati Act vests a whole lot of
powers on the Government for making rules with regard to service
conditions, salary and allowances, etc. and taking decisions with regard
to investing of its funds, preparation of annual statement of accounts,
preparation of annual report etc. Whatever might have been the
compulsions for retaining these powers with the Government, the
Committee believe that the provisions are serious impediments coming
in the way of autonomy of Prasar Bharati and fulfilling the avowed
objectives of the Corporation.
Action Taken by the Government
As has already been submitted at the time of evidence before the
Committee, rule making powers with respect to recruitment, service
conditions, investments and others have been kept with the
Government because of the over dependence of Prasar Bharati on
Government funds. Unless Prasar Bharati has a self-sustaining model
of funding its requirements, such rule making powers are bound to be
there with the Government. The GoM in its meeting on 5th October,
2007 has taken a view that the erstwhile employees of Government
with Prasar Bharati shall continue to be on deemed deputation with
all benefits that are available to any Government employee. On the
issue of funding, the GoM is yet to firm up its views.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 12 of Chapter-I)

37
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting explained to the Committee that these powers have been
retained by the Government on account of the fact that about 70% of
funds required by Prasar Bharati are provided by the Government
under Plan or Non-Plan allocation. The view put forward was that
Prasar Bharati could not be expected to be given the same financial
autonomy as that of PSUs enjoying Navratna status. however, the
Secretary did admit that “Prasar bharati will never be able to achieve
programme and editorial autonomy as long as they depend financially
on Government.” The CEO Prasar Bharati advocated that BBC is the
best-suited model for any Public Service Broadcaster. Going a step
further he commented, “I do not visualize Prasar Bharati with the
kind of mandate that the Parliament of India has given it to deviate
much from the BBC model.” Another representative of Prasar Bharati
felt that “as the Act stands, it would probably require an amendment
to the Act.“ To say the least, in the present context, the concept of
autonomy sounds a trifle jaded as far as Prasar Bharati is concerned
and calls for serious measures to repair the same. The Committee
trust that the proposed move for capital and financial restructuring of
Prasar Bharati and funding of Public Service Broadcasting operations
would create a favourable atmosphere for such a change. At the same
time, they also stress that in a multi-ethnic and multi-linguistic society
like ours, it should be ensured that the Corporation adheres to its
specified objective of upholding the unity and integrity of the country
and nurturing the democratic and social values enshrined in the
constitution.
Action Taken by the Government
Various models of funding as brought out in the report of
Committee on capital and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and
funding of Public Broadcasting Service Corporation across the world
are being examined by the Group of Ministers for a final view. GoM
has also expressed a view that Prasar Bharati should continue to
discharge its role as a Public Service Broadcaster. Since public Service
Broadcasting operations by themselves cannot generate sufficient
revenue, hence Prasar Bharati will have to be substantially funded
either directly by the Government or by other means. GoM is yet to
take a final view of the funding pattern.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 12 of Chapter-I)

38
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee also find that a number of Committees were
appointed to go into the various aspects of working of Prasar Bharati,
viz. Sengupta Committee on 1996, Review Committee in 1999 and the
Committee on Capital & Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati in
2006. However, there does not seem to have been any serious follow
up on the recommendations made by the Committees. The Committee
have been informed that the recommendations of the later stand
referred to a Group of Ministers (GoMs) which is yet to take a decision
in this regard. In Committee’s view, funding pattern of Prasar Bharati
is a key factor in determining the autonomy of the Corporation. Public
Service Broadcasting throughout the world being not a remunerative
activity, Prasar Bharati is saddled with heavy debt for no fault of its
own. While deploring the undue delay in arriving at a definite decision
regarding the funding pattern of Prasar Bharati, the Committee trust
that, in view of the urgency involved, a decision will soon be taken
to arrive at a viable capital structure for Prasar Bharati.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007 has desred
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 15 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee also note that in their Report, the Committee on
Capital and Financial Restructuring seems to exude confidence that
Prasar Bharati would be able to meet the revenue cost of Public
broadcasting as well as capital requirements for upgrading and
expansion of its assets through the collection of Licence Fee and Public
Broadcasting Service Fee. With this, Government would be required to
fund Prasar Bharati only to the extent of shortfall, if any, in order that
it may fulfill its Public Broadcasting objectives. The Ministry, however,

39
expressed the view that instead of keeping the criteria for such funding
open-ended, it should be in conformity with the norms to be drawn
up in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission
and Prasar Bharati and mutually agreed to. The Secretary also apprised
the Committee that the GoM had asked the Ministry to draw up
suitable norms in this regard in consultation with others and submit
the same for their approval. The Committee trust that by the Ministry
must have completed the exercise and submitted the proposal for the
approval by the GoM. They would like to be apprised of the further
action taken in the matter.
Action Taken by the Government
It was possible only after the increase in Revenue generation of
the Prasar Bharati. However, 70% (approx.) of funds required by the
Prasar Bharati are provided by the Government under plan and Non
plan allocation. However, a Committee has been Constituted by
Government with a view to enabling Prasar Bharati to meet their twin
objectives of social obligations as well as financial independence in an
effective manner in the prevailing competitive on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007 has desred
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I)
Digitalization of Terrestrial Network
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that Doordarshan, which is one of the largest
terrestrial networks in the world, operated 30 channels and has
126 Maintenance Centres. Doordarshan has also the distinction of
having exclusive rights for terrestrial TV broadcasting in the country.
Out of 64 Doordarshan Kendras (DDKs), only 9 major DDKs have
been made fully digital and 8 more are in the process. The remaining
DDKs are either being made partially digital or are yet to be the
digitalized. It has only four digital transmitters set up at Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai on an experimental service against a total number
of 1392 analog transmitters in the country. Doordarshan has reportedly
included proposals for digitalization of terrestrial transmission in the

40
11th Plan proposals which are yet to be approved. According to
Doorarshan, complete digitalization of terrestrial transmission, as of
now, is expected to be achieved only by the end of the 12th Plan,
subject to availability of adequate resources. It is quite distressing to
note that Doordarshan is still in the initial stages of switching over
from analog to digital while most of the developed countries have
already digitalized substantially . In the current era of intense
competition in broadcasting, Prasar Bharati has been placed at a very
disadvantageous position on account of the slow pace of digitalization
by Doordarshan. The Committee sense that digitalization would be
the most formidable challenge that Prasar Bharati would have to
address for making the transmission by Doordarshan more efficient
and competitive. They, therefore, emphasize that digitalization of its
network should be accorded highest priority and pursued vigorously.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has agreed with the recommendations and intimated
that provisions have been projected in the draft 11th plan for
digitisation of the DD Network.
Doordarshan has initiated process of digitisation by establishing of
DVBT transmitters at 4 metors. Utilisation of the digital transmitter at
Delhi to provide mobile TV service has been started in May 2007. It
is proposed to provide similar mobile TV service through digital
transmitter at other metros cities also.
Digitisation of terrestrial transmitter is one of the thrust areas of
11th Plan. For the digitalization of the transmitter is network Rs. 1166
crore was projected in the 11th Plan. However due to reduced overall
allocation indicated by Planning Commission for the 11th Plan, this
outlay is proposed to be reduced to Rs. 210 crores. With the reduced
allocation it will be difficult to complete the digitalisation targets by
2017 (proposed date for completion of migration to digital). It is felt
that there is a need for enhancement of the allocation outlay for
digitalisation under 11th Plan to hasten the process. In addition
Government may have to look at public private partnership for the
digitalization of the network. The Working Group for the Xth Plan
and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) have made a
recommendation to this effect, which are under consideration of the
Government.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 18 of Chapter-I)

41
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that AIR network consists of 225 Broadcasting
Centres and 361 Broadcasting Transmitters. Hard Disc based system
that has the advantage of high quality digital recording, reliability,
playback facility for linear non-destructive editing, non-deterioration
of signal quality with successive generation of sound dubbing, etc. has
been provided only at 76 Broadcasting Centres with a provision for
covering 61 more AIR stations under phase II which was expected to
be implemented by March, 2007. Whereas 526 Ultra Portable digital
recorders have already been introduced in the network, the process is
on for provision of 125 Digital Field Recorders, 61 Digital Audio
Consoles and 255 hand Held OB Recorders. Upgradation of analogue
uplink to digital mode has been done at 23 AIR stations. Despite all
these steps taken for digitalization of network, the Committee note
with dismay that only one AIR studio in Delhi is fully digitalized
thus far. It leaves much to be desired in the process of converting AIR
into a competitive network. The Committee, therefore, desires that
digitalization of AIR infrastructure should be accorded highest priority
and the need for adequate resources for meeting the challenge should
be pursued vigorously.
Action Taken by the Government
Digitalisation of AIR network is one of the major thrust areas of
11th plan. This includes digitalisation of the programme production,
transmission facilities and connectivity. AIR had projected Rs. 3145
crores for digitalisation during the 11th Plan. However due to reduced
overall allocation indicated by Planning Commission for the 11th plan,
this outlay is proposed to be reduced to Rs. 955 crore. With the reduced
allocation it will be difficult to complete the digitalization targets by
2017. There is a need to enhance the allocation outlay to hasten the
digitalisation as well as to complete the migration to digital in time.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph no. 18 of Chapter-I)

42
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Financing and Funding Pattern
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the revenue earned by Prasar Bharati
during the years from 2003-04 to 2005-06 was Rs. 567.17 crores,
Rs. 717.02 crores and Rs. 1046.83 crores respectively. The revenue
expenditure of the Corporation in the corresponding years was
Rs. 1363.25 crores, Rs. 1500.61 crores and Rs. 1738.96 crores with deficit
of Rs. 9478.28 crores, Rs. 880.28 crores and Rs. 906.19 crores. The cash
deficit has been met by releasing loans and grants by the Government.
The Balance Sheet of Prasar Bharati reflects a cumulative deficit of
Rs. 5540.22 crores (provisional) as on 31.3.2007. The Committee note
that the Review Committee on the Working of Prasar Bharati had
recommended in 1999 that Prasar Bharati should target to be financially
self sufficient within five years so that the Corporation would not
require major funding from the Government. The Committee, however,
note with concern that this has remained a distant dream with no
definite steps taken to achieve the same. Since the fate of the
Corporation cannot, in any case, be allowed to continue to hang fire
indefinitely, the Committee expect the Government to pursue the matter
with all the seriousness it deserves.
Action Taken by the Government
While efforts to increase revenue generation continue to be taken,
Prasar Bharati would have to depend on budgetary support for carrying
out its public service broadcasting. Modernization would also require
budgetary support.
2. The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007 has desired
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]

43
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee feel that savings like ‘funding influences content’
and ‘who pays commands’ must have influenced that framers of the
Prasar Bharati Act to provide for raising of resources through Broadcast
Receiver Licence Fees to sustain the operations of Prasar Bharati. In
fact, the funds coming through the second source of income as provided
for in the Act, i.e., Grant-in-Aid from the Government, has been adding
further burden on the finances of the Corporation. Moreover, viewing
from the context of autonomy of Prasar Bharati, heavy dependence on
Government funds is not a healthy practice. The Committee have been
informed that funding of Public Service Broadcasting trough collection
of Licence Fee on television sets is a common phenomenon across the
world. According to the Ministry in countries like UK, Japan, Sweden,
France, Germany, Italy, Ireland and several others, much of the
resources are raised through the levy of Licence Fee. Some other
countries follow a mixed model, where apart from direct or indirect
funding, revenue is generated by selling limited air-time for
advertisements. The Committee on Capital & Financial Restructuring
had recommended levying Licence Fee on all television sets at the
point of production at an ad-valorem rate collected through the Excise
Department. According to them, while it would also meet the concept
of user funding the cost of Public Broadcasting, the recurring amount
could be used for funding the revenue cost of Public Broadcasting
Services. It was estimated that if such a levy is 10%, it would fetch an
amount of Rs. 896 crores per annum an at the rate of 5% it would be
Rs. 448 crores. It was also submitted before the Committee, that
charging of Licence Fee was something prevalent in the country in the
yester years, but was abolished in the eighties. As the cost of collection
of Licence Fee annually would be quite high, it has been suggested in
the report of the Committee on Capital & Financial Restructuring that
it should be collected in lump sum as one time fee. Whatever be the
merits of these arguments, the Committee are of the considered view
that the proposal requires wider consultations with the stakeholders
and detailed examination before taking a final decision in the matter.
The Committee further desire that other possible options for funding
of Prasar Bharati should also be explored.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007 has desired

44
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that another source of funding suggested is
through the levy of Public broadcasting Service Fee (PBSF) on the
lines of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) in the telecom sector.
The rationale put forward for the levy of the fee is that all players
should bear the burden of social obligation in broadcasting. It has
been proposed that every channel should be given the mandate to set
aside 10% of their time for Public Service Broadcasting and the fee
should be levied on them to the extent they fail to meet the obligation.
On a rough estimate, the amount to be realized through PBSF is
expected to be the tune of Rs. 800 crores at the rate of 5% per annum.
Yet another source of revenue suggested by the Ministry during the
course of evidence is through financing of programmes sponsored by
Ministries, State Governments and Public Sector Undertakings to be
aired on Doordarshan in keeping with their mandate to educate and
inform the public on Government policies and programmes. The
revenue earned through these programmes, over and above what Prasar
Bharati does on its own, would go a long way in bringing down
Government’s direct budgetary supports to Prasar Bharati. The
Committee urges the Government to examine these proposals in right
earnest to their logical conclusion.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October 2007 has desired
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finnalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring had also
suggested that Prasar Bharati should try to maximize the revenue

45
generation on its commercial channels and programmes by AIR and
Doordarshan competing with commercial broadcasters. It was also
suggested that if AIR wished to expand the FM Channels, which are
run purely on commercial lines, it should have the freedom to do so.
Programmes meant for entertainment, other than those for education,
agriculture, public health and sanitation, literacy campaign, etc., should
earn commercial revenue through advertisement or sponsorship. In
addition, it was also suggested that efforts should be made for
maximizing revenue through best utilization of the assets owned by
Prasar Bharati. Prasar Bharati should aim at becoming the market and
technology leader with the support of the revenue generated through
the above measures. The Committee feel that the above suggestions
are very relevant and should be considered for implementation after
weighing the pros and cons thereof. They suggest that no stone should
be left unturned in the efforts to make Prasar Bharati fully self-reliant.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has agreed with the advice of the Committee. Prasar
Bharati has stated that efforts need to be upscaled to have greater
financial self-reliance. The recommendations of the Committee on capital
and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with
respect to funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers.
The Group of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October, 2007
has desired the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the
Ministry of Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Capital and Financial Restructuring
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note with concern that Prasar Bharati is saddled
with a cumulative deficit of Rs. 5540.22 crores pertaining to post Prasar
Bharati period of 9 years which has been met by loans and grants
given by the Government. On the other hand, Prasar Bharati is in dire
need of substantial funds for upgradation of its technology in order to
keep pace with the technological advancement and competition in the
broadcasting sector. The Committee find that with the labour intensive
technology in AIR, it requires huge investment for modernizing its
network without commensurate revenues. In the given context, the
committee on Capital and Financial Restructuring, after evaluating
various organizational restructuring options, arrived at the conclusion

46
that the only viable option for Prasar Bharati is to retain all the assets
as was being done at present with total revamping of the Corporation.
As part of Capital Restructuring Plan for Prasar Bharati meant to bring
down Government grants in terms of Plan and non-Plan, the Committee
suggested that Rs. 3734.03 crores released by Government till 1st April,
2005 which was utilized for meeting revenue deficit be written off and
the balance of Rs. 4876.61 crores utilized for building fixed and Current
Assets be converted into Capital Reserves after assigning Rs. 500 crores
as share capital of Prasar Bharati. It has been pointed out that a low
equity base is being suggested for Prasar Bharati as the cash flow and
financial projections do not reflect a comfortable position with regard
to servicing of capital. It was felt that Prasar Bharati needed a capital
base for any financial institution to be interested in lending to it for
any commercial venture that it may want to take up and also for the
Corporation to undertake commercial activity and marketing. The
Committee feel that the proposed Capital Restructuring Plan merits
serious consideration of the Government.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee on capital and financial
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and various options with respect to
funding of Prasar Bharati are before the Group of Ministers. The Group
of Ministers in its last meeting held on 5th October 2007 has desired
the Ministry to discuss the proposals in detail with the Ministry of
Finance for GoM to finalise its recommendations.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of Employees
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that out of 38,829 employees, only 1,675 people
were recruited on the rolls of Prasar Bharati after its formation and as
many as 37,174 were originally Government employees who are now
working on ‘deemed deputation’ in Prasar Bharati in accordance with
Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act. By September, 2002 Prasar Bharati
had framed and notified Regulations with regard to recruitment,
remuneration and service conditions in respect of 122 categories of
posts according to Section 33 of the Act in consultation with the
Government of India and Regulations in respect of most of the
remaining categories of employees were in place in the draft form. As
various Employees’ Associations at this stage expressed the view that

47
the Regulations were not acceptable to them, an MoU was signed
with the Joint Forum of AIR and Doordarshan Engineering Employees
wherein it was agreed that all the Regulations would be reviewed.
With the Associations representing the employees subsequently raising
certain issues for grant of higher pay scales which had huge financial
implications, a concensus could not be arrived at.
Action Taken by the Government
As regards notifying the resolutions with regard to recruitment,
remuneration and service conditions of the employees of Prasar Bharati,
there is no change in the status. Further, the issues regarding higher
pay and service conditions of the employees of Prasar Bharati are
under consideration of the GoM. The last meeting of the GoM was
held on 5.10.2007 and it was decided that the employees of Prasar
Bharati will be on “deemed deputation” with all facilities at par with
the Central Government employees.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee also note that on 29th March, 2005,, the Supreme
Court directed that the uncertainty about the service conditions of
employees be resolved expeditiously. At a subsequent meeting held by
the then Minister for Information and Broadcasting with the employees’
Associations, apprehensions were expressed by them at the manner in
which Rules were being framed and wanted their viewpoint to be
taken into account before finalizing the Regulations. Subsequently, a
Group of Ministers (GoMs) was constituted by the Government on 7th
March, 2006 to go into the working of Prasar Bharati including the
service conditions of employees. In their judgement against a Civil
Appeal, the Supreme Court on 2nd February, 2007 has directed the
Union of India to take a firm decision in term of Section 11 of the
Prasar Bharati Act within six months. As per the judgement, the entire
process of framing the Regulations regarding the service matters of
employees of Prasar Bharati is required to be completed by 2nd August,
2007. The GoM had also in their third meeting held on 31st August,
2006 asked the Ministry to get specific proposals on service conditions
and pay structures of employees of Prasar Bharati ready. The modalities
were to be worked out by Prasar Bharati on which the Ministry would
obtain the approval of the Department of Personnel and Training and
the Ministry of Finance and finally submit it to the GoM for their
final decision. The Committee note with serious concern that the

48
question of service conditions and pay structures of the employees of
Prasar Bharati has been hanging fire for more than 7 years without
arriving at any decision. Notwithstanding the legal and administrative
hurdles that came in the way of finalizing the Regulations, the
Committee are of the firm view that Prasar Bharati and the Ministry
should have expedited the whole process. Despite the deadline of 2nd
August, 2007 set by the Supreme Court for framing the Regulations
fast approaching and having received the directive from GoM about
nine months ago, nothing concrete seems to have been done by Prasar
Bharati to finalise the Regulations regarding service conditions and
pay structures of the employees. Without mincing words, the
Committee would like to say that the Government cannot dilly-daily
any further on an issue of such vital significance relating to the healthy
functioning of the Corporation. While deploring the delay in the
finalisation of the Regulations, the Committee desire that the stalemate
should be ended by drawing up the Regulations and getting them
approved at the appropriate level. The Committee would await the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Supreme Court in its order dated 2nd February, 2007 directed
the Government to take a firm decision about the status of the
employees of Prasar Bharati in terms of section 11 of the Prasar Bharati
Act within six months. On request from the Government, the Supreme
Court has granted three months more time for deciding the issue.
This issue was under the consideration of the GoM. In its last meeting
held on 5.10.2007, the GoM decided that the employees of Prasar
Bharati will be on “deemed deputation“ with all facilities at par with
the Central Government employees. As regards regulations, 122
regulations have already been notified. However, these regulations could
not be implemented, as these were not acceptable to the various
Employees Associations. The remaining 71 regulations are ready in
draft form.
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, O.M. No. 10/42/2006-B
(Fin.), dated 8 November, 2007]
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
16 July, 2008 Chairman,
25 Asadha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

49
APPENDIX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16th July, 2008 from 1500
hrs. to 1720 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Narahari Mahato
6. Shri G. Nizamuddin
7. Shri Sohan Potai
8. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
11. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
13. Shri Dara Singh
14. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
15. Dr. C.P . Thakur
16. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi

50
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. **** ***
2. **** ***
3. **** ***
4. **** ***
5. **** ***
6. **** ***
7. **** ***
8. **** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting to the sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired
by the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. The Committee, then took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Forty-seventh Report on ‘The Role of Prasar Bharati
and its future status‘.
(ii) *** *** ***
***Matter not related to this report.

51
6. The Committee then decided to present the above Reports to
the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction 71(A) of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Committee, also, authorised the Chairman to
finalise the above Draft Reports and present the same to the Speaker
on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

52
ANNEXURE
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21,
24, 25 & 26
Total : 11
Percentage : 42.3
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Replies of the Government:
Paragraph No. 15
Total : 01
Percentage : 3.8
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 2, 3, 4, 9, 13, 16 & 17
Total : 07
percentage : 26.9
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 22 & 23
Total : 07
Percentage : 26.9

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and
their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in.’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Sourvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are avialable
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New  Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above.”

SIXTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on the Role of Prasar Bharati and its future status]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 July, 2008
Laid  in Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2008/Asadha, 1930 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 193
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government................................ 32
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 34
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 42
APPENDIX
I. Minutes of the Twenty-sixth sitting of the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-2008) held on 10.04.2008 .............................. 49
ANNEXURE
I. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-
seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............. 52

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
*13. Vacant
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
@15. Vacant
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
  * Vice Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be a member on being inducted to the
Union Council of Ministers on 7 April, 2008.
  @ Vice Shri Prem Kumar Dhumal ceased to be a member on resignation from
Lok Sabha on 7 January, 2008.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
$27. Dr. C.P . Thakur
$28. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
$ Nominated w.e.f. 21 May, 2008.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixtieth Report on action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in the Forty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘The Role of Prasar Bharati and its future status’ relating to
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to the Speaker on
12 June, 2007. The Report was subsequently presented to Lok Sabha
on 21 August, 2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Ministry furnished their Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report
on 8 November, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 16 July, 2008.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Forty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Annexure.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
16 July, 2008 Chairman,
25 Asadha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology

60
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Role of Prasar Bharati
and its future status]
SIXTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2008/Asadha, 1930 (Saka)
