25
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 23.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 147
Price : Rs. 25.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Replies of the Government .............................. 33
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 42
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature .................... 49
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of Fourth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2005-06)
held on 20.12.2005 .................................................... 53
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee ............................... 55
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasada
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
18. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
(iii)

26. Shri Dara Singh
*27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director
5. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27.9.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Fifth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Demands for Grants (2005-2006)” relating to the Department of
Information Technology.
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21.4.2005
and laid in Rajya Sabha the same day. The Department furnished
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Report on 2.8.2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20.12.2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Information Technology).
2. The Committee’s Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha
on 21st April, 2005 and was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha the
same day. It contained 46 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all these Observations/Recommendations
have been received from the Department of Information Technology.
Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the
Report have been categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 44, 45 and 46
Total : 31
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Sl. Nos. 12, 13, 14, 18, 30, 33, 41, 42 and 43
Total : 9
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 7, 9, 10
Total : 5
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Sl. No. 19
Total : 1
Chapter-V

2
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason for
the Department to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by
Government on some of the recommendations.
Enhancing the Budgetary Allocations
Recommendation (Nos. 2 & 3)
5. Emphasising on the need to enhance the Tenth Plan allocation
for the Department of Information Technology (DIT), the Committee
had made the following observations/recommendation:
“The Committee observe that the Planning Commission has
approved a total budgetary support of Rs. 2714 crore to the
Department of Information Technology (DIT) for the Tenth Five
Year Plan period and the Department incurred an expenditure of
Rs. 604.98 crore in the first three years of the plan. Assuming that
the proposed BE of Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06, which is
the fourth year of the plan, is fully utilized, the Department will
be left with a budgetary support of only Rs. 179.72 crore for the
last year of the Tenth Plan. The Committee further note that the
IT industry is, admittedly, one of the fastest growing sectors of the
Indian economy and the thrust of the DIT’s projects/schemes is to
prepare a strong base for vibrant growth of this sector through its
various activities and therefore the Department needs sufficient
budgetary provisions. As the Department has itself, in the Mid-
term appraisal, highlighted their requirement of budgetary support
of Rs. 2500 crore for the last two years of the Tenth Plan, the
unutilized portion of the earlier approved plan outlay being
Rs. 179.72 crore, would not be able to meet the requirements of
the Department in undertaking its various important projects up
to the desired level. Some of these projects are e-Governance,
Community Information Centres (CICs) and Vidya Vahini
Programme, Nanotechnology, Special Manpower Development for
VLSI Design, Information security Education and Awareness
Programme, C-DAC and National Information Centre (NIC). The

3
Planning Commission ought to have taken note of the vital
importance of the schemes in the development of the IT sector in
the country. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend
the Department to take up the matter with the Planning
Commission at an appropriate level for enhancing suitably the
Tenth Plan allocation to provide adequate budgetary support for
different projects being undertaken by the DIT. The Government
should extend all its legislative support to ensure that the
Information Technology sector meets its projections in the Software,
ITES, BPO and the hardware sectors.”
6. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply have stated as follows:
“A budgetary support of Rs. 2,714 crore has been approved for
the Department of Information Technology for the Tenth Five Year
Plan. Against this, DIT is likely to incur an expenditure of about
Rs. 2,534 crore on its plan schemes in the first four years of the
Plan. Thus, a balance of only Rs. 180 crore would be left for the
last year of the plan. This will have a tremendous adverse impact
on the programmes of this Department especially since existing
provisions are very limited.
The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the United
Progressive Alliances (UPA) has affirmed the commitment of the
alliance to promote e-Governance on a massive scale. This also
figures prominently in the address of the President to the
Parliament on 7.6.2004. To give effect to this commitment, a thrust
in the DIT budgetary support would be required for the
implementation of the National e-Governance Plan.
The Department of Information Technology programmes in
Information Technology which are also the Core programmes of
the Department have a close linkage with the larger objective of
the CMP in regard to development of human resources,
employment generation and improvement of the quality of life of
disadvantaged areas.
Under the circumstances, the DIT Tenth Five Year Plan allocations
needs to be substantially augmented. The Department of
Information Technology has already raised this issue in the Mid-
Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan document submitted to the
Planning Commission wherein a requirement of minimum
Budgetary Support in the range of Rs. 2,500 core for the last
2 years of the Tenth Five Year Plan i.e. for the years 2005-06 and
2006-07 was indicated to run these programmes.

4
The Department has also forwarded a copy of the above
recommendation of the Standing Committee to the Planning
Commission for their information and necessary action.”
7. On the issue of raising the matter of allocation for the year
2005-06 with the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission at the RE
stage, the Committee had made the following observations/
recommendations:
“The Committee are concerned to note that though the Department
of Information Technology had proposed to the Planning
Commission a plan allocation of Rs. 1400.67 core for the year
2005-06 for its various schemes, yet the Planning Commission
approved allocation of only Rs. 929.30 crore. As per the Planning
Commission, the allocation of DIT has been increased from
Rs. 650 crore (RE) in 2004-05 to Rs. 929.30 crore for the year
2005-06 as a special consideration keeping in view the importance
of e-Governance and other IT projects being implemented by the
DIT. The Committee are not at all convinced with the plea of the
Planning Commission in this regard, due weightage appears to
have not been given to e-Governance or IT projects as is evident
from the fact that proposed allocation of Rs. 632 crore for
e-Governance itself has been reduced by Rs. 332 crore to the level
of Rs. 300 crore. In the Committee’s opinion, such reductions would
have an adverse impact on the programmes of the Department of
Information Technology. They therefore, strongly desire that the
Department should take up the issue of enhancement of allocations
for the year 2005-06 with the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance at the RE stage.”
8. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
reply  have stated as follows:
“The matter will be taken up with Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance for enhancement of funds at RE stage.”
9. The Committee learn that the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) have raised the issue for augmentation of the Tenth
Plan allocations in the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan
document submitted to the Planning Commission wherein a
requirement of minimum Budgetary Support in the range of Rs.
2,500 crore for the last 2 years of the Tenth Five Year Plan i.e. for
the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 was indicated to run DIT programmes.
However, the Planning Commission do not seem to have considered
the matter. DIT proposed an allocation of Rs. 1400.67 crore for the

5
year 2005-06, which the Planning Commission reduced to
Rs. 929.30 crore. Hence, raising the matter for augmentation of Tenth
Plan allocation fail to give any consolation to the Committee. The
Committee are afraid that the DIT may not get the required funds
even for the coming year i.e. 2006-07.
10. The Committee earnestly desire that the Core programmes of
the Department, having a close linkage with the larger objective of
the Common Minimum Programme of the Government in regard to
development of human resources, employment generation and
improvement of the quality of life of disadvantaged areas should be
given top priority and necessary funds provided for them. Hence,
the matter of raising the Tenth Plan allocation in consonance with
the needs of the Department requires to be vigorously pursued with
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance at the highest level.
11. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the matter for raising the allocation of funds for the year 2005-2006
at the RE stage.
Implementation of National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
Recommendation (Nos. 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10)
12. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that to
promote e-Governance on a massive scale the DIT jointly with
DAR&PG had drawn a National Plan on e-Governance (NeGP) for
implementation during 2003-07. As various Government Ministries/
Departments are responsible for implementation of the Mission Mode
Projects (MMPs) assigned to them with regard to NeGP , the Committee
emphasized the need for effective co-ordination among the various
participants like the NIC, National Institute of Smart Government
(NISG), NICSI, Line Ministries/Departments/State Governments etc.
for a focussed attention to the implementation of e-Governance
programme.
Besides several steps taken by the DIT to implement the e-
Governance programme, a scheme to establish Common Service Centre
(CSC) was drafted and given a final shape. As the budget provision
for e-Governance for the year 2004-05 and 2005-06 was being utilized
towards creation of State Wide Area Networks (SWAN), State Data
Centres (SDCs) and Common Service Centres (CSCs), the Committee
desired that the funds allocated should be fully utilized. They also
desired that SWAN, SDCs and CSCs should be set up in an integrated
manner.

6
The Committee had also observed that the issues of standardization,
interoperability, implementation of pilot projects, infrastructural
requirements, augmentation of capacity to be undertaken by the DIT
were of utmost importance. They, therefore, desired that the Department
should do comprehensive planning in all areas particularly in the area
of building the capacity in the States so that by the time Common
Service Centres are set up, the citizens could at once start utilizing
their services.”
As regards to the matter to link-up transfer of 2-3% of Plan funds
allocated to Line Ministries for e-Governance and IT related activities,
the Committee had recommended that DIT should take seriously the
suggestions of the Planning Commission to co-ordinate with the Line
Ministries/Departments. They felt that there was an imperative need
to impress upon the Line Ministries/Departments/State Governments
to take initiative in this regard.
13. The Department of Information Technology in their action taken
notes have stated that DIT is evolving suitable Programme Management
Structure for the NeGP , which would include Apex Committee for
inter-ministerial co-ordination.
As regards establishing CSCs, DIT have stated that it is proposed
to use about 88% of the current year budget (for 2005-06) towards
establishing key Core Infrastructure like State Wide Area Networks
(SWANs), State Data Centres (SDCs), and Common Services Centres
(CSCs) that would be serving different e-Governance applications. The
Scheme for providing financial support for SWAN has already been
approved at a total outlay of Rs. 3,334 crore including Central
Assistance Component of Rs. 2005 crore. Guidelines for State Data
Centres & Common Services Centres are under formulation and these
guidelines would include necessary provisions for integration of these
components.
The DIT has stated to have prepared Guidelines for Capacity
Building and Institutional Framework for e-Governance under NeGP
and circulated the same to State Governments/UTs for adoption. DIT
jointly with DAR&PG is planning to organize series of training
programmes for CICs and Policy makers. NIC is also conducting
regular training programme for government staff.
With regard taking initiative by DIT for obtaining projects approvals
and financial allocations by the Line Ministries/Departments/State
Governments, DIT have stated that their role is that of a facilitator
and catalyst to promote citizen and business centric e-Governance

7
applications in various Central and State Government departments
including local bodies. Allocation of funds to DIT has been restricted
to the e-Governance activities where DIT has direct responsibility for
execution. For other components and Mission Mode Projects, line
Ministries/Departments have been identified and they would be
owning complete responsibility for those project (s) including obtaining
required financial allocations & approvals. These Ministries/
Departments would also be responsible for carrying out the required
business process re-engineering for the project(s) assigned to them.
14. The Committee would like to mention here that the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2005-2006) have presented
their 22nd Report on “Implementation of e-Governance Projects” on
8 December, 2005 in which they have dealt with in detail the various
issues for the effective implementation of NeGP . Some steps though
have been taken/proposed to be taken by the Government, the
Committee had found that a lot still remained to be done for speedy
and effective implementation of NeGP . The Committee trust that the
recommendations made in the Report will be duly processed and
action taken in due course.
Slow progress of Media Lab Asia (MLA) Project
Recommendation (Nos. 15, 16 & 17)
15. Commenting on the slow pace in the implementation of
activities of Media Lab Asia (MLA), the Committee in their earlier
Report had made the following observations:
“The Committee are dismayed to note the slow pace in the
implementation of activities of Media Lab Asia (MLA). Though
the Planning Commission had approved a Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) of Rs. 300 crore for Media Lab Asia for the Tenth Plan
period, but surprisingly no money was spent on the project in
first three years of the Tenth Plan. Although, the Department had
proposed an outlay of Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 65 crore
during the years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively but no
serious thought appears to have been given to the implementation
of the project thus denying the benefits to the masses. Despite the
passage of considerable time, no clear picture of R&D activities to
be conducted by MLA or its benefits has emerged. The Committee
would, therefore, like to be kept apprised of the details of the
various activities undertaken by MLA so far.

8
The Committee learn that the board of MLA has been constituted
and also an Expert Sub Committee appointed to go into this matter.
The Report of the said Committee is expected shortly. The
Committee had however earlier been informed during examination
of Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 that Technical Advisory
Board had been constituted in December, 2003 but nothing concrete
has been reported so far to enable the MLA Programme to take
off and thus the Board constituted earlier for the purpose appears
to have failed to yield any results. The Committee trust that DIT
would expedite the submission of Expert Sub-Committee report to
initiate proposed activities of MLA at the earliest.
The Committee find that of late, the Department is trying to define
and concentrate on some kind of activity areas for MLA which are
not being done by other Companies so as to avoid duplication.
The Committee strongly desire that the bottlenecks in the
implementation process of the MLA project should be identified
and removed immediately . They trust that the fresh efforts being
made in this regard would yield positive results.”
16. In their action taken notes, the Department of Information
Technology have stated as follows:
“As a part of restructuring, the service contracts of all the
employees, including CEO, were terminated. The services of two
technical officers, who were on deputation from DIT were
continued. A team of officers was posted on additional charge to
manage the transition process and to manage the day-to-day affairs.
In the restructured Media Lab Asia programme, all the research
projects supported by Media Lab Asia were continued and new
projects were also initiated.
Based on the recommendations of the Technology Advisory Board,
Core Groups were set up in the identified thrust areas of ICT for
Rural Health Care, Education, Empowerment of Persons with
disabilities, rural connectivity and Livelihood. Stakeholders
workshops were held and based on the recommendations, new
projects were evolved and initiated. A list of the projects undertaken
by Media Lab Asia is given in Appendix.
The Expert Sub-Committee has held two meetings so far and the
recommendations of the Committee are being finalized. These will
be put up to the Board for their consideration and
implementations.”

9
17. The Committee note that based on the recommendations of
the Technology Advisory Board for Media Lab Asia (MLA), Core
Groups were set up in the identified thrust areas of ICT for Rural
Health Care, Education, Empowerment of Persons with disabilities,
rural connectivity and Livelihood. Stakeholders workshops were held
and new projects have been evolved and initiated. The Committee
desire that time frame for all the research projects under Media Lab
Asia programme should be laid down and efforts be made for their
timely completion. They further desire that the Expert Sub-Committee
should soon finalise its recommendations for consideration and
implementation by the Technology Advisory Board of MLA. The
Committee would like to be constantly apprised of the on-going
developments in this regard.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
General
The Committee recognize the tremendous contribution of the
Information Technology sector in branding India globally as an
economic powerhouse and a service economy. In order to meet the
targets/expectations of the IT sector for the future years, the Committee
are resolved to facilitating growth of the IT sector through their
recommendations made from time to time on policy matters, manpower
development and removal of duty barriers.
Action Taken by the Government
Department takes the note of recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Tenth Plan Allocation
The Committee observe that the Planning Commission has
approved a total budgetary support of Rs. 2714 crore to the Department
of Information Technology (DIT) for the Tenth Five Year Plan period
and the Department incurred an expenditure of Rs. 1604.98 crore in
the first three years of the plan. Assuming that the proposed BE of
Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06, which is the fourth year of the
plan, is fully utilized, the Department will be left with a budgetary
support of only Rs. 179.72 crore for the last year of the Tenth Plan.
The Committee further note that the IT industry is, admittedly, one of
the fastest growing sectors of the Indian economy and the thrust of
the DIT’s projects/schemes is to prepare a strong base for vibrant
growth of this sector through its various activities and therefore the
Department needs sufficient budgetary provisions. As the Department
has itself, in the Mid-term appraisal, highlighted their requirement of
budgetary support of Rs. 2500 crore for the last two years of the
Tenth Plan, the unutilized portion of the earlier approved plan outlay
being Rs. 179.72 crore, would not be able to meet the requirements of

11
the Department in undertaking its various important projects up to
the desired level. Some of these projects are e-Governance, Community
Information Centres (CICs) and Vidya Vahini Programme,
Nenotechnology, Special Manpower Development for VLSI Design,
Information security Education and Awareness Programme, C-DAC and
National Information Centre (NIC). The Planning Commission ought
to have taken note of the vital importance of the schemes in the
development of the IT sector in the country. The Committee would,
therefore, strongly recommend the Department to take up the matter
with the Planning Commission at an appropriate level for enhancing
suitably the Tenth Plan allocation to provide adequate budgetary
support for different projects being undertaken by the DIT. The
Government should extend all its legislative support to ensure that
the Information Technology sector meets its projections in the Software,
ITES, BPO and the hardware sectors.
Action taken by the Government
A budgetary support of Rs. 2,714 crore has been approved for the
Department of Information Technology for the Tenth Five Year Plan.
Against this, DIT is likely to incur an expenditure of about
Rs. 2,534 crore on its plan schemes in the first four years of the Plan.
Thus, a balance of only Rs. 180 crore would be left for the last year
of the plan. This will have a tremendous adverse impact on the
programmes of this Department especially since existing provisions
are very limited.
The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the United
Progressive Alliances (UPA) has affirmed the commitment of the alliance
to promote e-Governance on a massive scale. This also figures
prominently in the address of the President to the Parliament on
7.6.2004. To give effect to this commitment, a thrust in the DIT
budgetary support would be required for the implementation of the
National e-Governance Plan.
The Department of Information Technology programmes in
Information Technology which are also the Core programmes of the
Department have a close linkage with the larger objective of the CMP
in regard to development of human resources, employment generation
and improvement of the quality of life of disadvantaged areas.
Under the circumstances, the DIT Tenth Five Year Plan allocations
needs to be substantially augmented. The Department of Information
Technology has already raised this issue in the Mid-Term Appraisal of
the Tenth Plan document submitted to the Planning Commission

12
wherein a requirement of minimum Budgetary Support in the range
of Rs. 2,500 core for the last 2 years of the Tenth Five Year Plan i.e.
for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 was indicated to run these
programmes.
The Department has also forwarded a copy of the above
recommendation of the Standing Committee to the Planning
Commission for their information and necessary action.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para no. 10, 11 & 12 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
Budgetary Allocations for the year 2005-06
The Committee are concerned to note that though the Department
of Information Technology had proposed to the Planning Commission
a plan allocation of Rs. 1400.67 crore for the year 2005-06 for its various
schemes, yet the Planning Commission approved allocation of only
Rs. 929.30 crore. As per the Planning Commission, the allocation of
DIT has been increased from Rs. 6500 crore (RE) in 2004-05 to
Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06 as a special consideration keeping
in view the importance of e-Governance and other IT projects being
implemented by the DIT. The Committee are not at all convinced with
the plea of the Planning Commission in this regard, due weightage
appears to have not been given to e-Governance or IT projects as is
evident from the fact that proposed allocation of Rs. 632 crore for
e-Governance itself has been reduced by Rs. 332 crore to the level of
Rs. 300 crore. In the Committee’s opinion, such reductions would have
an adverse impact on the programmes of the Department of
Information Technology. They therefore, strongly desire that the
Department should take up the issue of enhancement of allocations
for the year 2005-06 with the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
at the RE stage.
Action taken by the Government
The matter will be taken up with Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance for enhancement of funds at RE stage.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 10, 11 & 12 of Chapter I.

13
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
Utilization of Funds during the year 2004-05
The Committee are happy to note that during the year 2004-05,
the Department of IT would be able to utilize around Rs. 645 crore
(tentative) out of the allocation of Rs. 650 crore. In the previous years
also the Department had optimally utilized the funds allocated to them
as out of the allocation of Rs. 470 crore and Rs. 495 crore during the
years 2002-03 and 2003-04 utilization was Rs. 465.35 crore and Rs.
492.88 crore respectively. The Committee appreciate various measures
being taken by the Department to ensure optimum utilization of the
budgetary allocation of Rs. 929.30 crore for the year 2005-06 also. Some
of these measures are review of the on-going projects by the Programme
Review and Steering Group (PRSG) on quarterly basis for monitoring
the progress on regular basis and for timely recommendation for release
of the fund, proposal for holding meetings of the Standing Finance
Committee (SFC) and the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on
monthly basis in respect of new projects and review of plan
achievements by the Secretary (IT) on quarterly basis. The Committee
consider that these steps are in the right direction, which would ensure
not only optimum utilization of funds but also give an opportunity to
the Department to have a close and regular monitoring of flow of
expenditure under different heads.
Action taken by the Government
Department takes the note of recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the Department of IT, in addition to
various ongoing activities under National Plan on e-Governance
(NEGAP), has proposed to take other initiatives such as replication of
successful e-Governance projects, development of Geographical
Information Service (GIS)/Geographical Positioning Service (GPS),
Languages Interfaces, Security, setting up of Programme Management
Structure, support for the Centre for e-Governances, Website
Management etc.
However, the Committee are very much concerned to note that in
view of the reduced allocation, DIT would be required to scale down
its various activities under the NEGAP . In their opinion, such reductions
would have an adverse impact in the nation’s attempt at bridging the
digital divide with rural India and the Indian masses. They would,

14
therefore, like to recommend that as and when the implementation of
the projects are on track successfully, the DIT should plead for more
resources for similar implementations, may be at the RE stage.
Action taken by the Government
As advised, DIT would be approaching Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission at RE stage for allocation of additional resources
for the  NEGP . DIT is also exploring possibility of raising additional
funds through Public Private Partnerships and from external agencies
like UNDP and the World Bank.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
Community Information Centres (CICs)
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Department of
information in setting up of Community Information Centres (CIC)
project, which is reportedly proving to be an effective interface between
the Government and the general public. They also note with satisfaction
that the Department successfully set up 487 CICs in eight North Eastern
States and 60 CICs in J&K also on replications basis to bring the
benefits of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) for
socio-economic development of these areas by providing broadband
connectivity. The Committee trust that 75 CICs to be set up by October
2005 will be operationalised within the fixed time frame.
Action taken by the Government
DIT is periodically pursuing with J&K Government and NIC
(National Informatics Center)—Project implementing agency for
completion of setting up of remaining 75 CICs of J&K and making
them operational as per schedule by October, 2005.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
Media Lab Asia (MLA)
The Committee are dismayed to note the slow pace in the
implementation of activities of Media Lab Asia (MLA). Though the
Planning Commission had approved a Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)
of Rs. 300 crore for Media Lab Asia for the Tenth Plan period, but
surprisingly no money was spent on the project in first three years of
the Tenth Plan. Although, the Department had proposed an outlay of
Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 65 crore during the years 2002-03,

15
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively but no serious thought appears to
have been given to the implementation of the project thus denying the
benefits to the masses. Despite the passage of considerable time, no
clear picture of R&D activities to be conducted by MLA or its benefits
has emerged. The Committee would, therefore, like to be kept apprised
of the details of the various activities undertaken by MLA so far.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee learn that the board of MLA has been constituted
and also an Expert Sub Committee appointed to go into this matter.
The Report of the said Committee is expected shortly. The Committee
had however earlier been informed during examination of Demands
for Grants for the year 2004-05 that Technical Advisory Board had
been constituted in December, 2003 but nothing concrete has been
reported so far to enable the MLA Programme to take off and thus
the Board constituted earlier for the purpose appears to have failed to
yield any results. The Committee trust that DIT would expedite the
submission of Expert Sub-Committee report to initiate proposed
activities of MLA at the earliest.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee find that of late, the Department is trying to define
and concentrate on some kind of activity areas for MLA which are
not being done by other Companies so as to avoid duplication. The
Committee strongly desire that the bottlenecks in the implementation
process of the MLA project should be identified and removed
immediately. They trust that the fresh efforts being made in this regard
would yield positive results.
Action Taken
As a part of restructuring, the service contracts of all the employees,
including CEO, were terminated. The services of two technical officers,
who were on deputation from DIT were continued. A team of officers
was posted on additional charge to manage the transition process and
to manage the day-to-day affairs. In the restructured Media Lab Asia
programme, all the research projects supported by Media Lab Asia
were continued and new projects were also initiated.
Based on the recommendations of the Technology Advisory Board,
Core Groups were set up in the identified thrust areas of ICT for
Rural Health Care, Education, Empowerment of Persons with
disabilities, rural connectivity and Livelihood. Stakeholders workshops

16
were held and based on the recommendations, new projects were
evolved and initiated. A list of the projects undertaken by Media Lab
Asia is given in Appendix.
The Export Sub-Committee has held two meetings so far and the
recommendations of the Committee are being finalized. These will be
put up to the Board for their consideration and implementations.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I.)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee are happy to learn that ESC has been able to fully
utilize the allocation made during the last three years. Out of an
allocation of Rs. 4 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore and Rs. 8.50 crore during
2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, ESC has utilized Rs. 8 crore,
Rs. 9.96 crore and Rs. 8.50 crore respectively . However, the Committee
are disappointed to find that for the current year i.e. 2005-06, the
Planning Commission has not allocated any amount for ESC, though
an outlay of Rs. 10 crore was proposed by the Department to carry
out its various programmes.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has written to the Planning Commission that ESC
and Export Market Development programme is essential to take care
of SMEs for Export promotion.
The Working Committee of the council has since approved the
Action Plan for the year 2005-06. Appropriate budget provision would
be made available to ESC towards its promotional and related activities,
from the concerned programmes of the Department. The Department
would take up with the Planning Commission for separate Budget
provision in future.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee observe that the ESC has been playing a significant
and crucial role in increasing the software and hardware export in the
world market as per the present need and therefore the Committee
would strongly recommend that efforts should be made to get suitable
allocation for ESC at the RE stage so that it could effectively perform
its various programmes planned during the current year for the benefit
of exporters of IT products.

17
Action Taken by the Government
The Department will take up the matter with the Planning
Commission and Finance Ministry for enhancement of allocations for
ESC & Market Development Programme at the RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Society for Applied Microwave Electronic Engineering and Research
(SAMEER)
The Committee recognize the invaluable contribution SAMEER is
making in the field of high power RF amplifiers, RF communications
systems, linear accelerators, atmospheric instrumentations and industrial
RF/microwave based applications etc. They further note that one of
the major projects that SAMEER has been doing in the area of
Electronics in Health (e-Health). There is an availability of only 40-50
LINAC machines in India though the need is for 1000 LINAC machines
as the number of cancer patients in India is increasing at the rate of
3 lakh per year. The Department has initiated a programme with
SAMEER to develop 6 MV LINAC, which is a state of the art machine.
Under phase-I of this project two machines are being developed and
the next year SAMEER would start Phase II, in which four more
machines will be fabricated. It is also planned to advance to take
advance action to initiate a programme to set up fabrication facilities
for the most critical components of LINAC machine, which only
SAMEER can do. The Committee hope that implementation of the
project would be undertaken by SAMEER with all the seriousness it
deserves and also in a larger scale by augmenting the capacity if
necessary. Emphasising R&D in IT sector, the Committee feel that focus
should be encouraged instead of diluting its activities. R&D spent is
very very critical for sustaining the growth rate for strengthening the
economy.
Action Taken by the Government
Jai Vigyan Phase I: The first Medical Linac JVI, has been dispatched
to MGIMS Wardha during June, 2005. The machine has undergone all
the regulatory tests mandated by AERB for installation at Wardha
Hospital. It will be commissioned for Treatment of Cancer patients by
August 2005.
The second Medical Linac JV2 is undergoing assembly and
integration. It will be ready by early 2006 for installation at a hospital
identified by DIT.

18
SAMEER has proposed establishment of the state-of-art Linac
infrastructure facility at Kharghar, Navi Mumbai for which DIT has
already made available the requisite land. The Working Group on
Medical Electronics projects has recommended Rs. 25 crore project for
establishing process, assembly, integration and evaluation facility for
Linac Machines. The proposal is being put up to Standing Finance
Committee (SFC) for approval.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee observe that SAMEER has been able to utilize
Rs. 11.60 crore, Rs. 14.70 crore and Rs. 18 crore against the allocation
of Rs. 12.00 crore, Rs. 14.70 crore and Rs. 18.00 crore during 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively which indicate almost full utilization
of funds. The Committee hope that likewise SAMEER would be able
to optimally utilize the allocation of Rs. 20 crore made for the year
2005-06.
Action Taken by the Government
The ongoing and new projects/programmes in Core  R&D and
expert areas of SAMEER in Microwaves, RF communication, Millimeter
wave, High Power amplifiers, Linac, Atmospheric Instrumentation,
Antenna, EMI/EMC, Radar, DSP , Thermal Design, Data
Communication, Opto-electronics have been identified. Annual action
plan for 2005-06 has been drawn including the core project activities
and funds will be fully utilized.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee further note that the SAMEER is making an effort
to pass the technology for manufacturing the LINAC machine to private
entrepreneurs also. The committee in this context earnestly desire that
action should be initiated to get patented the components of the LINAC
Machine being developed by SAMEER like the high power RF window,
which is actually a vacuum tube and Electronic interface which passes
X-ray and at the same time allows vacuum etc. The Committee also
desire that the Department should take care that the patent right is
first obtained before the technology is passed on to the private sector.
Action taken by the Government
The action for filing patents for subsystems in Linac such as High
Power Modulator and RF window has been initiated.

19
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
Research and Development
Focused Research and Development is a sine-qua-non for the growth
of the technology sector. In fact, the focus on R&D should actively be
nurtured and encouraged adequately. Indeed, the Committee’s
impression after visiting some of the organizations engaged in R&D
activities like SAMEER at Chennai, ERTL at Tiruvananthapuram,
C-DAC at Bangalore and C-MET at Hyderabad has been encouraging
and it rather re-enforced their expectations about country’s capabilities.
The Committee note that during 2005-06, R&D programme include
major thrust in Nano-technology, Main National Grid Computing
initiative, wireless sensors and RFID related technologies, Free/open
Source Software related capabilities, consolidation of language
Computing programme, Research, Development and deployment of
Information and Communication Technology for common man etc. The
Committee are however constrained to observe that through for
implementation of these R&D programmes, DIT had projected Rs.
293.30 crore for the year 2005-06, the Planning Commission approved
the allocation of Rs. 192 crore only. Keeping in view the rising
importance of R&D in IT sector, the Committee do not find the budget
allocation as adequate and the reduction will undoubtedly result in
tardy implementation of R&D programmes as many schemes/projects
would be sacrificed as a result of reduced allocation. In their opinion,
expenditure on R&D is very critical for sustaining the growth rate for
an emerging economy and, therefore, there is an imperative need for
provision of the required funds for R&D.
Action Taken by the Government
Department takes the note of recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee further note that with the major reduction in the
allocation of C-DAC from Rs. 87 crore to Rs. 60 crore many activities
of C-DAC would be given lower priority or may be taken up only in
the 2nd half of the year, if additional funds at RE stage are allocated
during the year 2005-06. Some of the activities which may be adversely
affected are commencement of main Garuda Grid Project (10 GBPS
Grid Fabric and Research and Technology Development Projects);
Setting up of Linux HPC Technology Excellence Centre; VLSI, MEMS
Labs; New R&D initiatives in Science and Engineering Computing;
Earth quake Engineering; System Biology, Air Quality Management,

20
Content Based Image Retrieval and Visualization, Multi-scale Modelling
and Simulation: Technology for Adhoc Wireless Networks and Wimax
(802.16) Networks; Development of additional tools in e-Governance
and e-Learning; Sensors for smell and taste to support Agro-processing
industry and National Initiative on Low cost PC design including chip
sets. The C-DAC has been fully utilizing the allocations in the past as
against the allocation of Rs. 10 crore, Rs. 26.35 crore Rs. 40 crore in
the previous three years, C-DAC has utilised the allocations optimally
and in such a situation downsizing the proposed plan allocation for
C-DAC will have serious consequences on its various schemes. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the position may be
explained with all its ramifications to the Planning Commission for
suitable enhancement of allocations for C-DAC probably at the RE
stage.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department will take up the matter with the Planning
Commission and Finance Ministry for enhancement of allocations for
C-DAC at the RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
Manpower Development
The Committee feel that like R&D, a major thrust is required to be
given by the Government on the Manpower Development. They are
given to understand that there is shortage of quality manpower in IT
industry, especially scarcity of trained personnel in the high end skill
areas of IT and design including standards and testing. There are also
certain skills and high-end services where higher demand is likely to
come but suitable qualified and knowledgeable personnel are not
available. Consequential, unless adequate measures are taken for
increasing the skilled base, a shortage of manpower is expected by the
year 2009.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee further note that the Task Force on Human
Resource Development in IT constituted with the objective to analyse
the present manpower delivery  mechanism in terms of quantity and
quality as well as skilled set vis-a-vis global ITeS requirement during
the 10th and 11th Plan period submitted its report in December, 2003.
The Report has 26 recommendations which are meant to create an

21
environment, generating the relevant manpower quantity as well as in
skill sets. The Committee observe that more than one year has passed
but the Department is yet to formulate the strategy with regard to
implementation of the recommendations given by the Task Force on
Human Resource Development in IT. While expressing their
dissatisfaction over the slow pace with which the matter is being
processed, the Committee desire that necessary steps be taken urgently
to formulate the strategy so that the recommendation can be
implemented urgently and problem of shortage of manpower
specialised in certain skills which the IT industry has been facing can
be solved.
Action taken by the Government
•W ith regard to implementation of the Task Force
recommendations to meet the manpower gap in terms of
skill sets for IT/ITES by the year 2009 in the short term
and 2012 in the long term, DOEACC will take lead in
developing programmes for skill set inculcation and
certification in ITeS sector.
• DOEACC Society is formalizing an action plan for
implementing a programme to generate manpower with
requisite skills for ITeS/BPO sector and a ‘ National
Employability Test’ certificate scheme.
•A  training programme in ITeS/BPO to train students of
Jammu & Kashmir has been initiated at DOEACC Jammu/
Srinagar Centre with a total outlay of Rs. 2.88 crore for a
duration of 3 years for creating skilled Manpower.
•A  Regional Institute of e-Learning and IT under DOEACC
society has been initiated with a total outlay of Rs. 20 crores
for a duration of four years at Kohima, Nagaland for
creating skilled Manpower in the area of Computer Science
& IT and related disciplines.
• DIT has also initiated a number of measures to generate
manpower in key verticals like Bioinformatics, VLSI Design
and Information Security. These are listed below:
I. Information Security Education and Awareness Project
In order to generate trained manpower in the field of Information
Security,  DIT has initiated a program— Information Security Education

22
and Awareness Project  with a budget outlay of Rs. 70 crores for a
duration of 5 years. The main objectives of the project are:
(i) Introduction of Information Security curriculum at M.Tech.
and B.Tech. level and Research Activity/Ph.D.
(ii) Train System Administrators/Professionals.
(iii) T rain Government Officers—Central and State on
Information Security issues.
(iv) Education Exchange programme.
(v) Bring Information Security Awareness in the country.
Under this project labs would be set up at 9 (nine) Resource Centers
(RCs) and 35 (thirty five) Participating Institutions (PIs) and faculty of
the participating institutions would be trained alongwith the
development of learning material on specific topics.
2. Special Manpower Development Programme in the area of VLSI
Design and related software (SMDP-II):
With a visiting to make India high-end VLSI design destination
and to target VLSI design turnover of around US$ 1 billion (Rs. 5000
crores) by the year 2010, DIT has initiated a Manpower Development
Programme in this area with a total outlay of Rs. 49.98 crores for a
period of five years to provide appropriate trained manpower. The
project is being initiated at 7 (seven) Resource  Centers (RCs) and
25 (twenty five) Participating Institutions (PIs). The major element of
the project are listed as below:
(i) Instruction Enhancement Programme (IEP) for the faculty
of PIs would be conducted by RCs.
(ii) To establish VLSI Design Laboratory equipped with
contemporary Electronic Design Automation (EDA) Tools at
all RCs and PIs.
(iii) Creation of VLSI Design Resource website and Mirror sites
at RCs.
(iv) To launch India Chip Project for siliconization of design
done by students of RCs and PIs.
(v) To introduce teaching of various courses on VLSI design
and related software to generate various types of manpower
listed below:
(a) ME/M. Tech programmes in VLSI Design (Type-II
Manpower)

23
(b) ME/M. Tech. Programmes in Electronics, Computer
Science with VLSI elective (Type-III Manpower)
(c) BE/B. Tech Programme with VLSI electives (Type-IV
Manpower)
(d) Ph.D. in VLSI Design and related software (Type-I
Manpower)
3. Establishment of Centres for Excellence for Manpower
Development in the field of Bioinformatics
Bio-informatics is an untapped and upcoming field of study that
requires specialized knowledge in biology, chemistry, information
systems etc. In order to formulate long-term strategy in Bioinformatics,
a study “Building block of Bioinformatics—Human Resource
Requirement in India” was carried out through CII. The main findings
of the report is that a conducive environment for research development
needs to be created and also specific skill sets need to be generated
to serve the Bioinformatics industry in India. In order to bridge skill
set gap and to generate more research, the report has recommended
to set up centres of excellence for research and training purpose and
to facilitate skill set development through modular courses.
DIT has planned to set up four centres of excellence for research
and training in the field of Bioinformatics. These centres will carry out
research in Bioinformatics as well as generate relevant skill sets to
serve the needs of Bioinformatics industry.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee learn that the Information security education and
awareness is very important from the point of view of trusted services
in both IT and IT enabled services in future. In order to build a
manpower that will service these requirements, a model of capacity
building was designed in which institutional capacity building would
require manpower development as well as laboratory setting up and
the content, that is, curriculum design. The working group
recommended some of the courses and also strategy to design new
courses or develop masters courses including existing courses and place
these courses in educational institutions, in engineering colleges and
train their teachers. Emphasis is, therefore, on training of trainers. Nine
RCs which would be assigned for the participating engineering
institutions or laboratories or societies which are imparting education
would mentor these institutions. IITs, Indian Institute of Science,

24
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFT), Mumbai have also been
identified for offering training of trainers and serve established
laboratories in each of these centres. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these Resource  Centres should explore the feasibility
of having a tie up with the industry as this is the place where one
can get the actual feed back regarding emerging needs of the time
and thus the training programmes can be strengthened and regularly
updated.
Action Taken by the Government
1. The Inter-Ministerial Working Group on “Cyber Security
Education and Awareness” had constituted a Sub-Committee
on Information Security Education and Awareness
Programme with a representative from Industry to give
inputs from Industry .
2. A representative from the Industry was also included in
the one-day Workshop, organized by DIT to finalize the
syllabus in the first four weeks Faculty Training programme
for Participating Institutes held at TIFR, Mumbai from May
23 to June 17 2005. The inputs given by representative from
industry were included in the curriculum of this first
Faculty-Training.
3. During the First Faculty-Training held at TIFR, Mumbai, it
has been decided to include expert faculty from the industry
available in the area of “Information Security” to deliver
expert/specialized lectures/tutorials.
4. DIT has finalized 9 Resource Centres (RCs) and 35
Participating Institutes (PIs) as implementing agencies for
the project “Information Security Education & Awareness”.
These institutes are being requested to include the industry
(preferably near to their location) in the development of the
Learning material to be developed under the project.
5. These 9 Resource Centres (RCs) and 35 Participating
Institutes (PIs) are also being requested to include the
representative from Industry/private entrepreneurs during
the various training courses and conferences in order to get
the proper inputs from the industry in the form of
presentations, lectures and case studies by the private
institutes.

25
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses (DOEACC)
Society
The Committee are distressed to note that DOEACC has not been
able to register and admit as many students as the target fixed for the
last two years. During 2003-04 and 2004-05, against the target of 75,000
and 82,500 students to be registered for conduct of O, A, B & C level
courses, only 49,391 and 42,275 students respectively were registered.
Similarly, again during 2003-04 and 2004-05 against the target of
admitting 1,50,000 and 1,65,000 students candidates, only 1,30,051 and
1,04,000 students candidates respectively were Admitted. The reasons
for shortfall in achievement of targets are stated to be the availability
of large number of courses being offered by Universities/deemed
Universities/Affiliated Colleges who are approved Institutes in the
private sector and offering formal degree programmes and as such,
the choice available to the students to opt for computer courses from
various IT educational Institutes is widening, thereby affecting the
DOEACC Courses. Other reasons are stated to be the high standards
of DOEACC courses in respect of its Syllabus as well as Conduct of
Examinations and also the absence of academic recognition of DOEACC
Courses.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee learn that the matter regarding academic recognition
of DOEACC ‘B’ Level course with All India Council of Technical
Education (AICTE) through Distance Education Council, Indira Gandhi
National Open University (IGNOU) has made some progress. Academic
recognition of DOEACC ‘B’ level course is expected to increase the
intake of DOEACC courses amongst students. The Committee desire
that the matter may be pursued vigorously to get these courses
recognized so that large number of candidates are attracted towards
them.
Action Taken by the Government
The DOEACC Society is pursuing with AICTE the recognition of
DOEACC courses. Action has also been initiated for recognition of
DOEACC ‘B’ level course for Bio-informatics for the award of a Post
Graduate Degree by West Bengal University of Technology.

26
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
Nano-technology
The Committee observe that Nano-technology as an emerging, inter-
disciplinary field involving development of nano-materials devices and
system and finding revolutionary applications in almost all fields of
science and engineering. It is being regarded as the next technological
revolution. It has attracted the attention of scientists, researchers and
technologists all over the world and is likely to have profound effect
on almost all industry sectors and application areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee note that seven projects in the areas of nano-
materials are on-going at some laboratories at IIT, Chennai. They further
note that some of the projects to be taken up during 2005-06 are: one
in the areas of carbon nano-tubes for targeted drug deliver at CSI,
Chandigarh, second is at National Physical Laboratory which is on
meteorology and the third biggest project is setting up of nano-
electronics centres at IISC, Bangalore and at IIT, Mumbai, for which
the AFCI papers are being examined by the Planning Commission.
The project estimate is stated to be close to Rs. 100 crore. The
documents are already under circulation and final decision on the
same is expected soon. Keeping in view the importance of nano-
technology in almost all fields of science and engineering and also
that there has been enormous funding being done in Europe, China,
Japan, etc. on developing Nano-technology, the Committee recommend
that adequate funding should be done for research and development
in this area. With this end in view, the Committee trust that allocation
of Rs. 40 crore made during the year 2005-06 for programmes under
Nano-technology will be fully utilised.
Action Taken by the Government
A new project i.e., joint project for setting up of ‘Nano-electronics
Centres’ at IISC, Bangalore & IIT, Bombay with a total outlay of
Rs. 99.80 crore for conducting R&D in the area of Nano-electronics,
has been approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on
6.7.2005. Further action for obtaining  Government approval is being
initiated. Given the specialized expertise available at these institutions,
IISC would mainly follow the atoms-up, materials centric approach
and IITB, the shrink-down, device centric approach though there will
be some overlapping as well. In addition to this, joint post-graduate
research would also be part of this project. There will be five (5)

27
demonstrable outputs from each institution i.e. Magnetic materials for
LC Resonator; Acoustic sensor; Ferroelectrics for FRAMs (Ferro-electric
Random Access Memory) and Phase shifters; Rare earth metal oxide
for MOS (Metal Oxide Semiconductor) gate dielectric; Molecular
Rectifier Based on Organic Thin Films from IISc and Sub 100 nm
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) Process
Development; Nano-systems for Healthcare and Environmental
Monitoring; Organic and Biopolymer Devices; GaN (Gallium Nitride)
Devices; Characterization, Modeling and Simulation of Nano-electronic
Devices from IIT, Bombay . There will also be one joint output of IIT
& IISc namely R.F. (Radio Frequency) Oscillator.
Out of allocated Rs. 40 crore for FY 2005-06, Rs. 6.36 crore have
already been utilised and some funds would also be required for other
on-going projects. Thus, less than Rs. 33 crore would be available
from Department of Information Technology (DIT) budget as against
the first year requirement of about Rs. 57 crore for “Nano-electronics
Centres”.
Further, another new project on Nano-metrology (science of
measurements at nano-scale), an essential requirement for development
of Nano-technology in the country at National Physical Laboratory,
Delhi has also been recommended by ‘Working Group on Nano-
technology’ for funding by the DIT with an outlay of Rs. 17.78 crore
and is being processed. The project aims at providing traceability to:
(i) Scanning Probe Microscopes (SPMs); (ii) Industry & all others for
line width, step height, surface texture measurements; and (iii)
Calibration of low voltage, low current and low electric charge.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
While applauding the R&D initiatives on Nano-technology, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should take a
clear view and initiative for framing policy to facilitate the creation of
fabrication units in the country.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department is formulating a policy framework for attracting
Mega Fab to the Country. This process is underway.
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy
The Committee were informed during the examination of the
Demands for  Grants for the year 2004-05 that the Department of

28
Information Technology had referred the draft paper on “National
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy” to the National
Manufacturing Competitive Council (NMCC) to promote manufacturing
in India. The Committee concludes from the reply to query regarding
the present status with regard to the above said policy that the
“National Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Policy” has not been
finalized as yet.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee observe that major fiscal measures have been taken
by the Government for rationalization of tariff structure for the
Hardware sector like custom duty being zero% on specified raw
materials/inputs used for manufacture of electronics components/
optical fibres/cables and on specified capital goods used for
manufacture of electronics goods. Central Excise duty is zero% on
Computers, Microprocessors, Hard Disc Drives, Floppy Disc Drives
and CD Rom Drives. In the Budget 2005-06, custom duty on ITA-1
items (217 items) has been abolished w.e.f. 1.3.2005. All goods required
in the manufacture of ITA-1 items have been exempted from customs
duty subject to Actual user condition and custom duty on specified
electronics components has also been exempted.
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee further observe that the DIT has taken up the
proposal for modification of the Electronics Hardware Technology Park
(EHTP) Scheme with the Department of Commerce. The National
Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) has constituted a Sub-
group on IT Hardware sector. The Secretary, Department of Information
Technology is a member of the Sub-group. The Sub-group on IT
Hardware sector is having discussions with the stakeholders as part of
the on-going exercise for energizing and sustaining the growth of
manufacturing industry in general including IT hardware.
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee understand that while the software industry has
shown a very impressive growth, the hardware industry has not grown
to the same extent. As the above said policy would address issues on
Tariff Policy, Exim Policy, Hardware Manufacturing Cluster Parks,
supporting R&D, marketing Made in India, inviting large Electronics
Manufacturing Service Companies to set-up Indian operations,
development of semiconductor industry, labour laws, patenting etc.,
the Committee recommend that all the formalities should be completed

29
expeditiously and the said policy be finalized soon. They hope that
once the policy will be in place, electronics and hardware
manufacturing sector would be energized and register further growth.
India can leverage its core competence in the Software field many
times over if coupled with a strong Hardware Policy. With reasonable
competence in the manufacturing of high end hardware like ICs and
ASICs, tremendous value addition to these products can be made with
the nation’s proven strength in Software skills.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations pertaining to fiscal measures made in the
Draft Paper have been acted upon. The promotional and other measures
contained in the Draft Paper are applicable, in general, for the whole
of manufacturing sector in the country. Therefore, the Draft Paper has
been referred to National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council
(NMCC) being the nodal agency appointed by the Government to
look into the problems of manufacturing sector including IT Hardware
and to provide a continuing forum for policy dialogue on this subject.
The NMCC has constituted a Sub-group on IT Hardware sector.
Secretary, Department of Information Technology is a member of Sub-
group. The necessary inputs are being provided by the Department of
Information Technology to the Council. The Sub-group on IT Hardware
sector is having discussions with the stakeholders, as part of the on-
going exercise for energizing and sustaining the growth of
manufacturing industry in general, including IT Hardware.
Once the NMCC submits its recommendations to the Government
on the manufacturing sector, particularly IT Hardware sector, the same
will go a long way in energizing the growth of this sector.
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
Intellectual Property Rights Promotion Programme (IPRPP)
The Committee understand that a great amount of design and
development work is being done by multinationals and Indian
Corporates in India. The Committee attach a very high priority to the
protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) in the country. They
urge the Government to take all measures to reaffirm the commitment
of the country to safeguard the IPRs.
Action Taken by Government
An IPR Cell has been established in DIT to nurse the niche
area of ICT-IPR facilitation, HR Development, contribution to

30
Inter-Ministerial meetings related to amendments in the IPR Acts in
regard to IT/Computer  Software. As a result today 58 Patents, 142
Software Copyrights, 28 Trademarks, 2 Designs have been filed in
respect of DIT, its Societies and Grantee Institutions. Four Patents, 37
Copyrights and 2 Designs obtained were handed over to these
respective organizations. An IPR Exchange Forum is being set up at
IISc, Bangalore to facilitate SMEs in particular.
Manual on E&IT Patents—2002, Copyrights and other Digital
Works—2002 and Industrial Designs—2004 were widely distributed
through ELITEX and other forums to enable all prospective creators/
inventors in ICT area protect their findings legally both within the
nation and abroad.
R&D Projects have been evolved responding to the needs of the
country in this niche area of ICT-IPRs to develop tools and databases
relevant to the Software Technologies and tapping of the IPR potential
of the developers of Software, Embedded Systems, Digital Intellectual
Properties etc.
A regular PG Diploma Course on “IPRs in Internet Age” was
institutionalized and this is being conducted in the E-Learning mode
through Internet to all concerned throughout the country for the first
time. Relevant Course material was developed and is being dissipated
in the field. The books as a Glimpse of Indian E&IT Patents 2000-03
Legal Dimensions of Cyber Space—ILI, and Guide to Free/Open Source
Software Intellectual Property Rights were published under IPR Cell
programme.
IPR Cell made 25 presentations at National level platforms on IPR
Topics of current interest. These platforms include Technology Day
Seminar—IIT, Delhi, Multimedia SAARC Conference—Pune, Technology
Utilization National Conference—Anna University, Chennai, New IPR
Regime Seminar—Company Secretaries of India, NSIT, IIT-Allahabad,
IISc., ITM-Mussoorie, IIT-Kh, DU, IDC, CSI-Chandigarh, IE, IEEE, FICCI,
ASSOCHAM—Delhi, S/w Protection Int’l Workshop—Seoul, Korea etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
Information Security
The Committee attach a lot of importance to cyber security and
matters relating to protection of data bases. They urge the Government
to take all measures towards branding India globally as a secure nation
for strengthening security aspects of IT and to create the confidence.

31
Action Taken by the Government
In view of importance of Cyber Security and matter related to
protection of databases, R&D in IT Security is being continued to be
promoted under a specific programme of the Department of Information
Technology.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
In this connection, the Committee note that Stadardisation Testing
and Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate has established Information
Security Management System certification   framework and are
certifying their client Companies. The Committee are of the view that
Information Security would be equally important in the implementation
of e-Governance programme. The Committee trust that STQC would
strengthen its Information Security Management System programme.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of Information Security, especially in
the context of e-Governance Programme of Department of Information
Technology, STQC has initiated following steps to strengthen its
Information Security infrastructure/activities:
(a) STQC has expanded its Information Security Management
System certification framework which was so far confined
to mainly major software and multinational companies to
Government and Public Sector Undertakings, such as Land
Record Information System, Treasuries & Accounts, Banks
& Financial Sector, Public Sector Undertakings and the like.
Apart from certification infrastructure, STQC is also
providing Penetration Testing and Vulnerability Assessment
Services to Private Sector companies and Public Sector
Undertakings to strengthen the security of IT System and
Network. STQC has also been empanelled by CERT-In, DIT
to provide such services on national level.
(b) To improve the quality of Professionals engaged in IT
Security area in the country, STQC has also come up with
certified training programmes on Information Security and
Network Security which are of International standards.
(c) Of late, STQC has also taken up initiatives to provide
Quality Assurance support in e-Governance Programme and
has developed Quality Assurance framework for

32
e-Governance integrating the aspects of Quality , Security and
Service Quality. This framework addresses the Security
requirements comprehensively covering perimeter security,
Network Security, application Security and Data Security
with the ultimate aim of Assuring, Securing and Quality
Service to the citizens.

33
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee further note that the proposal for setting up CICs
in Uttaranchal has been formulated and the EFC Memo of the project
is under review by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
The Committee desire that matter should be pursued with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance so that the people of Uttaranchal
may soon get the benefits of CICs. They strongly advocate the
replication of CIC model in remote and under developed regions of
India.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT has pursued with Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance for setting up of CICs in Uttaranchal. DIT has provdied
clarifications on the observations made by Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance. Planning Commission has agreed the proposal in
principle. DIT is convening the meeting of EFC.
As regards replication of CIC model in remote and under
development regions in India, DIT is not considering Statewide rollout
of CICs. However, DIT is in the process of formulating a plan to
facilitate establishment of Common Service Centres (CSCs) in rural
areas across the country. For this purpose, draft guidelines have been
prepared which aim to promote establishment of CSCs through
appropriate Public Private Partnerships (PPP). Such Centres would have
flexibility to offer a mix of services (from Government & non-
Government including localized services) that may be needed by the
local community.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
The Committee recognize the strategically important role of NIC
in creating the infrastructure backbone for delivering Government

34
services across the nation. However, they regret to note that out of the
target of setting up of 10 NIC district centres in newly created districts
during 2004-2005, NIC could set up only two NIC districts centres.
The non-availability of the sites is stated to be the reason for the
shortfall in target. They feel that such a situation could have been
effectively met by proper advance planning. The Committee trust that
NIC would in future anticipate such implementation problems and fix
the targets keeping in view the basic requirement for their projects i.e.
availability of sites. The Committee feel that DIT should take up the
matter with the concerned State Governments. The onus for identifying
the sites and making them available lies with the State Governments
also.
Action Taken by the Government
NIC is providing NICNET services upto district level. The State
Governments have been setting up new districts. NIC provides NICNET
connectivity as and when new districts are created by taking necessary
Government approval for the same.
For setting up of NIC district centre, the district administration
has to provide suitable space and electricity. NIC provides computer
and communication equipments, system software & application software
and technical manpower.
NIC prepares targets for setting up of NIC district centres there
keeping in view that district administration will be able to provide
suitable space and requisite electricity load.
Whereas NIC is in position to provide the necessary computer
hardware, VSATs, system software, application software to start the
district centre, NIC has to pursue the matter with the district authorities
for providing office space.
Many a times, district authorities are not able to provide suitable
space and electricity load. It has been found in certain cases that the
new districts are not even provided any separate space to start the
collectorate office. While NIC has been aware of such problems, NIC
has to fix the targets to complete the maximum number of new districts
so that it can continuously pursue with the district authorities for the
setting up of new districts.
NIC is taking necessary steps to complete the 8 districts during
the year 2005-06 by getting the space allotted which is getting sorted
out and creation of technical manpower posts for them.

35
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee are constrained to note that some of the NIC
activities though targeted to be completed in 2004-05, remained
incomplete and will now be taken up for completion during 2005-06.
These activities are Establishment of offsite Disaster Recovery site for
NIC Certifying Authority, Establishment of Key Archiving facilities for
archival of encryption keys, detailed study, procurement of systems
and data entry for Smart Island Project, setting up usability Lab for
India Image and procurement & setting up hierarchy of storage
solutions to cater to the varying demands of Government Departments.
The Committee observe that failure to successfully execute these
activities within the year will obviously affect the achievement of
activities targeted for the year 2005-06. The Committee, therefore,
express their concern over such delays and recommend that the reasons
for the same should be identified and corrected for timely
implementation of these critical projects. Responsibility should also be
fixed for the delay in implementation of all such projects. As a body
that understands very well the requirements of Government’s/
Departments, NIC should strengthen itself to play a pivotal and co-
ordinating role in identification, development and implementation of
e-Governance programme in close co-ordination with DIT and NISG.
Action Taken by the Government
NIC has been preparing targets for various important activities on
year-to-year basis. Thereafter, necessary steps are taken to implement
these activities. In some cases, a few constraints are faced at the time
of implementation. NIC tries to overcome such constraints. However,
in some cases, constraints are beyond the control of NIC. The same is
the case in the case of projects indicated by the Parliament Standing
Committee on Information Technology. Also, at the time of
implementation, NIC has to deploy the right kind of technological
solution.
The information relating to the projects indicated by the Standing
Committee is given below:
(i) Establishment of offsite Disaster Recovery site for NIC Certifying
Authority
The selection of Disaster Recovery Site for Certifying Authority is
a critical issue involving Geographical location (seismic zone), physical
and logical security, infrastructure, technicalities (Connectivity, Hardware
& Software) and other logistics, in compliance with the IT Act, 2000,
as amended from time to time.

36
After due consideration of all these factors, the site for Disaster
Recovery Site has been finalised at NIC, Hyderabad and the DR will
be setup during 2005-06.
(ii) Establishment of Key Archiving facilities for archival of
encryption keys
Establishment of a key archiving facility is basically meant for
archival of the private key of the encryption key pair. NIC Certifying
Authority is in the process of development of a scaled down version
of Key Escrowing system for encryption of private key in PEX format
for the encryption keys issued from enterprise CA.
(iii) Detailed Study, Procurement of Systems and Data Entry for Smart
Island Project
Pilot site selection for site preparation and systems installation was
scheduled to be carried out during Jan.-March 2005. Due to emergency
works related to Tsunami and the priorities assigned thereafter, the
scheduled travel and works were not taken up during this period.
The same will be taken up and completed during May-July, 2005.
(iv) Set up usability Lab for India Image
Usability Lab involves building of a special setup like construction
of soundproof rooms with special purpose infrastructure. Due to
introduction of some new services, NIC is presently involved with the
restructuring in NIC premises to render these services in an effective
manner. As a first step, NIC is setting up GIS lab, which is at an
advanced stage of completion. Setting up of usability Lab has been
planned as a part of this restructuring.
(v) Procurement & Set up Hierarchy of storage solutions to cater to
the varying demands of Govt. Depts.
Over the last couple of years, a lot of research & development has
taken place in the area of storage technologies as well as storage
networking. As a result lot of new storage technologies as well as
products were introduced in the market. NIC has been working out to
get latest and proven technologies.
The process for procurement of Hierarchical storage setup has
already been initiated and part of the solution is in the advance stage
of procurement. For the rest of the solution specifications and
requirements has been worked out.

37
Coordination with DIT for e-Governance programme
NIC is already playing a pivotal role in e-Governance programme
of DIT. A number of accelerated e-Governance projects are being
executed by NIC. NIC is also working on establishment of SWAN
projects for some States. The requirement of manpower and additional
financial resources is being worked out by DIT.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
Electronics & Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC)
The Committee observe that Electronics and Computer Software
Export Promotion Council (ESC) is one of the largest industry
association representing 2200 exporting companies from the field of
electronics and computer software/services sector. It has a committee
having twenty two members from the industry and four members as
Government nominees. It is basically engaged in arranging trade shows,
exhibitions, match making and also interface with policy makers. The
Committee are happy to note the efforts made so far by ESC in
organizing the export shows in the area of IT like “INDIASOFT”. The
Committee also note that as compared to Japan, which is the second
largest IT market in the world, India’s share of software export is only
to the extent of about 3.5 per cent at present. According to the DIT,
one of the reasons for such a low share of software exports is the
language barrier. The Committee feel that the ESC effort in organizing
Japanese and German languages programmes will help preparing IT
professional in developing alternative market like Japanese and German
IT market.
Action Taken by the Government
The Japanese and German language programmes by ESC are a
regular event and are part of its Annual Action Programmes. These
activities are covered under market Access initiative scheme of the
Department of Commerce, Government of India.
Under the Japanese language support programme, financial
assistance was provided by way of reimbursement to 43 IT students
and 93 IT professionals/personnel of Indian IT software firms for the
year 2002-03 and 28 IT students and 76 IT professionals/personnel of
Indian IT software firms for the year 2003-04 for learning the Japanese
language and obtaining the required level of proficiency prescribed
under the LRMAFI-J scheme. Claim applications for reimbursement
under this scheme for the year 2004-05 are being received from IT

38
students and IT professionals of Indian IT software firms for payment
during 2005-06.
The German language support programme (LRMAFI-G) was
officially announced in September 2004. Being the first year of its
operation, reimbursement of eligible claims was made to only 13 IT
students for the year 2004-05 for learning the German language and
obtaining the required level of proficiency prescribed under the
LRMAFI-G Scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee are concerned to note the problem of attrition that
SAMEER has been facing for long. They further learn that SAMEER
has been doing campus recruitment on contract basis and also are
trying to fill up this gap by having more number of standby people.
SAMEER ahs expressed its apprehension that such steps might create
a gap when the leadership question comes up at a certain period of
time. The Committee endorse the suggestion of SAMEER that the
Ministry of Finance should look into the possibility of allowing certain
exemptions to SAMEER like it is being given to DRDO so that it can
function with full vigor to yield the desirous results. The Department
should also examine the desirability of providing suitable initiatives to
minimize the rate of attrition of technical personnel.
Action Taken by the Government
SAMEER has submitted a comprehensive document for recruitment
and sustaining the manpower for the next 5 years and is under
consideration. Regular promotions to meritorious staff both Scientists
and Administration under FCS will go a long way in achieving
excellence in R&D efforts. SAMEER is engaged in state-of-art projects
with strategic implications for the nation. Exemptions in the same
lines as given to DRDO/DOS in recruitment by Ministry of Finance
will definitely keep the positive momentum going and allows
continuous induction of talented and capable young scientists to
SAMEER.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee are satisfied to note that looking at the increasing
demand of IT professionals, the Society has adopted a strategy to
interact with industry associations such as NASSCOM to review/
redesign the DOEACC courses with regard to their appropriateness
and employability, besides launching new courses in emerging areas

39
including IT Enabled Services (ITES)—Business Process Outsourcing
(BPO). The Society has already launched Bioinformatics courses at ‘O’
and ‘A’ level at DOEACC Centres. ITES-BPO courses have been
launched in North-Eastern Region with financial assistance of
Department of Development of North-Eastern Region (DONER), besides
Jammu and Srinagar. The Society has planned to launch DOEACC
Hardware courses during the financial year 2005-06. The Committee
welcome the steps taken by DOEACC which are in consonance with
the present day requirement of the IT professionals.  They desire that
greater importance should also be attached to contents of these courses
in consonance with the market demand by framing a forward looking
curriculum. The Committee would like be apprised of the academic
recognition of these courses launched/proposed by DOEACC.
Action Taken by the Government
The Society interacts regularly with the industry to review/redesign
the DOEACC courses with regard to their appropriateness and
employability. The courses contents are revised periodically to take
care of the requirements of the industry. The Committee would be
kept apprised of the academic recognition of DOEACC courses.
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
Digital DNA Park
The Committee observe that the Department of IT decides to create
specialized infrastructure for the biotechnology/bio-tech sector in the
country in order to foster the growth of bio-informatics/biotechnology
sector. However, they concerned to note that the Department has not
utilised the allocation of Rs. 3.50 crore and Rs. 5 crore during the
2003-04 and 2004-05 for the project.
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The Committee find that STPI, which is nodal agency on behalf of
DIT and Department of Biotechnology (DBT) in the implementation of
the project invited proposals from leading consultancy firms in
May 2003. Thereafter, the work was entrusted to M/s Ernst & Young
in February 2004. STPI alongwith them held stakeholder consultation
workshops at six locations in the country in April 2004. M/s Ernst &
Young submitted the feasibility Report in August 2004 for setting up
the Bio-IT Park. Six locations have been short-listed in the Feasibility
Report. This report was submitted to the Planning Commission which
accorded the approval on 13.10.2004. The Bio-IT Park is proposed to

40
be set up in the form of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. In
order to select a suitable private promoter STPI invited Request for
Qualification (RFQ) in December 2004. 17 bidders have been short
listed after evaluation process. The DIT have also written to the Chief
Secretaries of the States having the short listed locations and the
encouraging response has been received from the State  Governments.
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee observe that when so many formalities were
anticipated in the process involving years together, the allocations under
this head should not have been made earlier. The Committee, however,
now hope that implementation of the project would start soon and
Rs. 10 crore allocated for the scheme would be fully utilized for creating
specialized infrastructure for the biotechnology/biotech sector in the
country to foster the growth of bio-informatics/biotechnology sector.
Action Taken
In an endeavour to promote the activities in this industry, the
Department of Information Technology (DIT), in conjunction with the
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) intends to facilitate setting up of
a state-of-the-art infrastructure in the form of a ‘Bio-IT Park’. The
proposed Park would address the IT related needs of the global life
sciences industry and is expected to attract investments (both domestic
and foreign) in the related areas.
The Bio-IT Park is proposed to be set up in the form of a Public-
Private Partnership (PPP) model wherein the STPI would be a minority
stakeholder and the private promoter would be the majority
stakeholder. A detailed Feasibility Report has been prepared which
was submitted to Planning Commission. ‘In-principle’ approval has
been received from Planning Commission for the project.
The progress so far and the future course of action:
• STPI appointed M/s Ernst & Young as consultants for the
initiative.
•A  stakeholder consultation process was undertaken by STPI
assisted by M/s Ernst & Young to understand the needs of
the industry. This included workshops at six locations in
the country, which had a concentration of Biotech/
Bioinformatics companies. The workshops were held at
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Pune, Kolkatta, Delhi
(Noida).

41
•T aking into account the issues/points raised by the
participants of the workshop, a ‘Feasibility Report’ has been
prepared for setting up the proposed Bio-IT Park.
• The Feasibility Report was submitted to Planning
Commission and ‘In-principle’ approval has been received
from Planning Commission.
• The park is proposed to be developed in the form of a
public-private partnership model. In order to select a private
promoter a two stage process of RFQ (Request for
Qualification) and RFP (Request for Proposal) has been
adopted.
• STPI released the RFQ in leading national and international
financial dailies/magazines to invite responses from
interested private promoters.
• STPI received good response to the RFQ and 25 bids have
been received in response to the RFQ. STPI has also received
bids from international participants. A Committee consisting
of representatives of DIT, DBT and STPI evaluated the bids
and 17 bids have been short listed for the RFP process.
• The park would also have State Government as a key
stakeholder. DIT has written to State Governments of short
listed locations for providing inputs regarding land and
other facilities/incentives offered by the State Government
for the proposed park.
The responses from the State Governments would be made
available to the short listed bidders of the RFQ process.
The RFP would be released to the short listed bidders of the RFQ
process and they would submit their proposal in response to the RFP ,
which would also identify the location of the proposed park. A pre-
bid conference would be organized wherein short listed bidders of the
RFQ process and representatives of State  Government would be
invited.
DIT is in the process of submitting the proposal before Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC). After approval of the project STPI would
take further action for organization of pre-bid conference and selection
of strategic partner for STPI for implementation of Bio-IT Park. The
funds allotted for Bio-IT (Digital DNA Park) is likely to be utilized
during the current financial year.

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
National Action Plan on e-Governance (NEGAP)
The Committee observe that the vision behind the e-Governance is
to make all the Government services and relevant information accessible
to the common man. To promote e-Governance on a massive scale, a
National Action Plan on e-Governance (NEGAP) has been drawn for
implementation during 2003-07. It is a centralized initiative having a
much more decentralized model for implementation. Various
Government Ministries/Departments are responsible for implementation
of the Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) assigned to them with regard to
NEGAP . The direct responsibility of the Department of Information
Technology pertains to the areas of Creation of State Wide Area
Network (SWAN), Establishment of National Data Centre/State Data
Centres, Establishment of Common Service Centres, Horizontal transfer
of successful e-Governance applications, E-Portal/Services Delivery
Gateway, Awareness and assessment of similar projects, HRD, Technical
support, UNDP and other related activities like e-readiness formulation
for Core Policies and Standards etc. Web-sites, Office Automation Centre
for e-Governance (CEG), application development, Programmes
management etc.
the Committee realize that sincere efforts are required to be made
by the Department to effectively implement the e-Governance
programmes throughout the country. They, therefore, recommended that
the Department should accord top priority to the implementation of
all these projects in a systematic and organized manner. There is also
a need for effective co-ordination among the various participants like
the NIC, National Institute for Smart Governance (NISG), NICSI, Line
Ministries/Departments/State Governments etc. with a view to
providing a more focused attention to the implementation of
e-Governance programme.
The Committee would further like to caution the implementing
bodies to focus on the effective delivery of the solutions to the common

43
man rather than get overwhelmed by the hardware and technology
aspects of the projects.
Action Taken
DIT is evolving suitable Programme Management Structure for the
NEGP , which would include Apex Committee for inter-ministerial co-
ordination, Financial Empowered Committee for one point clearance
of project proposals for approvals, Advisory Group to solicit views of
external stakeholders and the Programme Directorate to provide
secretarial support. Apex Committee has already been constituted with
the Cabinet Secretary as its Chairman and Secretary , DIT as its member
convener. National Advisory Group of e-Governance under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Communication and Information
Technology has been set up to advise the government on policy issues
and strategic interventions necessary for accelerating introduction of
e-Governance across Central and State  Government Ministries/
Departments. The group would specifically advise on issues relating
to the implementation of the National e-Governance Action Plan and
the various Mission Mode Projects (MMPs).
DIT has proposed the following roles/responsibility for various
entities such as DAR&PG, DIT, NIC, NICSI, NISG, Line Ministry/
Department and the State Government towards implementation of
NEGP .
Department of Information Technology to be responsible for
• Assist Apex Committee to manage program
• Serve as secretariat to Apex Committee
• Address Standardization, Interoperability issues
• Implement Pilots/Infrastructure projects
• Augment capacity/provide technical support
•C reate suitable e-Governance Group to discharge above
functions
• Constitute Advisory Group on NEGP
DAR&PG to be responsible for
• Generic Administrative Reforms/Process Re-engineering
• General HRD and Training

44
•A wareness
• Assessment
• E-Office
NIC to be responsible for
• Implement designated projects for Govt. of India and State
Government Departments
•P rovide technical support to project implementation teams
in Government of India and State Government Departments
• Establish, operate & maintain National Data Bank
• NICNET—to be upgraded as National e-Governance
backbone
• Data Centers, Disaster Management, e-Records rooms
• Assist in finalization of common standards and policies
• Designing and conducting training programs
• Knowledge sharing-development of best practices
Responsibility of GoI Departments executing assigned Mission Mode
Projects
• Respective Departments to define objectives, milestones,
timelines & methodology for execution of each MMP
assigned to them
• Each project to be implemented in a Mission Mode
• Mission Leaders & Empowered Mission Teams to be
constituted.
Responsibility of State Governments for the State Mission Mode
Projects
• State-level Apex Committee headed by Chief  Secretary
• States to define objectives, milestones, timelines &
methodology for each of the State Mission Mode Projects
keeping in view the overall directions/guidance issued by
the respective Central Ministry
• Each project to be implemented in Mission Mode

45
Responsibility of NICSI
•P romote and supplement NIC activities and to offer IT based
value added services
Responsibility of NISG
• Channelise private sector resources and competence in the
execution of e-Governance action plan.
DIT has initiated a study to clearly define services and service
levels for each of the identified Mission Mode Projects. Mission Mode
Projects would tune to these requirements.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that DIT are taking several steps to implement
the e-Governance programme. One of these are issue of Policy
Guidelines to provide support to State Governments to establish State
Wide Area Networks (SWANs) from the State HQs up to the Block
level with a minimum bandwidth capacity of 2 Mbps. NIC has already
set up a Data Centre at Delhi and have identified various State Data
Centres to cater to the requirements of the States to enable the
aggregations of the fragmented data in the States and also to facilitate
service delivery from centralized data centre. Also a scheme to establish
Common Service Centre has been drafted and is being given a final
shape. A policy framework is also evolved to provide funding support
to establish Common Service Centres across the country by the year
2007 and initiatives are proposed to be taken to create an enabling
environment for delivering Government and other need based private
services to rural citizens.
In view of the submission of Department of Information Technology
that Budget provision for e-Governance for the year 2004-05 and
2005-06 is being utilized towards creation of State Wide Area Networks
(SWANs), State Data Centres and Common Service Delivery Centres,
the  Committee would like to be assured that the funds allocated
would be fully utilized vis-a-vis achievements of physical targets.
The Committee would further desire the Departments to examine
the possibility of setting up of SWAN, National Data Centre/State
Data Centres and Common Service Centres in an integrated manner.

46
Action Taken
Funds allocated for e-Governance for the year 2004-05 were fully
utilized. It is proposed to use about 88% of the current year budget
(for 2005-06) towards establishing key Core Infrastructure like State
Wide Area Networks (SWANs), State Data Centres, and Common
Services Centres that would be serving different e-Governance
applications.
This Scheme for providing financial support for SWAN has already
been approved at a total outlay of Rs. 3,334 crore including Central
Assistance Component of Rs. 2005 crore. Guidelines for State Data
Centres & Common Services Centres are under formulation and these
guidelines would include necessary provisions for integration of these
components.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee learn that the DIT is also making efforts to address
the issues of standardization, interoperability, implementation of pilot
projects, infrastructural requirements, augmentation of capacity and
those relating to technical support for effective implementation of the
e-Governance programme. An Advisory Group has also been
constituted to advise the various decision-making bodies on policy
and strategy issues. The Department have been working on specialized
training programmes for Chief Information Officers (CIOs) and for the
policy makers at the State level as well as for individual Ministries.
Steps are also being taken to improve the service delivery and outcome
of the programmes.
The Committee observe that these functions to be undertaken by
the DIT are of utmost importance and therefore they desire that the
Department should do comprehensive planning in all areas particularly
in the area of building the capacity in the States so that by the time
Common Service Centres are set up, the citizens could at once start
utilizing their services.
Action Taken
DIT has prepared Guidelines for Capacity Building and Institutional
Framework for e-Governance under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
and circulated the same to State Governments/UTs for adoption. DIT

47
jointly with DAR&PG is planning to organize series of training
programmes for CIOs and Policy Makers. NIC is also conducting
regular training programme for government staff.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee find that during discussion of Annual Plan on
e-Governance on 22.12.2004, the Planning Commission had observed
that NEGAP should clearly indicate how the plan would link-up
transfer of 2-3% of Plan funds allocated to Line Ministries for e-
Governance and IT related activities and how the 2-3% would come
from Ministries where there was no plan funding like Ministry of
Finance and how they would be accommodated in the NEGAP . The
Planning Commission had, therefore, advised that only after
ascertaining clear cut funding pattern and process re-engineering
methods appropriately in NEGAP , the DIT could go for approval. The
Planning Commission had approved an allocation of Rs. 300 crore
subject to DIT taking up these actions promptly . The DIT was also
asked to make a presentation of NEGAP before full Planning
Commission and also to firm up business re-engineering process for
NEGAP in the next six months time.
Action Taken
The role of DIT is that of a facilitator and catalyst to promote
citizen and business centric e-Governance applications in various
Central and State Government departments including local bodies.
Allocation of funds to DIT has been restricted to the e-Governance
activities where DIT has direct responsibility for execution. For other
components and Mission Mode Projects, Line Ministry/Department
have been identified and they would be owning complete responsibility
for those project(s) including obtaining required financial allocations &
approvals. These Ministries/Departments would also be responsible
for carrying out the required business process re-engineering for the
project(s) assigned to them.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I.

48
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee, however, observe that the Department has stated
that the concerned Line Ministries/Departments are expected to
formulate detailed project proposals including funding and process re-
engineering and obtain necessary approvals as far as implementation
of the Mission Mode Projects under the NEGAP is concerned. The
Department also stated that they on their part would be extending
support towards technical assistance and for establishing common core
infrastructure. It has also been submitted that the Planning Commission
have advised all the Ministries and also written to them that their IT
component should be communicated to DIT and therefore, it is the
Planning Commission which will really have to see that this has
actually been implemented.
The Committee thus feel that the DIT should take seriously the
suggestions of the Planning Commission to co-ordinate with the Line
Ministries/Departments. They are of the firm opinion that being the
nodal Department in the matter and also being specifically advised by
the Planning Commission it is the primary responsibility of the
Department to ensure that all activities under e-Governance are
undertaken effectively in the time bound manner. There is also an
imperative need to impress upon the Line Ministries/Departments/
State Governments to take initiative in this regard.
Action Taken
DIT is evolving suitable Programme Management Structure for the
National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), which would include Apex
Committee for inter-ministerial co-ordination, Financial Empowered
Committee for one point clearance of project proposals for approvals,
projects, Advisory Group to solicit views of external stakeholders and
the Programme Directorate to provide secretarial support.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I.

49
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
Electronics & Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC)
Recommendation (No. 19)
The Committee further learn that ESC intends to set up an export
facilitation and business support centre in the US in the current year,
which will provide a platform to Indian small and medium companies
to tap US market and would also enable them with networking facilities
to identify customers. ESC is also planning to set up something on
the lines of INDIASOFT for the promotion and growth of hardware
sector also. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the
results achieved in those areas.
Action Taken by the Government
ESC’s proposal to set up an export facilitation and business support
centre in the USA is under consideration and the idea of organizing
an international event on the lines of INDIASOFT in India for the
hardware sector is still at a conceptual stage. The Committee will be
apprised once finalized.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

50
APPENDIX
MEDIA LAB ASIA
LIST OF ONGOING PROJECTS AS ON 31ST MARCH, 2005
Sl.No. Project Name Description
 12 3
1. Interfaces for all Design and evaluation of IIT Bombay
interfaces for interaction
techniques
2. Interlingua Web Natural language processing to IIT Bombay
provide with initial focus on rural
agri domain
3. Polysensors Inexpensive reusable polymer IIT Bombay
based sensors for multi fluid
testing
4. Rural WiFi-802.11b Mesh Broadband wireless last mile IIT Madras
networks solution for rural areas
5. PLD for Rural Access Low-cost devices for rural IIT Madras
Devices applications
6. Speech Synthesis-(Shruti) Generalized speech synthesis IIT Kharagpur
engine for Indian languages
7. Visual Languages- Natural language processing IIT Kharagpur
(Sanyog) using iconic systems
8. Offline Internet Access Offline low cost internet access IIT Kharagpur
(Samvidha) for rural schools
9. Digital Music Software workbench to analyze IIT Kanpur
and characterize music
10. Info sculpture Advanced 3-D CAD printing, IIT Kanpur
rapid prototyping and tolling
11. Digital Gangetic Plan Wireless broadband multi hop IIT Kanpur
connectivity in rural areas
12. Digital Mandi Research interconnection of IIT Kanpur
dispersed rural markets through
the web

51
12 3
13. Info Thela Research low cost mobile ICT IIT Kanpur
solutions for rural areas
14. Semantic Legacy Storage and retrieval of Non- IIT Delhi
Documents on the Web OCRable documents and
indexing them using gross
linguistic features
15. Low cost Computing Low cost computing devices and IIT Delhi
gadgets
16. Multi-lingual web Multilingual interfaces to Gram IIT Delhi
interfaces to Gram Chitra Chitra a mapping software
17. Adhoc Networks Mobile Sensor Networks IIT Delhi
18. Grampatra Store and forward wireless Media Lab Asia,
networks for email communication New Delhi
in rural areas
19. Screen Access for All Hindi screen reader software for National
the visually impaired persons Association
for the Blind,
Delhi
20. Mobile Healthcare Delivery Healthcare services through low IIT Kanpur
cost mobile internet
21. Educational content Development of educational
development tool for content development tool for
Virtual Lab virtual lab experiments
22. Life skills training for To develop an effective and Kanwal Rekhi
Children of Nomadic simple methodology, using ICT, School of
Tribes in Maharashtra for ‘Learning’ and ‘Life skills Information
using ICT training’ for children and youth Technology,
in the age of 4 to 14 years Chennai
23. Pilot deployment of Pilot deployment for land record Revenue Dept.,
Grampatra with Bhoomi document delivery in remote Karnataka Govt.,
villages Bangalore
24. Strengthening of Health Health data collection with All India Institute
services in Rural areas of handheld devices, development of Medical Science,
using IT-Dev. of a of healthcare modules on New Delhi
replicable model handheld devices and developing
a local healthcare information &
management system

52
12 3
25. Centre of excellence in Addresses standards issued and IIT Madras
wireless technology technology issues in advanced
wireless technology
26. Ashwini Pilot deployment of WiFi Byrraju Foundation,
technology for promoting rural Hyderabad
agro, education, crafts and
micro-enterprises
27. ICT based resources for Develop IT based content International
rural school education development tool with local Institute of
language support and develop Information
virtual laboratory for school Technology,
Hyderabad
28. Computer aided Text Development of computer aided C-DAC, Pune
to speech and text to TTS and text to Braille system
Braille system for for the visually impaired
visually impaired

53
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on the 20th December, 2005 from 1600 hrs. to
1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Vijay J. Darda
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
11. Shri Dara  Singh
12. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
13. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director

54
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Fifteenth Report on “Demands for Grants (2005-
06)” relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information
Technology).
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Sixteenth Report on “Demands for Grants
(2005-06)” relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Posts).
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Seventeenth Report on “Demands for Grants
(2005-06)” relating to the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications).
(iv) Draft Report on “Spectrum Management” relating to the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications).
3. The Committee, then, adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports
at Serial No. (i), (ii) and (iii). Draft Report on “Spectrum Management”
relating to Department of Telecommunications was partially discussed.
As some Members requested the Chairman to give them some more
time to go through the Draft Report, the Committee deferred further
consideration of the Draft Report on “Spectrum Management” to
21 December, 2005.
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above mentioned  Reports adopted by the Committee to
the House on a date and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

55
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
FIFTEENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 44, 45 and 46
Total : 31
Percentage : 67.39%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. Nos. 12, 13, 14, 18, 30, 33, 41, 42 and 43
Total : 9
Percentage : 19.56%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10
Total : 5
Percentage : 10.86%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are
of interim nature:
Sl. No. 19
Total : 1
Percentage : 2.17%