24
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)]
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 20.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 146
Price : Rs. 14.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations  which  have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations  which  the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government ........................ 20
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations  in  respect of
which the replies of the  Government  have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration ........................................ 21
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in  respect  of
which the Replies are interim in nature............ 25
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes  of  the  Thirteenth sitting  of  the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) held on 15.12.2005 .................................. 26
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the  Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 28
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasada
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
18. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
(iii)

26. Shri Dara Singh
*27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27.9.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)
relating to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 May, 2005. The Ministry furnished Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Report on 2 September, 2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 15 December, 2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
16 December, 2005 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)” relating to
the Ministry of information & Broadcasting.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
13.5.2005 and was laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 13.5.2005. It
contained 14 recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5-11, 13, 14
Total : 11
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 12
Total : 03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies are of interim nature:
Recommendation Nos. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to them urgently and in no case later
than six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Plan Outlay
Recommendation (No. 3)
6. Emphasising the need for prudence in the budgetary exercise,
the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as follows:
“The Committee observe that there was no Plan budgetary
provision for RNI during the 9th Plan. In the 1st year of the
10th Plan (2002-2003), Rs. 60 lakh were allocated under this head.
The amount remained unutilised as the Plan scheme was not
approved by the competent authority. Further, a proposed allocation
of Rs. 132.00 lakh was reduced to Rs. 41.50 lakh due to
redefinement of scheme and non-completion of the sanctioned work
by CPWD in the year 2003-2004. The actual expenditure was only
Rs. 36.73 lakhs. The Committee feel that there is a lot to be desired
in RNI in the field of planning, as saving due to non-completion
of work and redefinement does not appear to be good planning.
It is in these circumstances, for the year 2004-2005 a meagre amount
of Rs. 29.5 lakh has been allocated.
The Committee desire that  RNI should undertake its budgetary
exercise prudently and with due seriousness in a realistic manner.
Plan development leads to improved quality and service. The
Committee hope that the funds allocated in Tenth Plan for
computerisation and renovation of RNI headquarters would be fully
utilised as envisaged by the Ministry. They desire that RNI should
make every effort to expend the allocated funds of Rs. 29.5 lakh
during the year 2004-05 so as to improve quality of services
rendered by it”.

3
7. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the proposals for
the financial year 2005-06 of the Plan Scheme ‘Modernisation of RNI’
has been prepared and is under process for approval.
8. The Committee regret to observe that the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting have not been able to finalise any
concrete plan for modernisation of RNI so far. Considering the fact
that a period of only about four months are left in the ongoing
financial year, the Committee wonder whether the Ministry would
be able to utilise the budgetary allocation gainfully. This clearly
shows the lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry in the
matter which is a matter of concern to the Committee. They, therefore,
reiterate that the proposals for modernisation of RNI should be
processed expeditiously and necessary follow-up-action taken
promptly with a view not only to utilising the budgetary allocations
purposefully but also streamlining functioning of the Organisation.
Verification of Titles
Recommendation (No. 4)
9. Dealing with the present procedures on verification of titles, the
Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as follows:
“The Committee note that as per provision of PRB Act, 1867
applications for title verification are received by RNI through
District Magistrates. The DM first verifies the details and sends
the application to RNI in Delhi. RNI then verifies the availability
of the titles. The Committee note that a lot of time is being
consumed in this process causing great inconvenience to the
publishers who keep waiting for title clearance to start a
publication.
The Committee are aware that DMs have a number of important
assignments apart from maintaining law and order in the Districts.
Hence, it may not be possible for the DMs to give priority to the
work assigned to them by RNI. The Committee, therefore, desired
that for expeditious disposal of work, the existing procedure may
be modified to the extent under which the publisher applies to
the DM with a copy of the same endorsed to RNI so that RNI can
at once start the job of title clearance subject to verification of
other details from the District Magistrates. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry should concentrate on expediting the on-
line registration process to simplify the procedure”.

4
10. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867 does not permit Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI) to accept the application directly from the
publisher for verification of titles and these have to be routed through
concerned District Magistrates (DM) only. However, RNI has
implemented online checking of title status by the publishers. Besides
this, as per the Citizen’s Charter the following time limits have been
set:
(a) Title Clearance-21 days from the day it is received in the
RNI office from the DM’s Office.
(b) Registration-Response must be given in 45 days from the
day papers are received in RNI.
(c) Circulation—Decision in two months from the date all
papers are received in RNI.
Also, RNI, in consultation with National Informatics Centre (NIC)
is developing a software for updated application status for registration
online.
11. The Committee note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, RNI have since implemented online checking of
status by the publishers. They also note that RNI are also developing
a software in consultation with NIC for updated applications status
for online registration. The Committee further note that time limits
have been set under Citizen’s Charter for title clearance. While the
Committee appreciate these steps which are in the right direction,
they are unable to endorse the Ministry’s attitude on the question of
initiating action for registration by RNI on the basis of the
endorsement made by the applicant. The Ministry, in their action
taken reply have merely reproduced the existing provisions of the
Law without acknowledging the need for amendment to the relevant
provisions of the Act. Since the Ministry are stated to be in the
process of amending the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867,
the Committee desire that their recommendation be examined and
necessary action taken in order to make the process more responsive
to the changed media environment. The Committee also expect the
Ministry to take conclusive action for developing a suitable software
in consultation with NIC within a specific period, say one year.

5
De-Blocking of Titles
Recommendation (No. 6)
12. Stressing the need for making the exercise of de-blocking of
titles more frequent, the Committee in their earlier Report had
recommended as follows:
“The Committee find that for seeking registration, there is a
provision that after the declaration is authenticated by the District
Magistrate, the publisher is required to bring out the first issue of
the newspaper within 42 days in case of daily or weekly and
within 90 days for publications with a periodicity of more than a
week, otherwise their titles would be cancelled. However, the
procedure of cancellation being mechanical and lengthy was not
adhered to and resulted in blocking of titles. The first exercise to
de-block unregistered titles was undertaken only in the year 1998,
in which about 1.7 lakhs titles were de-blocked. Thereafter titles
are being de-blocked after two years. The Committee desire that
de-blocking should be carried out more frequently and publishers
should not be denied titles on grounds other than genuine.”
13. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the process of de-
blocking of titles for the year 2002 was already been started by RNI.
Further, RNI is in consultation with NIC for preparing a software for
faster de-blocking.
14. The Committee desire to be informed about the progress
made in evolving a software for faster de-blocking of titles.
Verification of Circulation Claim
Recommendation (No. 11)
15. Commenting on the issue of verification of circulation claim,
the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as follows:
“The Committee note that one of the important functions of RNI
is to varify circulation claims made by the publishers. However, in
view of the limited manpower available with RNI, RNI has
confined the circulation checks to only cases referred to it by
DAVP/PIB/State Govt. and some other undertakings. RNI also
undertakes circulation checks on the basis of complaints. The
Committee further note that out of the total 2658 cases referred in
the year 2000, 2001 and 2002-03, 2628 cases were referred by DAVP ,

6
5 cases were referred by State Governments, one case by PIB and
the remaining 24 were miscellaneous complaints.
The Committee also note that the number of circulation checks
done by RNI is decreasing year after year. During 2001, 2002-03
and 2003-04, 1679, 1304 and 788 circulation checks could be carried
out. Though RNI expects to touch the figure of 700 circulation
checks respectively during 2004-05, the Committee find that around
378 circulation checks would still remain pending. The Committee
observe that the decline in the number of circulation checks is due
to (i) the increased number of requests for spot checks received
from DAVP , which has risen from 25 to 150 annually (one spot
check takes time equal to six document based checks); (ii) shortage
of staff (two posts of Circulation Officers & Accounts Clerks are
lying vacant in RNI); and (iii) non-availability of trained technical
experts who have to be hired from outside.
Effective circulation check pre-supposes adequate trained manpower
to ensure checks to be carried out at least once a year. The
Committee desire that for effective verification of circulation claims
of newspapers, besides redeployment of staff within RNI wherever
and whenever required, services of PIB officers and technical
experts from outside should also be availed of. The Committee
also desire that RNI should ensure that circulation checks are done
within a fixed time-frame to minimize the problems being faced
by the publishers.”
16. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the Registrar of
Newspapers of India (RNI) has already written to the press Information
Bureau (PIB) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants inviting their
suggestions to streamline the process of circulation checks. To ensure
that a larger number of spot checks can be completed every year,
within a fixed time-frame, the matter has been taken up, for utilizing
the additional manpower resources available in PIB and in its regional
and branch offices. Further, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India has also been approached by RNI for suggestions of suitable
changes in the current methodology being adopted by RNI for assessing
the circulation of a newspaper, which is presently based on various
inputs and scrutiny of documents.
17. The Committee note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, RNI have initiated steps to streamline the process
of circulation checks in consultation with the Press Information
Bureau, the Institute of Chartered Accountants, etc. The Committee

7
desire that earnest efforts should be made to expeditiously complete
the process and take concrete action with a view to ensuring that
the process of circulation checks are undertaken methodically and
quickly apace with the technological advancements and also keeping
in view the changing media environment. The Committee would
like to be kept informed of the precise action taken in the matter.
Publishers demands on verification
Recommendation (No. 12)
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee had further recommended
as follows:
“The Committee observe that newspaper bodies are facing
difficulties as RNI has not been doing circulation checks on time.
This in turn has directly affected the advertisement rates of
publishers with the DAVP at the time of re-establishment of
circulation after three  years because DAVP insists on automatic
reduction of rates, to the minimum rates, unless the circulation is
authenticated by the RNI.
The Committee also observe that RNI carries out circulation checks
through the number of distribution of sold copies to agents,
hawkers, consumption, printing machinery etc. which the publishers
find difficult to produce. The Committee feel that the verification
should not lead to harassment so that publishers take to dubious
methods of concealing their actual circulation. The Committee also
feel that RNI should be regular in issuing the circulation
certification so that publishers are not put to trouble of automatic
reduction of rates by DAVP in the absence of such certification.
The Committee recommend that if the delay for issuing the
circulation certification rests on RNI, there should be an
understanding with DAVP that they should continue to pay the
already approved rates till the RNI authenticates the circulation.”
19. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the parameters
adopted by RNI for assessment of circulation claims require a few
mandatory documents in order to confirm the claims by the publishers.
The requirements put forth by RNI are the barest minimum in order
to effect a meaningful verification. Any further reduction of documents
or any other relaxation might hamper an effective check. RNI makes
all out efforts to decide a circulation claim as early as possible.
However, due to shortage of manpower and non-submission of
documents by the publishers in time, the issuance of assessment
certificate is delayed.

8
If publishers show promptitude in submitting documents within
the stipulated time, the delay can be minimized even with the available
manpower. Regarding the recommendation made by the Committee
that the publisher should be allowed to enjoy the advertisements on
the last assessed circulation, pending issuance of the new assessment
certificate, the matter will be examined in depth and a final decision
will be taken.
20. The Committee agree that there is a need for a proper
verification of the circulation claims made by the publishers.
However, their anxiety was that not only should it be done in a
methodical manner, but it should also be completed within a
reasonable time by RNI. In no case should it lead to harassments or
the publishers resorting to dubious methods of manipulating the
figures of circulation. They, therefore, desire that examination of their
recommendations that the publishers should be allowed to enjoy
the advertisements on the last assessed circulation, pending issuance
of the new assessment certificate, be expeditiously completed. The
Committee would like to be informed of the outcome of the
examination.
Fee for title clearance or registration
Recommendation (No. 13)
21. Expressing their views on the need for imposition of charges
on the services rendered by RNI, the Committee in their earlier Report
had recommended as follows:
“The Committee are surprised to note that RNI is not charging
any processing fee for performing various statutory and non-
statutory function such as title verification, registration, bringing
out ‘Press in India’, circulation check, issue of eligibility certificates
for import of newsprint, essentiality certificate for import of printing
machinery etc. They find no reason why RNI should not charge
for these services.
The Committee further note that the Expenditure Reforms
Commission had recommended imposing some service charges for
various services rendered by RNI and a proposal thereof was
formulated by RNI. However, when the Ministry of Law,
Department of Legal Affairs was consulted, they opined that the
PBR Act does not provide for fee for discharging statutory functions
and therefore fee cannot be charged without amending the Act.

9
The Committee feel that the proposal of imposition of fee for
various statutory and non-statutory functions of RNI is a step in
right direction and it should be actively considered by the Ministry.
The Committee, therefore, desire the necessary amendments in the
provisions of PRB Act should be made in this respect.”
22. The Ministry in their reply have stated that the proposed
amendments in the PRB Act 1867 include provision for prescribing a
fee for getting a new title as well as for re-verification of titles.
23. The Committee note that the proposed amendments in the
PRB Act 1867 include provisions for prescribing fees for getting
new titles and for re-verification of titles. They, however, regret to
note that the Ministry’s reply is silent about the proposals for
charging a fee in respect of the other functions such as registration,
circulation check, issue of eligibility certificates, etc. The Committee
therefore, desire that the need for imposition of charges towards the
services rendered in these areas may also be examined and necessary
action taken thereon. The Committee would like to be informed of
the action taken in the matter.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Amendments to the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (PRB)
Recommendation (No. 1)
The Committee are informed that PRB Act is an Act for regulation
of Printing presses and Newspapers, for the preservation of copies of
books and newspapers printed in India, and for the registration of
such books and newspapers. The Act was enacted in the year 1867
and is still in force for the regulation of printing presses and the
newspapers.
The Committee are also informed that the Registrar of Newspapers
for India (RNI) is the important organization, which is keeping record
of all available information and statistics on the presses and newspapers
in India. The Registrar of Newspapers for India performs Statutory
functions as enshrined under the Act of 1867 as well as Non-Statutory
functions as enshrined under the GOI, MOF (Deptt. of Revenue)
Notification No. 21.
Some of the functions like title verification, registration, clearance
of foreign title for newspapers, receipt of Annual Statements, deletion
of names of ceased publications, verification of circulation claims,
facsimile edition etc., requires changes in the original Act for their
smooth functioning and quick disposal. The above process and
procedures could be made more efficient and transparent by making
the whole process on line by using the Information Technology. The
introduction of Information Technology and its wide spread usage for
the above function does not find place in the original Act. It has
become very essential that the Act be suitably reviewed and necessary
changes incorporated.
The Committee are of the strong opinion that the smooth
functioning of RNI and its timely disposal of its functions is the key
to redressal of complaints from the newspapers organizations. The
Committee feel that this will be possible only if the Act is suitably
reviewed and amended to suit the present day on-line environment.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department should
make all out efforts to amend the Act as early as possible.

11
Action Taken by the Government
This Ministry has already initiated action for amendment of Press
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 to make it more responsive to the
changed media environment. The proposed amendment to the said
Act has been agreed to by the Group of Ministers. Accordingly, a
Note for the Cabinet has been prepared for seeking its approval.
Recommendation (No. 2)
Opening of more Regional Offices
The Committee observe that RNI had earlier placed a proposal for
opening up of regional offices in more locations in India but the same
was pruned down due to administrative reasons. The Committee are
informed that the bulk of the work with RNI lies in the verification
of titles, which takes a long time. This delay is the cause of most of
the complaints received from the publishers. They are further informed
that this position would be tackled effectively, once the computerization
process is complete.
The Committee are of the opinion that for opening up more
Regional Offices more staff would not be needed and also more rent
would not be required to be paid for accommodation etc. if the
Computerisation and on-line registration is carried out effectively and
in a time-bound manner. Till such time the possibility of entrusting
the job of verification of titles to some other division within the
Ministry e.g. Field Publicity Division may be examined.
Action Taken by the Government
Due to economy instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, it
is not possible to create new posts. However, an attempt is being
made to synergise with Regional Offices of RNI without creating posts.
Further, RNI has already initiated action to strengthen the existing
computer infrastructure at the headquarters as well as in its regional
offices. The staff are also being trained to familiarise with the new set
up.
In the first phase, Radio Frequency link is being installed at the
RNI Headquarters in lieu of existing computer system linked with
VSAT/ISDN. This will improve the efficiency of daily work and cut
down delays.
RNI is of the view that entrusting the job of title verification to
any other Field office of the Ministry may not be a viable option as

12
the records will get scattered and consequently monitoring thereof by
the Press Registrar will be difficult.
Recommendation (No. 5)
On-line Registration
The Committee are informed the National Informatics Centre (NIC)
in consultation with RNI has developed software for on-line
registration/verification of newspapers and it will take about two years
to make it operational as the specific details are still to be worked
out. The Committee is happy that RNI, in consonance with the need
for the hour is taking a step in the right direction. However, the
Committee feel that the time being taken for starting on-line
registration/verification is on the higher side. In the opinion of the
Committee, the facility should be implemented expeditiously. The
Committee, therefore strongly recommend that all sincere and concrete
efforts should be made by the Ministry/RNI to gear up its machinery
to face the challenges to make the online title verification operational
as early as possible. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
effective steps taken by the RNI in this regard quarterly.
Although the Committee observe that amendment in the PRB Act
is necessary in order to make the procedure for registration/verification
of newspapers on-line but they strongly feel that availability of the
information technology newspapers/periodicals title from the data bank
should immediately be made on-line. They, therefore, recommend, that
review of PRB Act, 1867 should be given top priority and provisions
be made in this regard after suitable modifications in the Act.
Action Taken by the Government
RNI in consultation with NIC is under process to develop a
software for providing online registration status. This Ministry has
already initiated action for amendment to Press and Registration of
Books At, 1867 to make it more responsive to the changed media
environment. Since the process of verification involves consultation
with district authorities and police it is complex and may take time to
make it online. The process of registration after verification will be
attempted to be put online with the help of NIC.
Recommendation (No. 6)
De-Blocking of Titles
The Committee find that for seeking registration, there is a
provision that after the declaration is authenticated by the District

13
Magistrate, the publisher is required to bring out the first issue of the
newspaper within 42 days in case of daily or weekly and within
90 days for publications with a periodicity of more than a week,
otherwise their titles would be cancelled. However, the procedure of
cancellation being mechanical and lengthy was not adhered to and
resulted in blocking of titles. The first exercise to de-block unregistered
titles was undertaken only in the year 1998, in which about 1.7 lakhs
titles were de-blocked. Thereafter titles are being deblocked after two
years. The Committee desire that de-blocking should be carried out
more frequently and publishers should not be denied titles on grounds
other than genuine.
Action taken by the Government
The process of de-blocking of titles for the year 2002 has already
been started by RNI. Further, RNI is in consultation with NIC for
preparing a software for faster deblocking.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 14 of Chapter-I).
Recommendation (No. 7)
Refusal of title being same as a foreign title
The Committee note that one of the reasons for refusal of the title
is that it is same as any published foreign title. This is being done as
per PRB Act, 1867 and pursuant to Cabinet decision taken in 1955,
which says that any Indian edition of a foreign paper is not allowed.
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Ministry
of I&B is reviewing the matter in view of the fact that if there is a
copyright of a particular item, it is not merely the name, but also the
Mast head, Logo and many other things, if they are not the same
perhaps the foreign title can be allowed. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the decision arrived at in the regard.
Action taken by the Government
The Group of Ministers has in its second meeting on 12th May,
2005 has agreed to the proposal of the Ministry not to permit Indian
edition of foreign newspapers. RNI refers the cases of title verification
where the proposed titles are similar to known foreign publications to
the Ministry of I&B. These cases are examined on merits by Ministry

14
of I&B and a decision is taken keeping in view all aspects such as
Logo, name of title, content and Mast head etc. The proposed
amendments in the PRB Act, 1867 will include provisions for dealing
with such cases for foreign titles.
Recommendation (No. 8)
Annual Statements under the Act
The Committee note that under Section-19F of the Press and
Registration of Book Act 1867 Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)
is statutorily required to keep a record of registered publications
including newspapers weeklies etc. As per the records of RNI the
number of such registered articles is 58,467. This contains many
publications that have ceased to exist but RNI has no information
about them. One of the reasons put forward by RNI is that the
publishers have not submitted Annual Statements, which is the basis
on which RNI verifies the existence of newspapers.
The Committee further note that under the provisions in the PRB
Act, 1867 Annual Statements containing details of publication,
circulation, ownership, editors, price etc., are required to be submitted
mandatorily by the publishers every year. However, during the year
2003-04, only 5591 Annual Statements from publishers were received
by RNI, which meant that existence of 52,876 newspapers, weeklies
etc. was in doubt.
The Committee observe that although the problem of non-
submission of Annual Statements by the publishers is not new to RNI,
yet it has failed to take any concrete step to improve the situation. No
serious thought has been given to take any action against the defaulting
publishers by imposing penalty of Rs. 500 under the provision in PRB
Act 1867. The Committee do not accept the reason advanced by RNI
that provision in imposing fine is a long drawn process and would
only raise the harassment level. They desire that RNI should give
wide publicity to the provisions of the PRB Act under which a fine
can be imposed on erring publishers. Simultaneously, they opine that
RNI should function strictly as per the provisions of PRB Act and
wherever necessary provision of imposing the fine should be invoked
to serve as an example to erring publishers.
The Committee also feel that the fine of Rs. 500 for non-submission
of Annual Statement by the publishers is too low and therefore
amendment to the Act for raising the fine to a level that impinges
upon the pocket of the publisher should be proposed.

15
The Committee are happy to note that RNI took special initiatives
like placing advertisements in various media and a network of receiving
centers was provided for annual statements at various regional/branch
and field offices of RNI, PIB, DFP and DAVP to improve compliance
of filing Annual Statements by publishers. As a result, 7156 annual
Statements were filed during 2002-03, which was the maximum number
of Annual Statements ever received.
The Committee share the view of RNI that the situation of filing
Annual Statements will improve when the procedure of registration
will be on-line, as publishers would be able to fill a one page format
even locally in any cyber-cafe. However they apprehend that this
problem may continue even when the procedure becomes on-line
because there is no stringent action proposed against those who will
fail to do so. The Committee are of the view that RNI should take
special initiatives as had been done in the year 2002 to give wide
publicity to filing of  Annual Statements by publishers.
Action taken by the Government
Wide publicity has already been given in leading newspapers all
over the country during March 2005. Two advertisements were issued
in all prominent national and regional newspapers, informing publishers
about the deadline for filing their annual returns. In addition, a press
release was issued through the Press Information Bureau (PIB). As
regards enhancing the fine, it has been included in the proposed
amendment of the PRB Act, 1867 to introduce a system of graded
penalties.
Recommendation (No. 9)
Enhancing the minimum number of circulation figure
The Committee observes that there is a requirement of circulation
of 2000 copies of a publication to submit an Annual Statement. The
Committee further learn that the limit of 2000 copies is common for
RNI and DAVP and if RNI raises the limit to a higher level, DAVP
will have a problem because self-certification beyond 2000 could be
spurious as DAVP gives out advertisements and a large number of
publications may go to them with fake circulation figures to try and
take advantage of this situation. Keeping in view the increasing
workload on RNI, the Committee recommends that the circulation
figure for filing Annual Statements should be revised upwards to 5000
and the benchmark for self-certification from 2000 to 5000 should be
considered in consultation with DA VP . The Committee would also like

16
to recommend that the circulation figures should be taken as actual
number of copies sold/circulated in comparison to the figure arrived
at by calculating the number of copies printed etc.
Action taken by the Government
As per procedure, all publishers are required to file the Annual
Statements irrespective of circulation figures. The only exemption is
that the Chartered Accountant’s Certificate is not necessary with regard
to the newspapers whose circulation claims are below 2000 copies.
Additionally, RNI already has a process in which the circulation
figures are the actual number of copies sold/circulated and does not
consider the printed copies as circulated copies.
Recommendation (No. 10)
Deletion of ceased publications
The Committee observe that there is no provision in the Press &
Registration of Books Act, 1867 for deletion of names of publications,
which cease to exist. The Committee however, understand that the
Ministry is examining the matter regarding deregistration of such
publications which have not filed even a single Annual Statement
during the last 6 years presuming that they are not being published,
after giving a general notice. This would, however, not cancel the
registration number, as it would require suitable amendment in the
PRB Act, 1867.
The Committee are in complete agreement with the views of the
Ministry/RNI and strongly recommend that there is an apparent need
to amend the PRB Act by incorporating suitable provisions therein to
give effect to deletion of names and registration of the ceased
publications. The Committee recommend that pending such amendment
in the PRB Act, RNI should go ahead with the deregistration of such
publications which have not filed a single Annual Statement for the
past 6 years. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the Ministry in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
Under the existing Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, RNI
has no power to cancel registration of those newspapers/periodicals,
which are not submitting their annual statements on time. Amendment
has been proposed for de-registration of newspapers, which fail to

17
submit Annual Statement for two consecutive years. In case of default
for three consecutive years, the title shall be de-blocked. The
de-registered newspapers can be registered on a payment of a free
prescribed under the rules. However,  RNI has already initiated
preparatory steps pending amendment of the PRB Act.
Recommendation (No. 11)
Verification of Circulation Claim
The Committee note that one of the important functions of RNI is
to verify circulation claims made by the publishers. However, in view
of the limited manpower available with RNI, RNI has confined the
circulation checks to only cases referred to it by DAVP/PIB/State Govt.
and some other undertakings. RNI also undertakes circulation checks
on the basis of complaints. The Committee further note that out of the
total 2658 cases referred in the year 2000, 2001 and 2002-03, 2628 cases
were referred by DAVP , 5 cases were referred by State Governments,
one case by PIB and the remaining 24 were miscellaneous complaints.
The Committee also note that the number of circulation checks
done by RNI is decreasing year after year. During 2001, 2002-03 and
2003-04, 1679, 1304 and 788 circulation checks respectively could be
carried out. Though RNI expects to touch the figure of 700 circulation
checks during 2004-05, the Committee find that around 378 circulation
checks would still remain pending. The Committee observe that the
decline in the number of circulation checks is due to (i) the increased
number of requests for spot checks received from DAVP , which has
risen from 25 to 150 annually (one spot check takes time equal to six
document based checks); (ii) shortage of staff (two posts of Circulation
Officers & Accounts Clerks are lying vacant in RNI); and (iii) non-
availability of trained technical experts who have to be hired from
outside.
Effective circulation check pre-supposes adequate trained manpower
to ensure checks to be carried out at least once a year. The Committee
desire that for effective verification of circulation claims of newspapers,
besides redeployment of staff within RNI wherever and whenever
required, services of PIB officers and technical experts from outside
should also be availed of. The Committee also desire that RNI should
ensure that circulation checks are done within a fixed time-frame to
minimize the problems being faced by the publishers.

18
Action taken by the Government
Registrar of Newspapers of India (RNI) has already written to the
Press Information Bureau (PIB) and the Institute of Chartered
Accountants inviting their suggestions to streamline the process of
circulation checks. To ensure that a larger number of spot checks can
be completed every year, within a fixed time-frame, the matter has
been taken up, for utilizing the additional manpower resources available
in PIB and in its regional and branch offices. Further, the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India has also been approached by RNI for
suggestions of suitable changes in the current methodology being
adopted by RNI for assessing the circulation of a newspaper, which is
presently based on various inputs and scrutiny of documents.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (No. 13)
Fee for title clearance or registration
The Committee are surprised to note that RNI is not charging any
processing fee for performing various statutory and non-statutory
functions such as title verification, registration, bringing out ‘Press in
India’, circulation check, issue of eligibility certificates for import of
newsprint, essentiality certificate for import of printing machinery etc.
They find no reason why RNI should not charge for these services.
The Committee further note that the Expenditure Reforms
Commission had recommended imposing some service charges for
various services rendered by RNI and a proposal thereof was
formulated by RNI. However, when the Ministry of Law, Department
of Legal Affairs was consulted, they opined that the PRB Act does not
provide for fee for discharging statutory functions and therefore fee
cannot be charged without amending the Act.
The Committee feel that the proposal of imposition of fee for
various statutory and non-statutory functions of RNI is a step in right
direction and it should be actively considered by the Ministry . The
Committee, therefore, desires the necessary amendments in the
provisions of PRB Act should be made in this respect.

19
Action taken by the Government
The proposed amendments in the PRB Act, 1867 include provision
for prescribing a fee for getting a new title as well as for re-verification
of titles.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (No. 14)
Facsimile Editions
The Committee have noted that RNI does not allow facsimile
edition of newspapers published from different local destinations having
almost the same contents with local specific changes to serve various
localities with the same registration number. They have further noted
that if a newspaper is transmitted through Electronic Technology to
even some other destination and is printed and published from another
city, publishers are not allowed to use the same RNI Registration
number. The Committee feel that the Ministry  may take this into
consideration while proposing amendments to the Act.
Action taken by the Government
The proposed amendments in the Press and Registration of Books
Act, 1867, which is presently under consideration, has taken care of
the observations made by the Committee.

20
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
—Nil—

21
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (No. 3)
Plan Outlay
The Committee observe that there was no Plan budgetary provision
for RNI during the 9th Plan. In the 1st year of the 10th Plan
(2002-2003), Rs. 60 lakh were allocated under this head. The amount
remained unutilised as the Plan scheme was not approved by the
competent authority. Further, a proposed allocation of Rs. 13.00 lakh
was reduced to Rs. 41.50 lakh due to redefinement of scheme and non-
completion of the sanctioned work by CPWD in the year 2003-2004. The
actual expenditure was only Rs. 36.73 lakhs. The Committee feel that
there is a lot to be desired in RNI in the field of planning, as saving
due to non-completion of work and redefinement does not appear to
be good planning. It is in these circumstances, for the year 2004-2005
a meagre amount of Rs. 29.5 lakh has been allocated.
The Committee desire that  RNI should undertake its budgetary
exercise prudently and with due seriousness in a realistic manner.
Plan development leads to improved quality and service. The
Committee hope that the funds allocated in Tenth Plan for
computerisation and renovation of RNI headquarters would be fully
utilised as envisaged by the Ministry. They desire that RNI should
make every effort to expend the allocated funds of Rs. 29.5 lakh during
the year 2004-05 so as to improve quality of services rendered by it.
Action taken by the Government
The proposals for the financial year 2005-06 of the Plan Scheme
‘Modernisation of RNI’ has been prepared and is under process for
approval.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter-I)

22
Recommendation (No. 4)
Verification of Titles
The Committee note that as per provision of PRB Act, 1867
applications for title verification are received by RNI through District
Magistrates. The DM first verifies the details and sends the application
to RNI in Delhi. RNI then verifies the availability of the titles. The
Committee note that a lot of time is being consumed in this process
causing great inconvenience to the publishers who keep waiting for
title clearance to start a publication.
The Committee are aware that DMs have a number of important
assignments apart from maintaining law and order in the Districts.
Hence, it may not be possible for the DMs to give priority to the
work assigned to them by RNI. The Committee, therefore, desired that
for expeditious disposal of work, the existing procedure may be
modified to the extent under which the publisher applies to the DM
with a copy of the same endorsed to RNI so that RNI can at once
start the job of title clearance subject to verification of other details
from the District Magistrates. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should concentrate on expediting the on-line registration
process to simply the procedure.
Action taken by the Government
The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 does not permit
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) to accept the application
directly from the publisher for verification of titles and these have to
be routed through concerned District Magistrates (DM) only. However,
RNI has implemented online checking of title status by the publishers.
Besides this, as per the Citizen’s Charter the following time limits
have been set:
(a) Title Clearance-21 days from the day it is received in the
RNI office from the DM’s Office.
(b) Registration-Response must be given in 45 days from the
day papers are received in RNI.
(c) Circulation-Decision in two months from the date all papers
are received in RNI.
Also, RNI, in consultation with National Informatics Centre (NIC)
is developing a software for updated application status for registration
online.

23
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (No. 12)
Publishers’ demands on verification
The Committee observe that newspaper bodies are facing difficulties
as RNI has not been doing circulation checks on time. This in turn
has directly affected the advertisement rates of publishers with the
DAVP at the time of re-establishment of circulation after three  years
because DAVP insists on automatic reduction of rates, to the minimum
rates, unless the circulation is authenticated by the RNI.
The Committee also observe that RNI carries out circulation checks
through the number of distribution of sold copies to agents, hawkers,
consumption, printing machinery etc. which the publishers find difficult
to produce. The Committee feel that the verification should not lead
to harassment so that publishers take to dubious methods of concealing
their actual circulation. The Committee also feel that RNI should be
regular in issuing the circulation certification so that publishers are
not put to trouble of automatic reduction of rates by DAVP in the
absence of such certification. The Committee recommend that if the
delay for issuing the circulation certification rests on RNI, there should
be an understanding with DAVP that they should continue to pay the
already approved rates till the RNI authenticates the circulation.
Action taken by the Government
The parameters adopted by RNI for assessment of circulation claims
require a few mandatory documents in order to confirm the claims by
the publishers. The requirements put forth by RNI are the barest
minimum in order to effect a meaningful verification. Any further
reduction of documents or any other relaxation might hamper an
effective check. RNI makes all out efforts to decide a circulation claim
as early as possible. However, due to shortage of manpower and non-
submission of documents by the publishers in time, the issuance of
assessment certificate is delayed.
If publishers show promptitude in submitting documents within
the stipulated time, the delay can be minimized even with the available
manpower. Regarding the recommendation made by the Committee
that the publisher should be allowed to enjoy the advertisements on

24
the last assessed circulation, pending issuance of the new assessment
certificate, the matter will be examined in depth and a final decision
will be taken.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I)

25
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
16 December, 2005 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

26
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 15 December, 2005 in Committee
Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Kailash Joshi
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Dara Singh
11. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar  Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director

27
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then, took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on action taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)”
relating to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
(ii) *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the above mentioned Reports with some
amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time
convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
NINETEENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 5-11, 13, 14
Total : 11
Percentage : 78.57%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 3, 4, 12
Total : 3
Percentage : 21.43%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil