19
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
FUNCTIONING OF REGISTRAR OF
NEWSPAPERS FOR INDIA (RNI)
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)
NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING
FUNCTIONING OF REGISTRAR OF
NEWSPAPERS FOR INDIA (RNI)
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………


C.I.T. No. 141
Price : Rs. 17.00
© 2004 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Thirty-Second sitting of the Committee
(2003) held on 25 November, 2003 .................................... 29
II. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee
(2004-2005) held on 14 December, 2004 ............................ 31
III. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Committee
(2004-2005) held on 14 December, 2004 ............................ 33
IV . Minutes of the Twenty-Third sitting of the Committee
(2004-2005) held on 9 March, 2005 .................................... 35

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
*9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
**31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary (SK)
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
*Nominated w.e.f. 24.3.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on “Functioning
of Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)” relating to the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting.
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Registrar of Newspapers
for India (RNI) on 23 November, 2003 and 14 December, 2004. The
Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the Indian
Newspapers Society (INS), All India Small & Medium Newspapers
Federation (AISMNF) and All India Newspapers Editors’ Conference
(AINEC) on 14.12.2004.
3. In this Report, the Committee have emphasised on the need to
amend Press and Registration of Books (PRB) Act, 1867. The Act
describes the duties and functions of RNI.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 9.3.2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI), the Indian Newspapers Society (INS), All
India Small & Medium Newspapers Federation (AISMNF) and All India
Newspapers Editors’ Conference (AINEC) for appearing before the
Committee and for furnishing information that the Committee desired
in connection with the examination of the Subject.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
31 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

REPORT
PART-I
INTRODUCTORY
The Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) came into being on
1st July, 1956 on the recommendation of the first Press Commission in
1953 and by amending the Press and Registration of Books (PRB) Act,
1867. The PRB Act is an Act for regulation of Printing presses and
Newspapers, for preservation of copies of books and newspapers
printed in India, and for the registration of such books. It contains the
duties and functions of the ‘Press Registrar’ i.e., the Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI).
2. The Office of RNI has been performing Statutory as well as
Non-Statutory functions. The statutory functions performed by RNI
are processing of applications for title verification that come through
District Magistrates (DMs); informing the DMs about the availability
of titles, for intending publishers for filing declaration; issue of
Certificate of Registration to the newspapers published under valid
declaration; compilation and maintenance of a Register of Newspapers
containing particulars about all the newspapers published in the
country; scrutiny, analysis and compilation of Annual Statements sent
by the publishers of newspapers every year under Section 19-D of the
PRB Act, containing information on circulation, ownership, etc. and
submission of the Report “Press in India” to the Government on 31st
December every year and verification under Section 19-F of the PRB
Act, of circulation claims furnished by the publishers in their Annual
Statements.
3. The non-statutory functions entrusted upon RNI are to issue
Eligibility Certificates to the newspapers to enable them to import
newsprint; Essentiality Certificate to import printing and allied
machinery and materials and ‘No Newspaper Certificates’ to the
publications which are not newspapers/newsmagazines.
Organisational Set up
4. Pursuant to various functions assigned to Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI), the Committee enquired about the

2
organisational set up of RNI. In response, the witness informed the
Committee during evidence that the Press Registrar is the Head of the
RNI. The Deputy Press Registrar and four Assistant Press Registrars
are under him. One sits at the Headquarters and the other three at
each of the three Regional Offices located in Mumbai, Chennai and
Kolkata. There is also a Senior Circulation Officer and also Ciruclation
officers who are posted at the headquarters as well as in the Regional
Offices.
5. When asked whether some changes were made in the
organisational set up of RNI since 1956 when it was first set up and
whether those changes were adequate to effectively run the functioning
of RNI. The Committee have been informed that the organisational set
up of RNI was changed during the year 1978 when three Regional
Offices were established, one each at Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata.
These three regional offices headed by Circulation Officers were
strengthened in 1990 by creating Group ‘A’ IIS posts of Assistant Press
Registrar along with other subordinate staff. It was added that the
strengthening of infrastructure in RNI envisaged under the Tenth Plan
would meet the requirements of the Department adequately.
6. The Committee enquired about the difficulties being faced by
RNI in opening of regional offices in more locations. In reply, the
witness stated that such a proposal was made earlier but it was pruned
down for administrative reasons. However, the matter could be taken
up again.
Plan Outlay
7. The Committee have observed that there was no Plan Scheme
of RNI during 9th Plan, however an outlay of Rs. 92.00 lakhs have
been approved for the 10th Plan Scheme “Modernisation of RNI”. The
scheme comprises of two components viz. Computerisation of RNI
with an outlay of Rs. 40 lakhs and Renovation of RNI Headquarters
with an outlay of Rs. 52 lakhs. Computerisation Programme is stated
to be aimed for computerisation of title verification, registration and
data storage of circulation figures etc. R.F. Link installation and
air-conditioning of selected portions in the office. When asked about
the Non-Plan and Plan allocation and actual expenditure by RNI during

3
the last three years, the Ministry have furnished the following
figures:—
Non-Plan (Rupees in Lakhs)
Sl.No. Year S.B.G. Actual Reasons for variations
expenditure
1. 2001-02 198.63 196.03 Minor savings have
occurred due to receipt of
lesser than expected bills
for medical reimbursement
to staff.
2. 2002-03 212.10 199.22 Minor savings have
occurred due to receipt of
lesser than expected bills
for medical reimbursement
to staff.
3. 2003-04 227.80 213.68 Pr ovision for payment of
dues in accordance with a
CAT/Court award was
included in the S.B.G.
allocation but the payment
did not materialize and
accordingly R.E. was kept
at Rs. 215.60 lakhs.
Plan
1. 2001-02 Nil Nil There was no Plan Scheme
of RNI during 9th Plan.
2. 2002-03 60.00 Nil No expenditure was
incurred since the Scheme
was not approved.
3. 2003-04 132.00 36.73 The scope of the scheme
was redefined and the
S.B.G. of Rs. 132.00 lakhs
was reduced to Rs. 41.50
lakhs at the final grant
stage. The savings occurred
as CPWD could not
accomplish the sanctioned
works during the financial
year due to time
constraints.

4
As regards the allocation for the year 2004-2005, the Ministry
forwarded the following figures:-
(In Lakhs)
Year Plan Non-Plan Total
2004-05 Rs. 29.50 Rs. 226.00 Rs. 255.50
8. The Committee observed that Rs. 60 lakh were provided under
the Plan Sanctioned Budget grant for the year 2002-03 for its proposed
scheme, however the same could not be incurred at all as the scheme
was not approved. Further, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
stated in a written reply that out of higher budget allocations of Rs.
132 lakh proposed under the Plan head, only Rs. 36.73 lakh could be
utilised during the year 2003-04. It was further clarified that the Plan
outlay for the year was approved by the competent authority to the
extent of Rs. 42.50 lakh at RE stage. The saving occurred as CPWD
could not accomplish the sanctioned works during the financial year
due to time constraint.
9. The Committee also noted that out of Rs. 37 lakhs (approx.)
utilized, Rs. 15 lakhs (approx.) were spent on computerisation and a
sum of Rs. 22.00 lakhs (approx.) on renovation of RNI Headquarters,
civil works on walls, floors, doors, windows etc. and replacement of
electrical wirings/fittings etc). The sanctioned budget grant for the
year 2004-05, is Rs. 29.5 lakhs.
Staff Constraints
10. The Ministry have informed that the sanctioned strength of
RNI is 138 including that of regional offices. The existing strength is
120. The break-up of the sanctioned and existing staff strength of RNI
is as under:
Designation Sanctioned In position Vacant
Group A 7 7 —
Group B (Gazetted) 14 12 2
Group B (Non-Gazetted) 19 17 8
Group C 69 63 7
Group D 22 21 1
Total 131 120 11

5
11. In reply to a query, the Ministry clarified during evidence that
they had a vacancy position that was not so bad. It was only 13% and
efforts were being made to fill up these vacancies. However, in a
written reply, Ministry/RNI have stated that the matter for revival of
the two posts of Circulation Officer was taken up with the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Expenditure. Ministry of Finance had earlier
agreed for revival of one post of Circulation Officer at Kolkata Regional
Office subject to abolition of the other post at RNI (Headquarters),
which, however, was not acceptable to the RNI/Ministry of I&B.
Therefore, the Ministry of Finance has again been requested to agree
to allow Ministry of I & B to fill the post of Circulation Officer at
Hqrs. accepting the post of Circulation Officer at Kolkata as matching
saving. The matter is stated to be under consideration for revival of
both the posts. Further, the vacancies in the category of Registration
Assistants come under the Indian Information Service cadre and are to
be filled up by transfer.
12. In this context, the witness during evidence stated:
“...We are trying to face the constraint. We face it by taking
additional staff within the Government, within the RNI. We can
also take people on job work. For example, in regard to technical
staff, we can take them to join as a team. For example, there are
Chartered Accountants. They can join the team for assessment of
the financial position or printing experts can be taken from outside.
They would work under the Government Officers. They go as
members of the team. The team will be led by a Government
officer...”.
13. The witness further added that they had been trying to deal
with the staff constraint in four ways which were simplification of
procedure, computerization, outsourcing and wherever required by
additional staff.
STATUTORY FUNCTIONS
Verification of Titles
14. As regards the procedure for verification of titles, the RNI
have stated that requests for titles are received through District
Magistrates from all over the country. The number of titles proposed
in an application varies from 1 to 20, sometimes even more. More the

6
number of proposed titles, longer the processing time. The processing
of availability of titles has been computerised. The titles proposed are
fed into the computer so as to check with the existing same and
similar titles in the computer. After the check, new titles are approved
whereas same or similar titles are refused. Intimation of acceptance/
rejection is sent to the applicant as well as to the Magistrate forwarding
the application. The District Magistrates also intimates the applicant in
case the title is available. He authenticates the declaration. All existing
registered newspapers’ titles are put on RNI’s website. This facilitates
the potential publisher to avoid proposing an existing title.
15. During evidence, the Committee drew the attention of the
representatives of Ministry of I&B/RNI to one of the problems
highlighted by the representatives of Newspaper Federations relating
to the procedure for verification of titles adopted by RNI. They had
stated that it was cumbersome and it took a long time to get a title
cleared by the RNI. They have to wait for months together to know
the status of their applications. Many a times even after months of
applying for titles verification, RNI informs that the title applied for,
has already been allotted. In that case they have to apply afresh with
a new title. The Committee also pointed out that the District Magistrates
were already overburdened with too much of work. It would not be
proper to depend so much on them.
16. Clarifying the point, the witness has stated that as per the Act,
the District Magistrate has to once verify the title and once authenticate
it. However, they admitted that though the DM has once to do the
title verification and once the authentication as per the PRB Act, the
provision needs to be eased. In this context, to a suggestion made by
the Committee that the details could be submitted directly to RNI
instead of to the DM, the witness submitted:
“once the procedure becomes online, it will be streamlined. We
take note of that. Since we are thinking of amending the Act, we
need to modify the provisions. Once the system is reworked, we
can have another look at it. ...”
17. On being asked to state the future plan of RNI to make the
procedure of title verification on-line, the Ministry of I&B informed
that on-line verification of titles/registration etc. was technically feasible.
NIC had developed software for on-line registration/verification of
newspapers in consultation with RNI. This could be put in operation

7
within next two years once the specific details were worked out with
stake holders, implementing agencies such as, District Magistrates etc.
It would be considered for implementation on a pilot basis and in a
phased manner. It was also stated that Amendment to the PRB Act
too might be necessary.
18. As regards time taken by RNI to clear a title, the witness
stated that the titles were being cleared within two or three weeks.
Looking at the cumbersome procedure adopted by RNI for title
verification, the Committee apprehended whether the whole process
could be completed in two weeks time. Responding to it, the witness
stated that for quite some time there had been mechanical functioning
of the RNI office due to which a number of titles were getting blocked.
19. The Committee further enquired about the number of
applications received, approved, refused and discrepancy letters sent
to the applicant during the last three years. In reply, the details given
by the Ministry are as under:
Year Application Titles Applications Discrepancy No action Pendency
Received approved Refused Letters sent Called for
2002 19,852 12,648 5929 865 410 —
2003 21,504 12,978 5,234 1,624 1,668 —
2004 18,123 11,493 4,393 304 71* 1,862
(upto
Nov.)
*This include duplicate application or application received without the authentication of
DM and other such letters which do not call any action.
Refusal of Titles
20. The reasons for refusal of the titles as stated by the Ministry
are (i) requested titles were same or similar to that of any other
newspapers published in the same language or in the same State;
(ii) the titles were the same as any published foreign title and (iii) the
application for title verification was incomplete. On being asked as to
why foreign titles were being rejected, the witness during evidence
stated that this was done as per the Act and also according to a
Cabinet decision taken in 1955, which stated that any Indian edition
of a foreign paper was not allowed. When the Committee pointed out

8
that perhaps this was being done as this issue was close to Patents
and Trademarks, which needed to be honoured, the witness reacted as
follows:
“What the Hon. Chairman has mentioned is the key to the whole
issue. If there is a copyright of a particular item, it is not merely
the name, but also the Mast head, Logo and many other things.
If they are not the same, perhaps it can be done on a detailed
search. We have started doing it based on the decision of the
Cabinet. But it is subject to certainly a review. We are taking it
back to the Cabinet also for a decision on this issue. It has been
pointed out that if somebody is having a ‘Dawn’ in Andhra
Pradesh, how is it relevant if there is another ‘Dawn’ in some
other country. We are reviewing this issue.”
De-blocking of titles
21. The Committee have been informed that the titles verified but
not registered are being de-blocked after two years. The first exercise
to de-block unregistered titles was undertaken in 1998, when about
1.7 lakhs titles were de-blocked. De-blocking of unregistered titles
thereafter has been internalized. About, 8155 unregistered titles verified
in the year 2000, were de-blocked during 2002-2003, and about 7440
titles verified in the year 2001 were de-blocked during 2003-2004. To
a specific query as to non de-blocking of the unregistered titles earlier,
the Ministry of I&B/RNI clarified that earlier there was no
computerisation and the processes were also very lengthy.
Registration of Newspapers
22. To a query regarding registration of titles and its validity, the
Ministry/RNI have stated that after a little is verified the publisher
has to file a Declaration before the District Magistrate for seeking
registration. After the Declaration is authenticated, the publisher is
required to bring out the first issue within 42 days, in the case of a
daily or weekly and within 90 days for publications with a periodicity
of more than a week. The Declaration becomes void, if the publisher
fails to bring out the first issue within the stipulated time. After
bringing out the first issue in time, the publisher is required to submit
a copy of a Declaration, copy of the first issue of the newspaper/
periodical with correct imprint line and ‘no-foreign tie-up’ affidavit,
and the latest issue of the newspaper for registration. On receipt of

9
these documents the case is processed and registration number is given,
entered into the register and also in the computer, and a Certificate of
Registration is issued.
Issue of Registration Certificates
23. When Committee enquired about the number of Registration
Certificates issued by RNI during the last three years, the Ministry
during evidence informed that 3954, 5117 and 5341 registration
certificates had been issued during 2001, Jan. 2002 to March 2003 and
April 2003 to November 2004 respectively. The witness further added
that only 1986 registration certificates were issued in the year 1996
and therefore the work load as on date has gone up three times.
24. The Committee have been informed that RNI has on record
58,467 registered publications including newspapers, weeklies etc. as
on November, 2004, but most of those are defunct and RNI does not
have the exact details. Though a large number of the registered
publications might have ceased to exist, those are still included in the
register of publications.
Revised Certificate of Registration
25. It has been informed that though the registration is done only
once, a Revised Certificate of Registration is required whenever there
is change of title/owner/printer/publisher/periodicity/language/place
of printing/publication etc. A fresh Declaration indicating the reason
for the same has to be filed and got authenticated by the DM again.
The publisher is required to return the original registration certificate.
In case the original certificate of registration is lost/damaged or
misplaced, an affidavit for loss of the same along with an Indian
Postal Order for Rs. 5.00 is to be sent by the publisher.
26. The Ministry has provided the following figures regarding issue
of Revised Certificate of Registration.
Year No. of requests received RCR issued
for RCR
2002 875 661
2003 925 531
2004 (upto November 30) 1,075 305
Total 2,875 1,497

10
According to the Ministry, the pendency was normally due to delay/
non-compliance/incomplete submission of documents on the part of
publisher and not publishing in conformity with the rules laid in this
regard i.e. invalid/void declaration, pre-publications, time barred cases,
it aslo involved disputed ownership.
In this connection, the Department also clarified that no request
for revised registration was rejected.
Annual Statements
27. The Committee have been informed that under the PRB Act,
every year the publishers are required to submit an Annual statement
containing details of publication, circulation, ownership, editors, price
etc. whenever their average circulation exceeds 2000 copies. The Annual
Statements should carry the signatures of the publisher and also bear
the certificate of Chartered Accountant with his signature and office
seal. These statements are received directly or indirectly in RNI
headquarters, however there remains a huge gap between the total
registered publications and the annual statements furnished. Out of
the total 58,467 registered publications, annual statements have been
received in respect of only 5500 publications.
28. The details regarding number of annual statements due and
received during the last three years are given as under:
Sl.No. Year Number of registered Number of Annual
Newspapers Statements received
1. 2001 51960 5055
2. 2002-03 55780 7156
3. 2003-04 58469 5591
29. Expressing their concern over the receipt of very few Annual
statements as compared to the total number of publications registered,
the Committee desired to know the steps taken by RNI to increase the
awareness among the publishers to submit regularly their Annual
Statements. In response, the Ministry/RNI has stated that RNI made
special initiatives to improve compliance by publishers like
advertisements were placed in various media and a network was also
provided for receiving centers for annual statements at various

11
regional/branch and field officers of RNI, PIB, DFP and DAVP . As a
result, 7156 Annual Statements were received in the year 2002-03, which
was the maximum so far.
30. The Director, DAVP during evidence  was candid enough to
admit that with the non-submission of annual Statements, “Press in
India” was not reflected correctly. The details were not correctly known.
They were not able to reflect the growth of the industry. The errors in
the RNI database were therefore multiplying which also led to title
rejection because the titles were not being used and they denied them
to the real new entrants who wanted to publish their publications.
This also slowed down the software because as on date they had 1.06
lakhs titles. Some 100 to 125 titles were processed daily and some 70
to 80 were being cleared. They have been checking them against 1.06
lakh figure in State-wise and language-wise list. The whole thing was
churning quite unnecessarily because the titles were really not being
properly utilised.
31. The Committee pointed out that the figure of 2000 copies of
publication for submitting the Annual Statement was quite low in the
present time and needed to be revised substantially as it would lead
to substantial decline in the requirement of submission of annual
statements. In reply, the Ministry of I&B stated that as per PRB Act,
it was the duty of the publisher of every publication to furnish annual
statement every year. There was no circulation limit for submitting the
annual statement except that a Chartered Accountant should certify
such statements when the average circulation exceeded 2000 copies
and it if was below 2000 copies the publisher himself could certify the
same. The submission of Annual Statements was mandatory for all
newspapers. It was admitted that the upward revision would not doubt
reduce the burden of RNI but this would at the same time also affect
the empanelment of small newspapers in DAVP for release of
advertisements as there was a criteria for minimum circulation of 2000
copies to be certified by a Chartered Accountant.
32. In reply to a similar query, the witness stated that the upward
revision of the benchmark for self certification from 2000 copies to
5000 copies was quite feasible. Limit should be raised to make self-
certification upto 5000 permissible. But the limit of 2000 copies was
common for RNI and DAVP and if RNI raised the limit to 5000, DAVP
would have problems because self-certification beyond 2,000 could be
spurious as they gave out advertisements etc. and if benchmark went

12
up, a large number of publications might go to them with fake
circulation figures to try and take advantage of this situation.
Imposition of penalty
33. In this context, the Committee desired to know whether the
submission of Annual Statements was mandatory. To this, the witness
replied in the affirmative. When asked about the penalty being imposed
in case of non-submission of the Annual Statement, the Committee
were informed that the PRB Act provided for a fine of Rs. 500 only
for defaulters. But even if the fine was increased to Rs. 5,000, it would
only raise the harassment level and would not serve any purpose. As
regards disqualifying the publisher in such cases, Ministry have stated
that they have not taken any action in this regard so far as this could
lead to harassment. Sometimes some small newspapers give excuses
for not submitting annual statement in time. If such newspapers are
disqualified, they will have to go through the whole process of
registration. On the other hand if the publication is de-registered in
case it has failed to submit annual statements for three years or so,
then it may have some impact. Once the procedure of registration will
be on-line, the publisher can go to any cyber-cafe and fill up one page
format even locally and if they are into printing, it should not be
difficult for them. In that case, violation of that requirement may lead
to punitive action which is more like de-registration. The imposition
of penalty of Rs. 500 and its collection would lead to spending much
more than the collection of Rs. 500 itself.”
34. To a specific query, the Committee have been informed that in
the present form of Press & Registration of Books Act, 1867, there was
no provision for deletion of names of ceased publications. However, it
was being examined whether the publications which had not filed
even a single Annual statement during the last 6 years could be de-
registered presuming that they were not being published, after giving
a general notice. Further, the Committee have been informed that since
all this would require suitable amendment in the PRB Act, 1867, it
would be looked into to amend the Act to incorporate provisions,
inter-alia, to de-register publications to cancel the registration number,
and, to cease the title for re-use.
Papers published without registration
35. On being enquired about the action taken against newspapers
published without getting themselves registered, the Ministry have

13
stated that complaints of newspaper being published without RNI
clearance are examined according to the Act, and if it is found that
violation of Act is involved, the concerned DMs are requested to take
appropriate action. The PRB Act, 1867 provides for a fine not exceeding
Rs. 2,000/- or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or
both if a newspaper is being published without conforming to the
rules. There is no mechanism available in RNI for detecting or
identifying the cases or publication of newspapers without RNI
clearance as per PRB Act, 1867. They further stated that it was not
considered necessary to maintain a data of such complaints, as the
concerned DMs were the competent authority for necessary action in
such cases.
Circulation verification
36. Verification of circulation claim of newspapers/periodicals,
though not expressly provided for in the Act, is derived from Section
19(F) of the PRB Act, 1867(25 of 1867), which provides right of access
to records and documents relating to newspaper to Press Registrar or
any Gazetted Officer authorised by him in writing. The Ministry have
stated that in order to check exaggerated claims of circulation by
publishers, the RNI evolved an internal method of circulation
verification taken up on its own or referred by DAVP/PIB/State Govt.
Circulation checks are also undertaken at the instance of Central/State
Government Departments/organisations on the basis of complaints, at
the request of publications whose circulation claims have been declared
unestablished etc. and those cases referred to by PIB, Press Council of
India and Secretariats of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
37. When asked about the number of cases referred to RNI by
DAVP/PIB/State Governments during the last three years, the
Committee were informed that during 2000, 2001 and 2002-03, as many
as 2628 cases out of the total of 2658 cases were referred by DAVP , 5
cases were referred by State Governments, one case by PIB and the
remaining 24 complaints were received directly.
38. During evidence, the witness further added that the total
number of cases for circulation checks which were required to be taken
up now, were 937, out of which 359 cases were cleared upto November,
2004 but there was a backlog of 578. Then 500 cases on DAVP panel
not verified for over three years were also to be taken up. So there
were 1078 cases pending as on date.

14
39. To a query regarding circulation verification, the Committee
have been informed that input circulation check was done through
details of printing machinery and consumption of newsprint and an
output check through distribution of sold copies to agents, hawkers
etc. and through sale proceeds of the publication. According to the
Ministry, the Circulation helps in fixing the advertisement rates. The
Details of Circulation claims assessed/verified by the RNI are given
as under:
Year 2000 2001 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Fully assessed 264 301 289 168 76
Lower assessed 420 807 753 365 226
Unestablished 904 571 262 255 57
Total 1588 1679 1304 788 359
40. When asked about the reasons for less number of circulation
check during 2003-04 and 2004-05 as compared to previous years, the
witness stated that RNI would be able to reach a target of 700 plus
circulation checks before the end of the financial year but this number
was less than year 2002-03 and 2003-04 when 1304 and 788 circulation
checks were done. The reason being the spot checks which had gone
up, which meant a team of three people visit the premises. Time taken
in one time spot check was equal to time taken in six document based
checks. Spot checks had also increased from 25 to 150 annually. Besides
there were vacancies of two Circulation officers and 2 Account clerks.
41. Reacting to a query as to whether circulation checks should be
carried out periodically/more frequently, the Committee were informed
that on an average one thousand cases of verification of circulation
were undertaken by RNI in a year. It included spot check cases which
were finalized after visiting the printing press and scrutinizing the
documents of the publisher at this office/press. This exercise was
arduous in nature and time consuming. Of late the spot checks exercise
had increased considerably as DAVP specifically requested for
conducting spot checks. The existing quantum of work was too
voluminous vis-a-vis manpower available. The workload had increased
three-fold but the sanctioned strength remained the same. Effective
circulation check pre-supposes adequate trained manpower to ensure
check to be carried out at least once a year. Although RNI was

15
empowered to inspect the record of all newspapers, the circulation
check might continue to be confined to DAVP empanelled newspapers.
The suggested measures were given as computerisation and automation
in RNI activities. It was added that the new software was already
launched. Redeployment of staff from other wings within RNI to the
Circulation Wing would take place soon once the software was
operationalised. They would also be associated with PIB officers and
technical experts from outside.
42. Various newspapers bodies tendered evidence before the
Committee on “Functioning of RNI”. It was pointed out that small
and medium newspapers were facing difficulty in getting circulation
verification by RNI on time. This affected directly their rates with the
DAVP at the time of re-establishment of circulation after three years.
DAVP insisted on reducing the rates, to the minimum rates, unless the
circulation was authenticated by the RNI. Due to in-sufficient staff
RNI was not able to do the circulation checks in time. According to
them, it was not done in three years, the rates would be automatically
reduced. Now according to the new procedure they have to apply
through DAVP . They wanted that DA VP should continue to pay the
already approved rates given to the newspapers till the RNI issues a
final certificate about the circulation figure.
43. It was further pointed out that the process of circulation
verification adopted by RNI particularly for small and medium
newspapers was tedious and out-dated. For instance one of the
documents required was the bill that the publisher gave to the hawker
every day. Suppose a newspaper had got around 180 hawkers in Delhi
then for 365 days they would have to give two copies of 180 bills,
They desired that the rules for circulation checks should be simple
and straightforward. The time limit should be prescribed within which
RNI should issue the circulation certificate. In the case of large
newspapers, RNI did not verify, if they were members of ABC.
Fee for title clearance or registration
44. The Committee enquired whether RNI had been charging some
processing fee for registration of the title. In reply, the Committee
were informed that RNI performed both statutory and non-statutory
functions such as title verification, registration, bringing out ‘Press in
India’, circulation check, issue of eligibility certificate for import of
newsprint, essentiality certificate for import of printing machinery etc.

16
without charging user fee from the clients. Further, the Committee
were informed during evidence by the representative of RNI that the
Expenditure Reforms Commission had made a recommendation for
imposing some service charges for various services which were being
given by RNI.
The witness added:
“The Office of the RNI has to discharge statutory functions; it has
to be continued for securing the orderly development of
newspapers journalism as well as book industry.
The revenue earned by the RNI annually is about Rs. 60,000 (the
earnings last year, 1999-2000 was Rs. 58,000). A meaningful set of
fee for the service of RNI should be established.”
45. In reply to a query, the Committee were further informed that
in pursuance of the recommendations of ERC, a proposal to impose
some charges for various services given by RNI was formulated.
However, when the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law was
consulted in this regard, that Ministry observed that for charging fees
for statutory functions the Press & Registration of Books Act, 1867
needed to be amended as it did not provide for discharging statutory
functions. Subsequently, it has been stated that any fee charged under
a statutory provision would go to the Consolidated Fund of India,
which would not be available for the organisation. The overall issue
whether the levying of charges could be retained needed to be
examined.
Non-Statutory Functions
Eligibility Certificate for import of Newsprint
46. According to the Ministry of I&B/RNI, under the Import of
Newsprint Policy, the publisher intending to import newsprint are
required to obtain Eligibility Certificates (E.Cs.). The E.C. is valid for
the financial year in which it is issued. There is no quantity restriction
on import of newsprint. ECs are issued for import of Standard and
Glazed varieties of newsprint. The publishers are required to produce
the E.C. issued by RNI to the Customs Authorities at the time of
taking delivery of the consignment.

17
47. To a query regarding the criteria fixed for issuing the eligibility
certificates, the Committee were informed that the permission to import
newsprint was subject to Actual User condition to those who hold
‘Registration Certificate’ issued by the Registrar of Newspapers for
India (RNI), Ministry of I & B, New Delhi, on the submission of
necessary documents as prescribed in the Newsprint Policy enunciated
by the Ministry of Commerce and guidelines issued by Ministry of
I & B.
48. In this context, the Committee desired to know the impact of
the Government’s liberalised economy on the issue of Eligibility
Certificates for importing newsprint. The Ministry in their reply have
stated that Newsprint has been placed under Open General License
(OGL) w.e.f. 01.05.1995 and Standard and Glazed newsprint can be
imported by actual users without any quantity restriction. RNI is not
required to issue any certificate for purchase of indigenous newsprint.
Issue of Essentiality Certificates
49. RNI is stated to have been assessing and certifying the essential
requirements of newspaper establishments with regard to printing and
machineries and materials. It issue Essentiality Certificates for import
of:
(i) Newspapers Page Transmission and reception Facsimile
System or Equipment;
(ii) T elephoto Transmission and Reception System or Equipment.
50. To a specific query, the Ministry have stated that RNI does not
have technical staff to evaluate the details of above machinery. With
fast changing technology, a judgement on essentiality may also be
difficult. However, with increasing liberalisation in import policy and
current account convertibility of foreign exchange, the provision of
essentiality certificate itself has become redundant. At present, RNI
only ensures that the machinery imported are installed at pre-declared
premises. During the financial year 2003-2004, 12 E.Cs were issued.
No Newspaper Certificate
51. In a written reply, the Ministry have stated that the certificate
of Registration is issued to all categories of registered publications.
However, some publishers publishing magazines mainly on

18
Art & Culture, Religion, Spiritualism etc., seek permission for foreign
contribution under FCRA. For this purpose they approach the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The MHA requires a “No Newspaper Certificate” to
be issued by the Registrar of Newspapers to certify that the contents
of the publication have nothing to do with news and current affairs.
According to the PRB Act, ‘newspaper’ means any printed periodical
work containing public news or comments on public news. RNI
examines each and every application on the basis of contents of the
publication and also takes a declaration from the publisher that the
magazine does not contain public news and current affairs. On
satisfaction of these criteria a ‘No Newspaper’ Certificate issued. During
the financial year 2003-2004, 17 “No Newspaper Certificates” were
issued.
Press in India
52. RNI is required under Section 19G of PRB Act, to compile a
report and submit the same to the Government of India. The Report
titled “Press in India” is to be submitted by 31st December every year.
The Report is compiled on the basis of the Annual Statements
submitted by the publishers under Section-19E of the PRB Act. The
Report highlights the state of Print Media in the country state-wise,
language-wise & periodicity-wise. The ownership pattern is also
highlighted in the Annual Report. The Committee noting details of
only 5,500 publication in this report, although the RNI has 58,467
registered publications desired a clarification from the Ministry/RNI.
In reply, the Ministry stated that the Press in India included the details
of those publications which had given their Annual Statements. The
Annual Statements of 5,500 publications had only been received.
Constraints faced by Publishers
53. One of the suggestion given by a Newspaper body during
their evidence before the Committee was that facsimile edition of
newspapers should be allowed. It was elaborated that now-a-days with
latest Electronic Technology, many newspaper publishers had started
printing and publishing newspapers from various centres with almost
same contents to save the delivery time and to meet the needs of the
local readers. In Delhi itself, most of the newspapers were being
published with different local editions having by and large same
contents with only locality specific changes to serve various localities.
They desired that if a newspaper was transmitted through Electronic

19
Technology to even some other destination and was printed and
published from another city, publishers should be allowed to use the
same R.N.I. Registration number and publication should be treated as
one publication. The moment a facsimile edition was done, RNI insisted
on a separate RNI number. It was added that the definition of ‘edition’
was not very clear, i.e. whether it was the printing center or the
facsimile edition. Therefore, there was a need to have a re-look at the
PRB, Act.

RECOMMENDATION
Recommendation No. 1
AMENDMENTS TO THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS
ACT, 1867 (PRB)
The Committee are informed that PRB Act is an Act for
regulation of Printing-presses and Newspapers, for the preservation
of copies of books and newspapers printed in India, and for the
registration of such books and newspapers. The Act was enacted in
the year 1867 and is still in force for the regulation of printing
presses and the newspapers.
The Committee are also informed that the Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI) is the important organization which is
keeping record of all available information and statistics on the
presses and newspapers in India. The Registrar of Newspapers for
India performs Statutory functions as enshrined under the Act of
1867 as well as Non-Statutory functions as enshrined under the GOI,
MOF (Deptt. of Revenue) Notification No. 21.
Some of the functions like title verification, registration, clearance
of foreign title for newspapers, receipt of Annual Statements, deletion
of names of ceased publications, verification of circulation claims,
facsimile edition etc. requires changes in the original Act for their
smooth functioning and quick disposal. The above process and
procedures could be made more efficient and transparent by making
the whole process on line by using the Information Technology. The
introduction of Information Technology and its wide spread usage
for the above function does not find place in the original Act. It has
become very essential that the Act be suitably reviewed and necessary
changes incorporated.
The Committee are of the strong opinion that the smooth
functioning of RNI and its timely disposal of its functions is the
key to redressal of complaints from the newspapers organizations.
The Committee feel that this will be possible only if the Act is
suitably reviewed and amended to suit the present day on-line
environment. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the
Department should make all out efforts to amend the Act as early
as possible.
20

21
Recommendation No. 2
Opening of more Regional offices
The Committee observe that RNI had earlier placed a proposal
for opening up of regional offices in more locations in India but the
same was pruned down due to administrative reasons. The
Committee are informed that the bulk of the work with RNI lies in
the verification of titles, which takes a long time. This delay is the
cause of most of the complaints received from the publishers. They
are further informed that this position would be tackled effectively,
once the computerisation process is complete.
The Committee are of the opinion that for opening up more
Regional offices more staff would not be needed and also more rent
would not be required to be paid for accommodation etc. if the
computerisation and on-line registration is carried out effectively and
in a time-bound manner. Till such time the possibility of entrusting
the job of verification of titles to some other division within the
Ministry e.g. Field Publicity Division may be examined.
Recommendation No. 3
Plan Outlay
The Committee observe that there was no Plan budgetary
provision for RNI during the 9th Plan. In the 1st year of the Xth
Plan (2002-2003), Rs. 60 lakh were allocated under this head. The
amount remained unutilized as the Plan scheme was not approved
by the competent authority. Further, a proposed allocation of
Rs. 132.00 lakh was reduced to Rs. 41.50 lakh due to redefinement
of scheme and non-completion of the sanctioned work by CPWD in
the year 2003-2004. The actual expenditure was only Rs. 36.73 lakhs.
The Committee feel that there is a lot to be desired in RNI in the
field of planning, as saving due to non-completion of work and
redefinement does not appear to be good planning. It is in these
circumstances, for the year 2004-2005 a meagre amount of
Rs. 29.5 lakh has been allocated.
The Committee desire that RNI should undertake its budgetary
exercise prudently and with due seriousness in a realistic manner.
Plan development leads to improved quality and service. The
Committee hope that the funds allocated in Tenth Plan for

22
computerization and renovation of RNI headquarters would be fully
utilised as envisaged by the Ministry. They desire that RNI should
make every effort to expend the allocated funds of Rs. 29.5 lakh
during the year 2004-05 so as to improve quality of services rendered
by it.
Recommendation No. 4
Verification of Titles
The Committee note that as per provision of PRB Act, 1867
applications for title verification are received by RNI through District
Magistrates. The DM first verifies the details and sends the
application to RNI in Delhi. RNI then verifies the availability of
the titles. The Committee note that a lot of time is being consumed
in this process causing great inconvenience to the publishers who
keep waiting for title clearance to start a publication.
The Committee are aware that DMs have a number of important
assignments apart from maintaining law and order in the Districts.
Hence, it may not be possible for the DMs to give priority to the
work assigned to them by RNI. The Committee, therefore, desire
that for expeditious disposal of work, the existing procedure may be
modified to the extent under which the publisher applies to the DM
with a copy of the same endorsed to RNI so that RNI can at once
start the job of title clearance subject to verification of other details
from the District Magistrates. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should concentrate on expediting the on-line registration
process to simplify the procedure.
Recommendation No. 5
On-line Registration.
The Committee are informed that National Informatics Centre
(NIC) in consultation with RNI has developed software for on-line
registration/verification of newspapers and it will take about two
years to make it operational as the specific details are still to be
worked out. The Committee are happy that RNI, in consonance with
the need of the hour is taking a step in the right direction. However,
the Committee feel that the time being taken for starting on-line
registration/verification is on the higher side. In the opinion of the
Committee, the facility should be implemented expeditiously. The

23
Committee, therefore strongly recommend that all sincere and
concrete efforts should be made by the Ministry/RNI to gear up its
machinery to face the challenges to make the online title verification
operational as early as possible. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the effective steps taken by the RNI in this regard
quarterly.
Although the Committee observe that amendment in the PRB
Act is necessary in order to make the procedure for registration/
verification of newspapers on-line but they strongly feel that
availbility of the information technology newspapers/periodicals title
from the data bank should immediately be made on-line. They,
therefore, recommend, that review of PRB Act, 1867 should be given
top priority and provisions be made in this regard after suitable
modifications in the Act.
Recommendation No. 6
De-Blocking of Titles
The Committee find that for seeking registration, there is a
provision that after the declaration is authenticated by the District
Magistrate, the publisher is required to bring out the first issue of
the newspaper within 42 days in case of daily or weekly and within
90 days for publications with a periodicity of more than a week,
otherwise their titles would be cancelled. However, the procedure of
cancellation being mechanical and lengthy, was not adhered to and
resulted in blocking of titles. The first exercise to de-block
unregistered titles was undertaken only in the year 1998, in which
about 1.7 lakhs titles were de-blocked. Thereafter titles are being
de-blocked after two years. The Committee desire that de-blocking
should be carried out more frequently and publishers should not be
denied titles on grounds other than genuine.
Recommendation No. 7
Refusal of title being same as a foreign title
The Committee note that one of the reasons for refusal of the
title is that it is same as any published foreign title. This is being
done as per the PRB Act, 1867 and pursuant to Cabinet decision
taken in 1955, which says that any Indian edition of a foreign paper
is not allowed.

24
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Ministry
of I & B is reviewing the matter in view of the fact that if there is
a copyright of a particular item, it is not merely the name, but also
the Mast head, Logo and many other things, if they are not the
same perhaps the foreign title can be allowed. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the decision arrived at in this regard.
Recommendation No. 8
Annual Statements under the Act
The Committee note that under Section-19F of the Press and
Registration of Book Act, 1867 Registrar of Newspapers for India
(RNI) is statutorily required to keep a record of registered
publications including newspapers, weeklies etc., As per the records
of RNI the number of such registered articles is 58,467. This contains
many publications that have ceased to exist but RNI has no
information about them. One of the reasons put forward by RNI is
that the publishers have not submitted Annual Statements which is
the basis on which RNI verifies the existence of newspapers.
The Committee further note that under the provisions in the
PRB Act, 1867 Annual Statements containing details of publication,
circulation, ownership, editors, price etc. are required to be submitted
mandatorily by the publishers every year. However, during the year
2003-04, only 5591 Annual Statements from publishers were received
by RNI which meant that existence of 52,876 newspapers, weeklies
etc. was in doubt.
The Committee observe that although the problem of non-
submission of Annual Statements by the publishers is not new to
RNI, yet it has failed to take any concrete step to improve the
situation. No serious thought has been given to take any action
against the defaulting publishers by imposing penalty of Rs. 500
under the provision in PRB Act, 1867. The Committee do not accept
the reason advanced by RNI that provision in imposing fine is a
long drawn process and would only raise the harassment level. They
desire that RNI should give wide publicity to the provisions of the
PRB Act under which a fine can be imposed on erring publishers.
Simultaneously, they opine that RNI should function strictly as per
the provisions of PRB act, and wherever necessary provision of
imposing the fine should be invoked to serve as an example to
erring publishers.

25
The Committee also feel that the fine of Rs. 500 for non
submission of Annual Statement by the publishers is too low and
therefore amendment to the Act for raising the fine to a level that
impinges upon the pocket of the publisher should be proposed.
The Committee are happy to note that RNI took special initiatives
like placing advertisements in various media and a network of
receiving centers was provided for annual statements at various
regional/branch and field offices of RNI, PIB, DFP and DA VP to
improve compliance of filling Annual Statements by publishers. As
a result, 7156 Annual Statements were filed during 2002-03, which
was the maximum number of Annual Statements ever received.
The Committee share the view of RNI that the situation of filing
Annual Statements will improve when the procedure of registration
will be on-line, as publishers would be able to fill a one page
format even locally in any cyber-cafe. However they apprehend that
this problem may continue even when the procedure becomes on-
line because there is no stringent action proposed against those who
will fail to do so. The Committee are of the view that RNI should
take special initiatives as had been done in the year 2002 to give
wide publicity to filing of Annual Statements by publishers.
Recommendation No. 9
Enhancing the minimum number of circulation figure
The Committee observe that there is a requirement of circulation
of 2000 copies of a publication to submit an Annual Statement. The
Committee further learn that the limit of 2000 copies is common for
RNI and DA VP and if RNI raises the limit to a higher level, DA VP
will have a problem because self-certification beyond 2,000 could be
spurious as DA VP gives out advertisements and a large number of
publications may go to them with fake circulation figures to try and
take advantage of this situation. Keeping in view the increasing
work load on RNI, the Committee recommend that the circulation
figure for filing Annual Statements should be revised upwards to
5000 and the benchmark for self certification from 2000 to 5000 should
be considered in consultation with DA VP . The Committee would
also like to recommend that the circulation figures should be taken
as actual number of copies sold/circulated in comparison to the figure
arrived at by calculating the number of copies printed etc.

26
Recommendation No. 10
Deletion of ceased publications
The Committee observe that there is no provision in the Press
& Registration of Books Act, 1867 for deletion of names of
publications which cease to exist. The Committee however,
understand that the Ministry is examining the matter regarding de-
registration of such publications which have not filed even a single
Annual statement during the last 6 years presuming that they are
not being published, after giving a general notice. This would,
however, not cancel the registration number as it would require
suitable amendment in the PRB Act, 1867.
The Committee are in complete agreement with the views of the
Ministry/RNI and strongly recommend that there is an apparent need
to amend the PRB Act by incorporating suitable provision therein to
give effect to deletion of names and registration of the ceased
publications. The Committee recommend that pending such
amendment in the PRB Act, RNI should go ahead with the de-
registration of such publications which have not filed a single Annual
Statement for the past 6 years. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.
Recommendation No. 11
Verification of Circulation Claim
The Committee note that one of the important functions of RNI
is to verify circulation claims made by the publishers. However, in
view of the limited manpower available with RNI, RNI has confined
the circulation checks to only cases referred to it by DA VP/PIB/State
Govt. and some other undertakings. RNI also undertakes circulation
checks on the basis of complaints. The Committee further note that
out of the total 2658 cases referred in the year 2000, 2001 and 2002-
03, 2628 cases were referred by DA VP , 5 cases were referred by State
Governments, one case by PIB and the remaining 24 were
miscellaneous complaints.
The Committee also note that the number of circulation checks
done by RNI is decreasing year after year. During 2001, 2002-03 and
2003-04, 1679, 1304 and 788 circulation checks respectively could be
carried out. Though RNI expects to touch the figure of 700 circulation
checks during 2004-05, the Committee find that around 378 circulation
checks would still remain pending. The Committee observe that the
decline in the number of circulation checks is due to (i) the increased
number of requests for spot checks received from DA VP , which has
risen from 25 to 150 annually (one spot check takes time equal to

27
six document based checks); (ii) shortage of staff (two posts of
Circulation Officers & Accounts Clerks are lying vacant in RNI);
and (iii) non-availability of trained technical experts who have to be
hired from outside.
Effective circulation check pre-supposes adequate trained
manpower to ensure checks to be carried out at least once a year.
The Committee desire that for effective verification of circulation
claims of newspapers, besides redeployment of staff within RNI
wherever and whenever required, services of PIB officers and
technical experts from outside should also be availed of. The
Committee also desire that RNI should ensure that circulation checks
are done within a fixed time-frame to minimize the problems being
faced by the publishers.
Recommendation No. 12
Publishers demands on verification
The Committee observe that newspaper bodies are facing
difficulties as RNI has not been doing circulation checks on time.
This in turn has directly affected the advertisement rates of
publishers with the DA VP at the time of re-establishment of
circulation after three years because DA VP insists on automatic
reduction of rates, to the minimum rates, unless the circulation is
authenticated by the RNI.
The Committee also observe that RNI carries out circulation
checks through the number of distribution of sold copies to agents,
hawkers, consumption, printing machinery etc. which the publishers
find difficult to produce. The Committee feel that the verification
should not lead to harassment so that publishers take to dubious
methods of concealing their actual circulation. The Committee also
feel that RNI should be regular in issuing the circulation certification
so that publishers are not put to trouble of automatic reduction of
rates by DA VP in the absence of such certification. The Committee
recommend that if the delay for issuing the circulation certification
rests on RNI, there should be an understanding with DA VP that
they should continue to pay the already approved rates till the RNI
authenticates the circulation.
Recommendation No. 13
Fee for title clearance or registration
The Committee are surprised to note that RNI is not charging
any processing fee for performing various statutory and non-statutory

28
functions such as title verification, registration, brining out ‘Press in
India’, circulation check, issue of eligibility certificates for import of
newsprint, essentiality certificate for import of printing machinery
etc. They find no reason why RNI should not charge for these
services.
The Committee further note that the Expenditure Reforms
Commission had recommended imposing some service charges for
various services rendered by RNI and a proposal thereof was
formulated by RNI. However, when the Ministry of Law, Department
of Legal Affairs was consulted, they opined that the PBR Act does
not provide for fee for discharging statutory functions and therefore
fee cannot be charged without amending the Act.
The Committee feel that the proposal of imposition of fee for
various statutory and non-statutory functions of RNI is a step in
right direction and it should be actively considered by the Ministry.
The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary amendments in the
provisions of PRB Act should be made in this respect.
Recommendation No. 14
Facsimile Editions
The Committee have noted that RNI does not allow facsimile
edition of newspapers published from different local destinations
having almost the same contents with local specific changes to serve
various localities with the same registration number. They have
further noted that if a newspaper is transmitted through Electronic
Technology to even some other destination and is printed and
published from another city, publishers are not allowed to use the
same RNI. Registration number. The Committee feel that the Ministry
may take this into consideration while proposing amendments to
the Act.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
31 March, 2005 Chairman,
10 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY (2003)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 25 November, 2003 from
1100 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Somanth Chatterjee —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Dukha Bhagat
3. Shri P .D. Elangovan
4. Shri Rama Mohan Gadde
5. Shri T. Govindan
6. Shri Jawahar Lal Jaiswal
7. Shri K.K. Kaliappan
8. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri K. Balrama Krishna Murthy
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Sheeshram Singh Ravi
12. Shri C.N. Singh
13. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chowdhary
14. Shri Vanlal Zawma
15. Shri Charanjit Singh
16. Shri Arun Kumar
17. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
19. Shri Balbir K. Punj
20. Shri Dina Nath Mishra
21. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
22. Shri Rajeev Shukla
29

30
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Sharma — Officer on Special Duty (IT)
4. Shri B.D. Swan — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
1. Shri Pawan Chopra — Secretary
2. Ms. Deepa Singh — Addl. Secretary & Financial
Adviser
3. Shri Sudhir Sharma — Joint Secretary (P&A)
4. Shri G.D. Beliya — Press Registrar, RNI
5. Shri Uday Moray — Dy. Press Registar, RNI
6. Shri Sahab Singh — Principal Information Officer,
PIB
7. Smt. Surinder Kaur — Dirctor General, DAVP
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, Press Registrar, RNI and other officers
of the Ministry of I & B to the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, Press Registrar, RNI made a presentation on the
subject “Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India”. Then the
Members sought clarifications on issues like duties and obligations of
RNI, staffing pattern and methodology applied to check circulation of
newspapers and periodicals. The representatives of the Ministry
responded to the queries raised by the Members.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting and RNI for appearing before the
Committee as well as for furnishing information sought by it on the
subject.
5. A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
6. The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 14 December, 2004 from 1500 hours
to 1630 hours in Committee Room No. G-074, K-Block, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
9. Col. G. Nizamuddin
10. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Dara Singh
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary (P)
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Indian Newspaper Society (INS)
1. Shri Suresh Balakrishnan—Chairman, Delhi Regional
Committee, INS
2. Shri R.K. Gupta—Deputy Secretary , INS
3. Mr. Harish Nagpal—General Manager, Hindustan Times, New
Delhi
31

32
Representatives of All India Small & Medium Newspapers
Federation (AISMNF)
1. Shri Harbhajan Singh—President, AISMNF
2. Shri L.C. Bhartiya—State President of Federation Rajasthan Unit,
Editor, Akashdeep
3. Shri Gurinder Singh, Vice President, AISMNF
4. Shri B.M. Sharma, Secretary-General, Editor—Sandhya Jyothi
5. Shri M.L. Pahwa, State President, Delhi Unit Editor, Rashtra
Chhaya
Representatives of All India Newspapers Editors’
Conference (AINEC)
1. Shri Vishwa Bandhu Gupta, President
2. Shri Uttam Chand Sharma, Hony. Treasurer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Indian Newspaper Society (INS), All India Small & Medium
Newspapers Federation (AISMNF) and All India Editors’ Conference
(AIEC) to the sitting of the Committee, invited their attention to the
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested
them to put forth their views on the “Functioning of Registrar of
Newspapers for India (RNI)”.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of INS, AISMNF and AIEC briefed
the Committee on matters relating to the delay in issuing of registration
certificates and title clearance, verification system of circulations of
newspapers, need to review the existing Press and Registration of Books
Act, 1867 and gave suggestions to improve the functioning of RNI.
The representatives also attended to the queries of the Members.
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the representatives of Indian
Newspaper Society (INS), All India Small & Medium Newspapers
Federation (AISMNF) and All India Newspaper Editors’ Conference
(AINEC) for appearing before the Committee and for providing
valuable information desired by the Committee.
5. A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 14 December, 2004 from 1630 hours
to 1740 hours in Committee Room No. G-074, K-Block, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
9. Col. G. Nizamuddin
10. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Dara Singh
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary (P)
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
33

34
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting/
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)
1. Shri S.K. Arora—Additional Secretary
2. Ms. Deepa Jain Singh—AS & FA
3. Shri P .K. Tripathi—JS(P & A)
4. Smt. Shakuntala Mahawal—PIO, PIB
5. Smt. Deepak Sandhu—Press Registrar, RNI
6. Shri Swagata Ghosh, Director, DAVP
2. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary and other officers
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the Press Registrar,
RNI and Director, DAVP to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha. The Ministry then made a presentation on the subject
“Functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India”. The Committee
sought clarifications on issues like issue of registration certificates, title
clearance, verification system of circulation of newspapers/periodicals
etc. existing in RNI, staff constraints and also the need to review Press
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 etc. The representatives of the
Ministry/RNI responded to the queries raised by the Members.
3. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting, RNI and DAVP for appearing before the
Committee and for expressing free and frank views on the various
issues raised by the Members.
4. A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 9 March, 2005 from 1500 hours
to 1900 hours in Committee Room No. 074, K-Block, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Dr. P .P . Koya
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Vijay J. Darda
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
11. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
12. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
35

36
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:-
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on “Working of Registrar of Newspaper for
India (RNI)” relating to Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting.
3. After elaborate discussions on the draft report “Functioning &
Expansion of Postal Network” the Committee adopted the same with
certain amendments/modifications. During deliberations the Committee
desired that they may discuss the issue of Universal Service Obligation
and the role of the private couriers in a separate sitting of the
Committee. The Committee then considered the draft report on
“Working of Registrar of Newspaper for India (RNI)” which was then
adopted with certain amendments/modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above mentioned Reports to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.