46
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 27.4.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 168
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Implementation status of recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Ninth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of
Information Technology.............................................................. 1
III. Tenth Plan Budgetary Allocation and Utilisation ............... 2
IV . Budgetary Allocation for Eleventh Five Year Plan and
the year 2007-08 ........................................................................... 3
V. Implementation of National e-Governance Plan ................. 7
VI. Electronics and IT Sector........................................................... 12
(i) Software Technology Parks of India (STPIs) ................ 12
(ii) IT Hardware Manufacturing ............................................. 17
VII. Human Resource Development................................................ 19
VIII. National Informatics Centre (NIC).......................................... 23
(i) General ................................................................................... 23
(ii) Information Kiosks .............................................................. 24
(iii) Government Informatics Training Programme ............. 25
(iv) Video conferencing .............................................................. 25
IX. Media Lab Asia ........................................................................... 28
X. Nano-Technology Development Programmes ....................... 29
XI. Technology Development for Indian Languages ................. 30
PART II
Recommendations/Observations .............................................. 33
A
NNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting held on 2 April, 2007 ... 50
II. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting held on 20 April,
2007 ................................................................................................. 52

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
*18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
**19. Shri Narahari Mahato
#20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
21. Vacant
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006 in place of Shri Rajnarayna Budholiya,
MP (L.S.)
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
# Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February , 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
#22. Vacant
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajagopalan M. Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
#Vacated dated 15th December, 2006.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Forty-Sixth Report on ‘Demands
for Grants (2007-2008)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2006-07)
was reconstituted on 5 August, 2006. One of the functions of the
Standing Committee, as laid down in Rule 331E of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, is to consider
Demands for Grants of the concerned Ministry/Department and make
a Report on the same to the House.
3. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining
to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Information Technology) for the current year i.e.
2007-2008 which were laid on the Table of the House on 7 March,
2007. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Information Technology on 2 April, 2007.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20 April, 2007.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of
the Department of Information Technology for appearing before the
Committee and for furnishing the information, that the Committee
desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
25 April, 2007 Chairman,
5 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

REPORT
I. Introductory
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT), in the Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology are inter-alia
responsible for formulation, implementation and review of national
policies in the field of Information Technology. All policy matters
relating to silicon facility, computer based information technology and
processing including hardware and software, standardisation of
procedures and matters relating to international bodies, promotion of
knowledge based enterprises, internet, e-commerce and information
technology education and development of electronics and coordination
amongst its various users are also addressed by the Department.
Various schemes/programmes of the Department of Information
Technology are implemented directly by them and through the
organisations/institutions under their jurisdiction. To make the
technology robust and state-of-the-art, collaboration of the academia
and the private/public sector is also obtained, Major schemes/projects
being/to be taken up by the Department are National Informatics
Centre (NIC), Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification (STQC),
Society for applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research
(SAMEER), Micro-electronics and Nano-technology, Technology
Development Council (TDC) including Intellectual Property Rights
Promotion Programme, Convergence, Communication & Strategic
Electronics, Component and Material Development, Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Electronics in Health
and Tele-medicine, Technology Development for Indian Languages
(TDIL), E-commerce and Info Security, IT for Masses (Gender, SC/ST),
Media Lab Asia, Export Promotion-Software Technology Parks of India
(STPI) & EHTP , Digital DNA Parks, Cyber Security including Cert-in,
IT Act/Certification and Network Security, Education and Research
Network (ERNET), Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware
manufacturing, Department of Electronics Accredited Computer Courses
(DOEACC), Manpower Development, Special Manpower for VLSI
Design, Facilitation of setting up of Integrated Townships and E-
Governance including Community Information Centres (CICs).
II. Implementation status of recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Department of Information Technology
2. The Committee presented their Twenty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of

2
Information Technology on 2 August, 2006. The Report contained
48 recommendations/observations. Out of that 42 recommendations
(Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 4-6, 8-20, 22-26, 30-48) were accepted by the
Government. The replies in respect of recommendations at Sl.Nos. 3
and 21 were not accepted by the Committee and these
recommendations were reiterated in the Forty-First Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha).
III. Tenth Plan Budgetary Allocation and Utilisation
(Rs. in crore)
Financial Year Proposed BE RE Actuals
2002-03 937.19 470.00 470.00 465.35
2003-04 1146.90 470.00 495.00 492.88
2004-05 1294.38 750.00 650.00 644.74
2005-06 1400.67 929.30 882.00 880.10
2006-07 1516.00 1090.00 1090.00 1090.00*
Total Xth Plan 6295.14 3709.30 3587.00 3573.07*
*Expected
3. During evidence, the Committee wanted to know whether the
reduced allocations in all the previous years have affected the
implementation of the various programmes of the Department of
Information Technology. In reply, the Secretary, DoIT stated as under:
“I may be permitted to cover 2006-07. It is because we had more
reasons to study that over the course of the years….. One of the
issues where we have taken up very ambitious programme and
that is e-governance. To that extent, we had to cut out coat
according to the clothes…. The other area where we had, so to
speak, taken up reduced outlays is where we have either sanctioned
projects under R&D or we have not been able to release the funds
which were supposed to be done according to schedule, or we
have held back the sanctioned or some other projects which we
would have been able to take up if the Budgetary outlays were
more……… As I said, we have suffered cuts this year in the case
of NIC. They wanted to take up a lot of capital investment, which
is really required like improvement of networks and security. In
many of these areas we had got squeezed a little this year. Previous

3
year also, we had to do this. I would request that in these two
areas and also in R&D side—in these three areas—the reduction in
outlays has meant that to some extent we have had to go a little
more realistically.”
IV . Budgetary Allocation for Eleventh Five Year Plan and the year
2007-08
4. The Department of IT have informed the Committee that the
Physical and Financial targets for the 11th Five Year Plan have been
proposed and submitted to the Planning Commission. However, the
Planning Commission has not yet considered/allocated the Outlays.
Further for the financial year 2007-08, a budgetary support of Rs. 1500
crore has been approved. As per Demand No. 15 pertaining to the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT), the details of Revenue
as well as Capital Expenditure under the Plan and Non-Plan Sections
have been stated to be as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
2007-2008 Plan Non-Plan Total
Revenue 1421.00 36.00 1457.00
Capital 79.00 — 79.00
Total 1500.00 36.00 1536.00
5. The Scheme-wise details of Annual Plan allocations for the year
2007-2008 as proposed by the Department of Information Technology
and approved by the Planning Commission have been stated to be as
under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Scheme Number/Name Annual Plan (2007-2008)
Proposed Allocation Difference
12 3 4
I.R. & D Programmes
SAMEER 25.00 22.00 3.00
Microelectronics & Nano-Tech. Dev. Prog. 40.00 29.00 11.00
Technology Development Council 50.59 32.00 18.59

4
12 3 4
Convergence, Communication & 35.00 22.00 13.00
Strategic Electronics
Components & Material 15.60 10.00 5.60
Development Programme
C-DAC 127.00 75.00 52.00
Electronics in Health & Telemedicine 27.73 18.00 9.73
Technology Development for 30.00 11.00 19.00
Indian Languages
IT for Masses (Gender, SC&ST) 10.00 9.00 1.00
Media Lab Asia 50.00 10.00 40.00
R&D Sub-Total 410.92 238.00 172.92
II. Infrastructure Development
STQC 65.00 50.00 15.00
STPI & EHTP 12.00 0.50 11.50
Digital DNA Park 0.10 0.10 Nil
Electronic Governance 957.96 800 157.96
Cyber Security (including CERT- 75.00 33.00 42.00
In, IT Act)
ERNET 0.10 0.10 —
Promotion of Electronics/IT 10.00 1.00 9.00
Hardware Manufacturing
Infrastructure Sub-Total 1120.16 884.70 235.46
III. Human Resource Development
DOEACC 22.00 0.50 21.50
Manpower Development 99.00 43.00 56.00
Facilitation off setting-up of 1.00 1.00 Nil
Integrated Townships
HRD-Sub-Total 122.00 44.50 77.50

5
12 3 4
IV . Others
Headquarter (Secretariat & Bldg.) 12.00 12.80 0.80
NIC 427.00 320.00 —
Grand Total 2092.08 1500 592.08
6. It has been observed that DoIT proposed an outlay of Rs. 2092.08 crore
for its various schemes viz. R&D, Infrastructure Development, Human
Resource Development, NIC and other miscellaneous programmes for
the year 2007-08, but the Planning Commission approved only
Rs. 1500 crore.
7. In this regard, the Committee desired to know abut the
programmes/projects under the various Schemes which the DOIT will
have to sacrifice in view of the reduced allocations. In reply, it has
been stated that no plan schemes have been proposed to be sacrificed
because of reduced allocations. To a similar query, it has been replied
that the plan allocations would be reviewed during consultation with
the Planning Commission at the time of finalization of Eleventh Plan.
8. The major thrust areas of the Department of Information
Technology for the Eleventh Five Year Plan and for the year 2007-2008
have been stated to be Manufacturing, Software Exports, Domestic
Software, Human Resource Development and Research & Development.
Manufacturing, Software Exports, Domestic Software are covered under
Infrastructure Development. It has been observed that major reduction
in allocations have been made by the Planning Commission in these
programmes of the Department. Against the proposed amount of
Rs. 410.92 crore for Research & Development, Rs. 1120.16 crore for
Infrastructure Development and Rs. 122.00 crore for Human Resource
Development, the Planning Commission approved only Rs. 238.00 crore,
Rs. 884.70 crore and 44.50 crore respectively.
9. To a specific query whether the allocations for these schemes of
the Department are adequate, it has been stated that 2007-08 is the
first year of Eleventh Plan and the Plan Outlay for the Eleventh Plan
is yet to be finalised. It has simultaneously been stated that the
Department would take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
and the Planning Commission for suitable increase in Plan Allocation
for 2007-08 wherever required at the time of formulation of RE
proposals for 2007-08 to provide them a focused approach.

6
10. It has been informed that India’s expenditure on R&D is 0.8%
of GDP which is well below that of many nations and needs to be
stepped up progressively. There is a need for encouraging design led
manufacturing which is also known to be an employment generator.
The Committee then asked whether Rs. 238 crore allocated for the
year 2007-2008 was adequate to carry out their various activities
especially if certain programmes were to be taken up in design led
manufacturing. The Department have stated that they had proposed
Rs. 410.92 crore for R&D Programmes and will take up the matter
with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission for increase
in the budget allocation at the RE stage during the year.
11. The Committee desired to know the initiatives/steps taken by
DoIT for better implementation of their various schemes/projects in
the Eleventh Plan. In reply, it has been stated that in order to measure
developmental outcomes, cost effectiveness and efficiency of
development programmes, they have taken the initiative to undertake
a comprehensive, in depth and independent evaluations of Plan
Schemes and programmes under implementation in the Department.
These independent evaluation and impact assessment studies would
constitute a vital input for finalizing programmes for the 11th Plan.
Four Plan Schemes have been taken up for Impact Evaluation Studies
(IES). The names of the schemes have been given as under:
1. Software Technology Parks in India
2. Convergence, Communication, Broadband Technologies and
Strategic Electronics.
3. Telemedicine
4. Technology Development in Indian Languages.
12. When asked the grounds of selection of the Plan Schemes for
Impact Evaluation Studies (IES), the Committee have been informed
that the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance had requested
the DoIT to initiate action for undertaking IES of major Plan Schemes
and other programmes, which were proposed to be continued in the
Eleventh Plan. Accordingly, DoIT selected four Plan Schemes for IES
for 2006-07 based on the importance of the scheme and its implications
for the growth of the sector.
13. The Committee then asked whether the Department have a
plan to undertake such studies for their other important and high
budget schemes specially with a view to preparing  better Plan
proposals for the Eleventh Plan. In reply, DoIT stated that the Plan

7
Schemes like e-Governance, which have been important and high
budget schemes were not undertaken for Impact Evaluation Study for
2006-07 as e-Assessment framework was already built into the Plan
Schemes. For other schemes, which were high budget schemes, Impact
Evaluation Study was not proposed for 2006-07 as IES for them have
already been carried out.
V. National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
14. During evidence, the Committee asked the exact role of DoIT
in the implementation of NeGP . A representative of DoIT replied as
under:
“………...One of the critical areas is the core and the support
infrastructure, which is common for all the projects across the board
and all of them would be users of this infrastructure. In fact,
without this infrastructure, it would be difficult for those
departments to achieve the vision of the Government. So the three
main core and support infrastructures consists of State Wide Area
Network in each State which connect the State Headquarters to
the District Headquarters and down to the Block, tehsil, and Sub-
Divisional Headquarters through high-speed optical fibre based
networks. …Then, the second is the Common Service Centre; and
the third is the State Data Centres, which are at the State
Headquarters…. At this point, I just want to mention that as per
the current plan, this infrastructure will be ready in most of the
states by the middle of 2008.
15. To a specific query, the witness informed that the original time
target for provision of Core and Support infrastructure was March,
2008. Therefore, there has been a slight delay of about three months.
16. In fact, the scheme for the establishment of SWAN at a total
outlay of Rs. 3334 crore was approved by the Government on
28th March, 2005.
17. Asked about the status of State Wide Area Network project, in
a written information furnished to the Committee, it has been stated
that with the recent approval of SWAN proposals from 3 States and
1 UT by the Empowered Committee on SWAN, the total number of
SWAN proposals approved becomes 28 as on date. Andaman & Nicobar
has opted out of the SWAN Scheme. The implementation of the
approved proposals of the States/UTs has been at various stages and
expected to be completed by March 2008. SWAN team at DoIT has
been vigorously pursuing to evolve the project proposals from

8
remaining 5 States/UTs, viz., Jammu & Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh,
Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Goa. The proposal from
Lakshadweep has been received and is under scrutiny . Teams
comprising DoIT officials along with members from SWAN Programme
Management Consultant Unit visited various States/UTs to assist the
State/UT Governments to prepare the SWAN proposals. Proposals from
the remaining States/UTs are at advanced stage of preparation. DoIT
have expected that all State/UT SWAN proposals for the entire country
would be checked from DOIT level by the first quarter of 2007-08.
18. As regards the reasons for slow progress of SWAN project in
some of the States, a representative of DoIT submitted during evidence
as under:
“……The States, where progress has been little slower—when I
said that in most of the States, it would be ready by 2008—in the
bottom category  of the States, where even by the middle of 2008,
it may not be ready unless the States complete their preparatory
activities. These States include Aruanchal Pradesh, Lakshadweep,
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Daman and Diu,
Goa and Andhra Pradesh. ….Sir, certain States, like Arunachal
Pradesh and so on, had some problems in just formulating their
schemes. They wanted consultants, we provided them with
consultants; they wanted people to support them, and we had
provided the people. But I must say that in some cases, decision-
making has been a little slow. In the small States, like Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, perhaps they have not felt the
requirement so acutely. But as far as Goa is concerned, they feel
that they do not need this scheme, because they have proceeded
with an alternative mode of implementation, which is achieving
the same purpose…. In Jammu and Kashmir, there have been
special issues relating to BSNL and also the security-related aspects,
which have delayed the project. However, the NIC and BSNL
officials have been working with them, and the DIT officials have
also been associated with the State, and we are hopeful, though a
little delay is there, action will be taken in Jammu and Kashmir…..
Andaman and Nicobar Islands have indicated that they do require
this one because they have already VSAT connectivity . In Andhra
Pradesh, there was a peculiar problem………. The problem was
that certain scheme was envisaged earlier to provide connectivity.
Andhra Pradesh actually tried to implement a connectivity
programme through Andhra Pradesh broadband earlier than this
project. So, that predates the SWAN scheme of the Government of
India. But that ran into contractual difficulties and is not currently

9
proceeding further. So, the State has to conclude the earlier
arrangement and sent a revised proposal. The Scheme itself has
already been approved for Andhra Pradesh but they are not able
to proceed with the implementation because of these problems. …
We are trying to help them to sort out the problems. But this is
how it is. Again, the bottom line of all this is that except for this
last category of few States, in the rest of the States by March 2008
itself we would expect the Wide Area Networks to be fully
operational.”
19. From the Outcome Budget of the DoIT for the year 2007-08, it
is seen that the Department had proposed to establish and
operationalise Data Centres in 20 States across the country within a
period of one year. A target was kept to make operational Data
Repository in 10 States by March, 2007. However, the same could not
be achieved. It has been stated that the scheme for the State Data
Centre would be taken up for implementation during 2007-08. As part
of core and support infrastructure of NeGP , it was considered necessary
to first address the establishment of State Wide Area Network (SWAN)
and Common Service Centres (CSC), since these require longer
timeframe for implementation compared to the State Data Centre.
SWANs and CSCs were expected to be operational in most of the
States by March 2008. DoIT have therefore, proposed to establish Data
Centres in 20 States by March 2008 matching with the timelines of
setting-up/operationalisation of SWANs and CSCs in the States.
20. As regards the status of implementation of Common Services
Centres (CSCs) project, it may be seen from the Outcome Budget that
a target was kept to set up 1,00,000 ICT based Kiosks at village level
across the country in phases by December, 2007 and 30,000 kiosks by
March, 2007. However, in a written reply to a similar query, it has
been stated that in case of 3 other States, namely Bihar, Assam and
Punjab, the RFPs have been issued and as expected, the process of
selection of Service Centre Agency (SCA) would be completed in the
next 2-3 months. In the case of another 13 number of States, the RFPs
for selection of SCA would be issued by end April, 2007. The RFPs,
which are likely to be issued by end April, 2007 would cover an
additional 65,000 number of CSCs. Once the selection process of SCA
would be completed (which takes about 2-3 months) the CSCs would
be rolled out within 12 months of signing of the agreement by the
State Government with the SCAs. Thus by August 2008, a total of
84000 CSC would be set up across the country as per the approved
scheme and by end October 2008, the complete Scheme would be
rolled out in the country. It has simultaneously been stated that the

10
CSCs have to be established by the State Governments concerned and
they would float the bids for setting up the CSCs and hence the
timelines for implementation would depend on the speed with which
the State Governments would be able to implement the Scheme.
21. Describing the role and responsibility of DoIT, the Cabinet
approval for NeGP States—“DoIT would be the facilitator and catalyst
for the implementation of NeGP by various Ministeries and State
Governments and would also provide technical assistance to them either
directly or in collaboration with external professional consultants. It
would serve as a secretariat to the Apex Committee and assist it in
managing the programme. In addition, it would implement pilot/
infrastructure/technical/special projects and support components. DoIT
would also prepare a suitable template for preparing project document,
which could be used by individual departments for preparing their
detailed project reports.”
22. Asked to state the difficulties being faced by DoIT in
implementation of NeGP , DoIT replied that the major difficulties being
faced by them while expediting implementation of Mission Mode
Projects by Line Ministries and States have been two fold:
(a) Issues related to Project Conceptualization
• Selection of Services & Determination of Service Levels
• Determination of Milestones & Timelines
• Government Process Re-engineering
• Legislative enablement
• Modes and Models of Public Service Delivery
Possibility of Public Private Partnership
•A wareness & Communication strategy
(b) Issues related to Capacity Building
• Need for requisite skill sets in sufficiently large numbers
for project execution
• Need to create a core team in each MMP with domain
and private sector experts
ºSuitable mechanism to attract private talent
ºIdentify and incentivise talent within government

11
• Need to manage change by training and sensitising
employees to
º Handle Government functions in an automated workspace
º Promote a culture of responsiveness in dealing with citizens
23. As regards measures taken for speedy implementation of NeGP ,
DOT stated that regular reviews have been conducted by the Apex
Committee on e-Governance, chaired by the Cabinet Secretary. At this
forum, various nodal ministries bring out inter-ministerial issues which
might hamper speedy implementation of projects. Till date, 7 meetings
of the Apex Committee have been held. Also, a review meeting of
e-Governance would be held soon by a high level body, chaired by
honourable Prime Minister for expediting implementation of various
e-Governance Projects.
24. DoIT have further suggested that the programme should be
undertaken in a mission mode where each initiative should state clear
and well defined timelines, goals and deliverables. Proper
conceptualisation, preparation of detailed project documents and
mechanisms to ensure aspects of change management, awareness,
process re-engineering etc. would speed up the implementation
schedule of the programme. Issues of capacity building, setting up of
project and programme management and monitoring mechanisms are
also certain key requirements for timely and effective roll out of NeGP .
25. The Committee have been informed that a Programme
Management Unit (PMU) has been set up to provide Secretarial support
for the NEGP and Technical cum Managerial support to line Ministries/
Departments. The PMU has prepared a consolidated report on the
status of implementation of NeGP which is being constantly updated
based on inputs received from the respective line Ministries. To a
specific query, it has been replied that the PMU directly reports to
Additional Secretary (e-Governance) and is presently composed of three
Principal Consultants, nine senior consultants and five consultants in
the areas of Programme Management and Monitoring, Infrastructure,
Awareness and Assessment, Capacity Building, Research and
Development, Standards, etc. The periodicity of the consolidated reports
on the status of NeGP is monthly for Cabinet Secretariat and fortnightly
for Prime Minister’s Office.
26. The another similar query, it has been informed that the
monitoring of the status of implementation of NeGP in various States/
UTs and preparation of Reports thereon is done mainly through inputs
from the concerned line Ministries/Departments. However in order to

12
obtain greater clarity, PMU officers have now begun visiting concerned
officials in Ministries/States. In this context, it has further been
informed that 11 Market research agencies have been empanelled to
carry out impact assessment of e-Governance initiatives across States
and the Centre. In assessment of phase 1 about 40 projects covering
10 States and four nation-wide projects have already been taken up.
27. When asked about the observations/suggestions contained in
the Report submitted by PMU and the steps being taken/proposed to
be taken on them, DoIT stated that the major sections in the reports
submitted by PMU consists of project deliverables/milestones, service
areas, service levels, if any, status of project and synopsis of decisions
of the Apex Committee. The reports have been submitted in templates
as advised by the Cabinet Secretariat and Prime Minister’s Officer.
The report provides a key snapshot of the implementation status of
Mission Mode Projects under NeGP. Comments/remarks have also been
provided wherever appropriate to assist monitoring authorities.
Currently DoIT have been exploring the option of placing the status
of implementation of MMPs in the public domain.
28. The Committee drew the attention towards the common man
in the country who is largely unaware of the benefits and potential of
the ICT in his day-to-day life. When asked about the Government‘s
preparedness to awaken the citizens to demand better services from
the Government, the DoIT stated, in response that for spreading
awareness and promoting usage of e-Governance amongst common
man, DoIT have adopted multi-pronged strategy involving multi-media
approach such as use of Mass Media, Advocacy Seminars and
Workshops for Implementers, Sensitization workshops for implementing
agencies, and on ground activities specific to the context for rural
audience. DoIT have stated that they have been selecting and
empanelling advertising agencies to carry out these tasks.
VI. Electronics and IT Sector
(i) Software Technology Parks of India (STPIs)
29. During evidence, the Committee drew the attention of the DoIT
to the major cut made by the Planning Commission in case of STPI,
where against proposed allocation of Rs. 12 crore, only Rs. 0.50 crore
have been approved. To this, Secretary , DoIT responded as under:—
“In the case of STPI, we felt that they could do more on the basis
of internal accruals also. To that extent, the allocation has been
kept at a nominal figure. This is the reason. But we feel that with

13
internal accrual this could be done……….. To that extent, if required
we would make out a case. We feel that with their internal accruals
they should be able to take up more ambitious programme and
not limit to the amount that is provided in the budget.”
30. Asked whether there exist a national policy on setting up of
Software Technology Parks, the Secretary, DoIT replied that there is a
policy that each State should first provide 3 acres of land and should
give a minimum corpus of funds. Director General, STPI further added
that a study has recently been commissioned which will be completed
at the end of the month and it will come out with all the potential
sites. At present there are 45 STPI centres and about 5 are in the
pipeline.
31. On being enquired whether a State can have more than one
Software Park, DG, STPI informed that some States have even 5 such
parks. But their idea was to put atleast one Software Technology Park
in each State. Except for 3 North-Eastern States, each State was now
coming up with a Software Park.
32. The details regarding the total software export from the member
units of STPI during each of the last four years including growth rate
have been given as under:—
Sl.No Years Exports (Rs. in Crores) Growth (%)
1. 2006-07 131,255* 30*
2. 2005-06 100,965 36
3. 2004-05 74,019 44
4. 2003-04 51,458 38
*Expected.
33. From the Annual Report of the DoIT for the year 2006-07, it
has been observed that the total estimated software export of the
country would be to the tune of Rs. 141,800 crore. STPI accounts for
over 92.56 percent of India’s Software exports. To a query about the
assessment on the achievements and shortfalls of the software exports
during Tenth Plan, DoIT have replied that India’s success in the export
of Information Technology (IT) Software and Related Services over the
past decade remains unparalleled. Total export revenues earned by
this sector have grown from Rs. 6,723 crore (US$ 1.8 billion) in
1997-98 to Rs. 104,500 crore (US$ 23.6 billion) in 2005-06 and are forecast

14
to reach Rs. 139,700 crore (US$ 23.6 billion) in 2005-06 and are forecast
to reach Rs. 139,700 crore (US$ 30.5 billion) in 2006-07. Today, India
has been regarded as the premier destination for the global sourcing
of IT and IT-Enabled Services (IT-ITES). India now accounts for
65 percent of the global market in offshore IT and 46 percent of the
ITES market. Of the total 117 companies certified at Level 5 of the
Software Engineering Institute (SEI)—Capability Maturity Model (CMM),
80 Companies (65 percent) are Indian. A majority of the Fortune
500 and Global 2000 corporations are sourcing IT-ITES from India.
34. The Committee have further been informed that the growth of
the sector has led to tremendous pay-offs in terms of wealth creation
and generation of high quality employment. Market capitalization
values of leading Indian IT companies now exceed those of global
competitors (even though the letter have higher revenues), and the
exports segment of the Indian IT-ITES sector directly employed over
9,20,000 people in 2005-06. In addition to the direct economic impacts,
growth of this sector has also indirectly contributed to economic and
employment growth in other parts of the economy such as the
increased demand for commercial and residential real estate, catalysing
urban development, and playing a significant role in driving demand
for other commercial services such as retail, hospitality and
transportation, etc.
35. The DoIT have also informed that with only 10 percent of the
US$ 300 billion market potential addressed so far, there has been
significant headroom for growth. Further, with the global offshoring
market continuing to grow rapidly, as the proven benefits of offshoring
(also termed global sourcing or global delivery) induce more and more
companies to adopt these practices and providers develop the
capabilities to offer more sophisticated products and services—the size
of the overall pie has also been expanding.
36. In his address at the special session of NASSCOM-2006 India
Leadership Forum, the Hon. President of India Dr. A.P .J. Abdul Kalam
had asked the industry to “aspire to increase our market share to
$200 billion in the IT services, ITES and BPO sector. While the targets
presented in this paper are relatively modest compared to this
aspiration, our analysis indicates that certain concerns and challenges
need to be addressed urgently for the industry to even achieve these
targets. These issues have been analysed and required policy actions
have been recommended. Further, it has been proposed that a
committee be reconstituted to conduct a mid term review of the
progress on recommended policy action and their impacts and may

15
consider and upwards revision of the industry revenue targets, based
on the observed success.”
37.India has been fundamentally advantaged and uniquely
positioned to sustain its global leadership position, grow its offshore
IT-ITES industries at an annual rate of 24-25 percent, sustain nearly 10
million jobs, and generate export revenues of about US$ 86 billion by
2012. Additionally , this export growth can be further accelerated through
deep and enduring innovation by industry participants. Such extensive
innovation could generate an additional US$ 15-20 billion in export
revenue over the next five to ten years.
38. When asked about the initiatives taken/proposed to be taken
for the Eleventh Plan, it was stated that the Planning Commission has
constituted a Working Group on Information Technology sector in
connection with the exercise relating to formulation of the Eleventh
Five Year Plan (2007-12) for Communication and Information Sector.
The Working Group has set-up certain study teams to make
recommendations in their respective sectors to formulate the Eleventh
Five Year Plan for Information Technology Sector. Accordingly, a Study
Team has been constituted for “the Exports of Computer Software and
services”, where in, following points have been recommended:—
(a) Improving the supply of suitable talent
(b) Building adequate basic, business and social infrastructure
(c) Ensuring a favourable policy, business policy and regulatory
environment, with a special focus on encouraging SMEs and
new ventures
(d) Continue the Benefits provided by the STP Scheme
(e) Strengthen the IP Protection, Data Privacy and Information
Security Environment in the Country
(f) Support SME Segment Growth
(g) Ensuring adequate access to venture capitals
(h) Global trade development and promoting global free trade
in services
(i) Fostering a sustainable eco-system for innovation and R&D.
39. The Committee have learnt that with income tax concessions
for Software Technology Parks of India (STPIs) scheduled to expire by
March, 2009 and Ministry of Commerce’s announcement of the Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) scheme, the Companies under STPI scheme

16
have expressed their concern about the sustainability of the STPI
scheme. The SEZ scheme in its present form does not meet the objective
of spreading the growth of the software industry across smaller cities
and towns, whereas STPI scheme provides this flexibility .
40. Asked in this context, DoIT have stated that the Software
Technology Park (STP) scheme has been a standing scheme as per the
Handbook of Procedure Vol. I (updated as on 7th April 2006). However,
tax holiday exemption under section 10A/10B would be available only
upto 31st March 2009. As per the Department of Commerce, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry out of the 234 valid formal approvals
granted for setting up SEZs in the country, 146 are Information
Technology (IT)/Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES)/
Electronics Hardware (EH) SEZs of which 37 have since been modified.
Besides, in principle approval has been granted for 31 IT/ITES/EH
SEZs. It may be pointed out that the Special Economic Zones Rules
2006 does not allow for conversion of existing units to SEZs. An
amendment to Section 10AA of the Income Tax Act has been proposed
in the Finance Bill 2007 to restrict the corporate tax exemption to new
units of SEZ. The phasing out of tax concessions with effect from 1st
April 2009 will have considerable impact on the Information Technology
(IT) industry.
41. It has further been informed that the STPI had appointed
M/s Ernst & Young as a consultant to commission a study in order
to have independent view and assess the impact of SEZ Act and
phasing out of concessions under STP scheme on software industry.
After completion of the study on 17 April, 2006, the Committee, chaired
by Member Secretary, Planning Commission with Secretaries from
Department of Commerce, Information Technology, Revenue and
Economic Affairs as members submitted its report.
42. On the issue of extension of fiscal benefits 2009-10 to existing
STPI units, the report says that there was intrinsic merit for doing so
as it does not make much sense to force existing STPI units from
existing locations to SEZs for availing fiscal benefits, already available
under existing STPI scheme (upto 209). It would be much easier to
extend similar fiscal benefits under 10 A and 10 B of Income Tax Act
beyond 2009. Such an amendment may be taken up by Department of
IT separately. ITES which encompass Business Process Outsourcing
(BPO) and Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) sectors work
internationally on slim margin & migrate from one location to another
depending on comparative advantage. In this sector, there will be
distinct advantage where the developer develops and owns the bricks

17
and mortar assets and the BPO company hires premises as a plug and
play operation.
43. In this context, it has been stated that as per the
recommendation of the above said committee, the Department of
Information Technology may initiate action to obtain approval of
Ministry of Finance and Cabinet Approval for IT Act amendments
separately. DoIT have, therefore, taken up the proposal for extension
of tax benefits under section 10 A and 10 B of the Income Tax Act
1961 for Software Technology Park units for 10 years with the
concerned Ministries.
44. During evidence, the Director General, STPI submitted:—
“The Central Sales Tax is fully exempted for SEZs, but it is
reimbursed in the case of STPIs. Even though there is no net
revenue for Government, it is a cumbersome procedure. So, we
have requested that we should be given the same facilities on par
with SEZ. That is the submission that industry has been making
and also we are supporting……….SEZ is fully exempt. We said
that the Government should exempt STP/EHTP units on similar
basis.”
(ii) IT Hardware Manufacturing
45. India has a potential to develop and manufacture Electronics/
IT Hardware for the global markets and gain higher global share
besides meeting the country’s future requirement in the converging
areas of information, communication and entertainment. However, the
growth of Indian Electronics/IT Hardware industry has not been
consistent with the market potential. The industry suffers disability
factors on account of high incidence of duties/taxes, inadequate
infrastructure, high cost of finance, transaction cost, freight and power,
low volume of production and inverted custom duties structure in
some products, etc.
46. As regards steps taken by Government to give a boost to
Electronics/IT Hardware manufacturing, it has been informed that the
Government has identified growth of Electronics and IT Hardware
manufacturing sector as a thrust area.
47. While examining the Demands for Grants of the DoIT for the
year 2006-07, the Committee had noted that the DoIT had prepared a
discussion paper on “The Conceptual Policy Framework to promote
growth of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry” in

18
consultation with the Industry associations and submitted the same to
the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) in
September 2005. The mandate of the NMCC was to provide a
continuing forum for policy dialogue to energise and sustain the growth
of manufacturing industry including IT hardware. NMCC was expected
to finalise the Policy by 15th January, 2006. The main objectives of the
proposed package of incentives for the Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Sector were as follows:
•T o make the industry globally competitive
•T o attract more FDI in the industry
•T o bring down the prices of the end products
•T o bring down the production cost
•T o increase volumes to take advantage of economies and
efficiencies of scale
•T o increase the demand
•T o compensate for disabilities until the basic infrastructure
constraints that the nation faces are removed, and
•T o move towards total taxation level of 10-15% in the next
3-5 years.
48. It was subsequently informed that a copy of the discussion
paper was forwarded to the PMO. It was proposed to the PMO to set
up a Task Force with representatives from the concerned Ministries/
Departments. From the Annual Report (2006-07), it has been observed
that the said Task Force was set up by the PMO to examine the
proposals/suggestions contained in the above-mentioned discussion
paper and the existing government policies/procedures and recommend
suitable amendments/measures/incentives so as to make India a hub
for electronics/IT hardware manufacturing.
49. In a written information furnished to the Committee, it has
been stated that the first meeting of the Task Force was held on
20.4.2006. The Task Force constituted a Group under the Chairmanship
of Member Secretary , Planning Commission to look into all relevant
aspects of the matter and give its recommendations regarding
appropriate fiscal as well as other benefits for the Electronics/IT
Hardware Industry for consideration of the Task Force. Meetings of
this Group were held on 10.5.2006, 13.7.2006 and 29.11.2006. The Group

19
has submitted its Report on 6.3.2007 to the Task Force to enable it to
finalise its recommendations to promote the growth of electronics/IT
Hardware Manufacturing.
50. It is pertinent to mention that while examining the Demands
for Grants for the year 2003-04 of the Department of Information
Technology, it was informed that IT Task Force constituted by the
Prime Minister had given three Reports-first on Software, the second
on Hardware and the third was a mixture in the sense that it was
about the overall picture. The first Software Report had
107 recommendations and a large part of it were accepted and therefore
the software policy was in place. On IT hardware policy, there had
been discussions and they were in the process of formulating a policy
because it had gone up to the Cabinet, up to Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA).
VII. Human Resource Development
51. The Committee drew the attention of the Department of
NASSCOM-McKinsey Report 2005 which indicates that the Indian
Industry has a target of USD 60 billion in exports by 2009-10 which
translates to an estimated demand for 8,50,000 IT professionals and
1.4 million ITES-BPO professionals by 2010. With offshore penetration
for both IT as well as ITES-BPO services estimated at about 10 percent,
and offshore adoption rising rapidly, demand for these services from
India would continue on its high growth trajectory. Besides, the Indian
IT Industry has been growing at a faster pace and more and more
Companies have been setting up their businesses in India. The
developing business demands an appropriate sized and skilled
workforce. However, in the current scenario, many graduates coming
out of academic institutions are unable to meet the IT Industry’s
requirements.
52. Asked about the steps taken to bridge the gap between the
industry and academia by forming suitable talent as per the
requirement of IT Industry. DoIT replied that the Ministry of Human
Resource Development had constituted a Working Group under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Higher Education for making
recommendations to the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) on improving
the supply of suitable talent in the IT & BPO Sectors. The
recommendations were submitted to the PMO on 6th September 2006.
The Working Group observed that “the All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE) has projected that by the year 2009, there may not

20
be any shortage of manpower for the IT Sector provided that there is
10 percent growth in the enrolment. However, there would be a
considerable gap between the demand and supply of IT manpower
(about 0.26 million) by 2012 which calls for increasing the enrolment
in the colleges and opening of new colleges. The AICTE has been
taking steps to speed up the enrolment to engineering stream to touch
the figure of about 1 million by 2010-11 from the current level of
about 0.50 million.”
53. The DoIT have simultaneously informed that as per the
feedback of the industry, the major challenge has been to make the
existing engineering graduates employable. It was recommended by
the Working Group that Finishing Schools were required to be started
immediately under Government-industry partnership for engineering
graduates. Seven NITs at Surathkal, Durgapur, Warangal, Jaipur, Calicut,
Trichi and Kurukshetra have been identified for starting these Finishing
Schools on a pilot scale. Ministry of HRD has been in the process of
launching finishing school courses in these seven NITs from May 2007.
Formulation of model curriculum and syllabus would be an outcome
of these Pilot Finishing Schools. This in future could be made part of
the engineering curriculum so as to make it compatible with industry
needs.
54. As regards the preparedness of the Department of Information
Technology to develop skilled workforce for the IT Industry , it has
been stated that they have constituted a Study Team on Human
Resource Development under the Working Group on IT Sector for the
11th Five Year Plan to cope with the challenges placed by the rapid
growth of IT/ITES Industry and the resultant manpower needs. The
Study Team has addressed the issues pertaining to the shortage of
skilled workforce in the ITES-BPO industry and made several
recommendations to sustain desirous growth in this field. The Report
of the Working Group has been submitted to the Planning Commission
for their consideration. DoIT also proposes to spread the concept of
Finishing Schools for ITs/ITES sector by way of launching pilot projects
in the area(s) of teacher’s training/courseware development/conducting
Master Trainers’ Training Programmes/bridge courses, etc.
55. In the above context, the Department have stated that their
HRD activities have been aimed at generation of trained human
resources for the manufacturing & service sectors of electronics and IT
Industry. Initiatives include identifying gaps emerging from the formal
sector, planning programmes in informal and formal sectors for meeting
these gaps. In pursuance, projects have been initiated for generation

21
of quality manpower in the area of Information Security, VLSI Design;
setting up of a Regional Institute for e-Learning and Information
Technology (RIELIT) at Kohima, Nagaland for creating skilled
manpower in the area of Computer Science/IT and setting up of ITES/
BPO training facilities in Jammu & Kashmir and in the North-East
region. In addition to above, C-DAC and DOEACC have been engaged
in conducting industry oriented education programme both in formal
and non-formal sectors. DOEACC has been implementing ITES/BPO
courses in the North-East and Jammu & Kashmir region. Further steps
would be initiated to spread this course to other DOEACC centres
and its accredited institutes spread across the country.
56. As informed, an approach paper for Indian ITES Certification
Test (IICT) and ITES manpower training scheme was prepared and
submitted for internal discussions between all Directors of DOEACC
Society. Meanwhile, NASSCOM and Government of Rajasthan
(Department of Information Technology & Communication) have
launched an employment benchmarking test-called NASSCOM
Assessment of Competence (NAC) as pilot phase for ITES-BPO Sector
during November, 2006. The NAC would create a continuous pipeline
of talent through continuous assessment of candidates on key skills by
a national standard assessment. NASSCOM proposes to spread the
NAC across India. DOEACC has been assessing the progress of the
NAC Scheme and would undertake the matter further on need basis.
57. When enquired about the exact role of DOEACC in this matter,
DoIT stated that based on the recommendations of the Task Force set
up by DoIT, DOEACC was asked to prepare a methodology for Indian
ITES Certification Test and ITES Manpower Training Scheme.
Accordingly, an Approach Paper has been prepared. Meanwhile,
NASSCOM has launched an employment benchmarking scheme called
NASSCOM Assessment of Competence (NAC).  DOEACC has not been
directly associated with the NAC programme. However, DOEACC
would observe the progress of NAC and its’ impact on the industry,
based on which complementary training efforts could be initiated.
58. As regards the new initiatives proposed during the 11th Five
Year Plan for Manpower Development, DIT stated that the Pilot projects
have been proposed to be evolved in the following areas based on the
recommendations of the Working Group on HRD in IT:
• Capacity building in selected areas (Nanotechnology, Power
and Communication, Computer Science, Biotechnology,
Infrastructure, Energy, Manufacturing, Mechatronics) to
address the requirement of emerging knowledge economy.

22
•T echnology Incubation Centres and Hardware Infrastructure
facility for entrepreneur development.
• Integration of new courses in ITI and support to Women’s
Polytechnics.
• Spreading the concept of Finishing Schools teachers training
by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc.
59. The Committee further enquired whether the steps indicated
above would be sufficient to bridge the gap between the demand and
supply of the IT skilled workforce for the present and future
requirements. In reply, the DoIT stated that the demand-supply gap
can only be addressed with the concerted involvement of the
Government as well as the Private Sector. MHRD will continue to
play a major role to address the issue of manpower requirement. The
steps of DoIT alone will not be sufficient to bridge the gap between
demand and supply of IT skilled workforce for the present and future.
The proposed initiatives of DoIT primarily have been directed towards
capacity building exercise in certain selected niche areas to upcoming
needs of knowledge-based industry. Specific pilot programmes in the
areas indicated would be evolved by a Working/Expert Group on
HRD in IT being constituted by DoIT.
60. In this context, a representative of DoIT submitted during
evidence as under:
“In the IT-enabled services, there are two types of services, one is
the call-centric operations which is the BPO which requires
predominantly soft skills like being communicative, helpful nature
and a person who is good at keeping the caller engaged online
and help him out and that attitude are all called soft skills.
Language is one of the most important components of it because
most of our operations that we are getting today are from the
English speaking people, typically from the United States. The other
sector is domain specific IT-enabled services which are mainly in
the software services where it is of technical nature and the
expertise required of the call-centric agents. Now, the DOEACC
has been identifying new areas and domains which enable the
foreign companies are outsourcing to India. We are constantly
developing syllabus for training such students and we have
designed courses in Bio-Informatics, banking, insurance and also
designing such courses which IT-enabled vertical domain specific
centres are using….. On the generic skills, the DOEACC was a
pioneer in starting such courses in the North-Eastern region where

23
we felt neither the private sector industry reached out to the
students of the North-East, nor was there any private enterprise
set up. The DOEACC set up that with the fund that we gave from
the Department of Development of North Eastern Region. Some of
the course were carried to Jammu and Kashmir where we are
running these courses under the Prime Minister’s programme in
Srinagar and in Jammu. We propose to have these courses in other
States also and here again the DOEACC would require some
Budgetary support and if we have some funds, then we will pass
it on to DOEACC to run these courses from other centres also.”
VIII. National Informatics Centre (NIC)
(i) General
61. The Committee were informed that DoIT proposed an allocation
of Rs. 427 crore for implementing various projects under NIC for the
year 2007-08, against which the Planning Commission has approved
only Rs. 320 crore. When asked as to how NIC would have utilised
had they got the proposed amount, the Director General, NIC submitted
as under:
…. In our planning process, we are going to have at least three
centers—Delhi, Hyderabad and Pune. We have our own large
infrastructure and connect them on to 100 MBPS backup. These
three data centers will not only work as disaster centre for each
other, but also will provide backup systems for the State Centres,…
already Gujarat Centre has done the backup at the Hyderabad
Centre…… if we had got more money, Apart from the disaster
Centre, we would have business continuity planning, which needs
much more resources in terms of how quickly I restore the system,
if it goes wrong.
62. The Committee wanted to know about the recovery procedure
available in case of a system break down. To this DG, NIC replied:
“We are looking into that aspect. The Secretary was mentioning
some days back about this—if my office is connected to his office
and his office to the Bangalore office and if something goes wrong,
will I get connected? I said, we cannot because we have not
considered the business continuity planning system. What is
happening is this NICNET is very heavily used now. Even if the
system is shut down for 5-6 minutes, we get a lot of complaints.
We need to work out alternatives and linkages. While within the
network and within the data centre, redundancy has been built,

24
that does not give us the continuity planning. We need to take a
re-look at the whole design and to make sure that 15 minutes
certain services are restored and all others are also restored within
another 15 minutes, etc. We are looking at the moment, at that,
and we need to invest very heavily on that.
63. In the context of reduction in annual plan allocation, the
Secretary, DoIT further stated as under:
“… In the case of NICNET, for 05-06, we have had Rs. 260 crore;
for the next year; Rs. 280 crore and this year, it is Rs. 320 crore.
Even it is not enough for 2-3 reasons. We would like to have
business continuity plans; we would like to have more protection
to the systems which are in place… Our hope is to spend more
in this crucial area. But there is another pressure on NICNET. He
had mentioned that its work is going to be arranged at higher
levels with more bandwidth. Now, he is setting up the network
and structure. But he has to pay more for higher bandwidth
charges. That itself will require a very specific outgo of funds.
Then we will have to choose between spending more on protection
of systems and also he has to spend more on bandwidth and for
the network, which is building up…”
64. In the information furnished to the Committee subsequently, it
has been stated that due to the reduced outlay, activities in respect of
Cyber Security, business continuity planning, Disaster Recovery Centres,
E-Governance Standards, Land Records Computerisation, knowledge
Management and Training, strengthening of Districts, Upgradation of
Video Conferencing facility, Geographic Information System, Data
Centres, Last Mile Solution, etc. have to be carried out on a reduced
scale.
(ii) Information Kiosks in all the High Courts
65. During 2006-07, a target was kept by NIC to set up Information
Kiosks in all the High courts and their Benches, Upgrade LAN and
Servers to High Courts and to develop digital Signature and related
Software to High Courts by September, 2006. However proposals have
been stated to be under process as on 31.12.2006. When asked about
the present status in this regard, it has been stated that subsequent to
this proposal, the Govt. has given approval for the computerization of
13000 district and sub-ordinate courts through out the country and
upgradation of the computer/IT facilities at Supreme Court and
21 High Courts at a cost of Rs. 442.00 crore. NIC has been the
implementing agency for this project. Accordingly, upgradation of the

25
IT facilities including provision for information Kiosk, LAN and servers
and development of digital signature would be undertaken under this
project.
(iii) Government Informatics Training Programme
66. The Committee have learnt that under the sponsorship of
DoP&T various courses have been conducted for Government staff.
Workshops on e-Governance was also conducted. In a subsequent note,
it has been informed that during the year 2007-08, NIC propose to
organise the following programmes under the sponsorship of DoP&T,
which would be open to the Government Officials all over India:
1. ICT Tools for e-Readiness in Government:
Venue Moduel I (10 days) Module II (10 days)
NIC, Bhopal Sep 10-21, 2007 Nov 19-30, 2007
NIC, Chennai Jul 23-Aug 3, 2007 Sep 10-21, 2007
NIC, Delhi Oct 22-Nov 2, 2007 Jan 7-18, 2008
NIC, Guwahati Aug 20-31, 2007 Nov 12-23, 2007
NIC, Hyderabad Sept 17-28, 2007 Nov 12-23, 2007
NIC, Pune Jun 25-Jul 6, 2007 Aug 6-17, 2007
NIC, Pune Dec 3-14, 2007 Feb 4-15, 2008
1. Workshop on e-Governance
Venue Dates
NIC, Chennai Dec 10-14, 2007
NIC, Delhi Aug 6-10, 2007 & Feb 4-8, 2008
It has also been informed that such programmes would also be
conducted on demand basis for the States on e-Governance Projects.
(iv) Video Conferencing
67. As informed, NIC has set up video-conferencing facility in 490
locations using cost effective solutions. Video conferencing has been
extended to districts of Assam, Tamil Nadu, Jammu and Kashmir and
Bihar. This facility has been extensively used for monitoring of various

26
projects and discussions. Video conferencing facilities are being used
for conducting remote interactions, inaugurations and for delivering
speeches on more than 50 locations. Madhya Pradesh Government has
conducted 390 VC sessions between Government secretariat and districts
and it has been published as a national record in Limca book of
records.
68. In reply to a specific query, it has been informed that NIC has
provided Video-conferencing facilities in 21 states so far up to district
level. They are Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Manipur, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttrakhand and Uttar
Pradesh. Further the following States and Union Territories have
number of Video-conferencing studios as indicated:
 1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands — 2
 2. Lakshadweep Islands — 3
 3. Pondicherry — 1
 4. Dadra Nagar Haveli — 1
 5. Daman and Diu — 1
 6. Andhra Pradesh — 2
 7. Karnataka — 1
 8. Kerala — 2
 9. Goa — 1
10. Gujarat — 1
11. Haryana — 1
12. West Bengal — 1
69. To further query, DoIT informed that all the Video-conferencing
locations in the States and Union Territories are being used widely by
various Central and State Government Departments, Government
Agencies and other users of NICNET domain. State Informatics Officers
of NIC are in continuous touch with various secretaries to promote
the use of NIC’s Video-conferencing Services. State-wise Multipoint

27
Videoconferencing usage for the year 2006-2007 has been given as
under:
State/UT No. of Hours
12
1. Arunachal Pradesh — 241
2. Assam — 427
3. Bihar — 976
4. Chhattisgarh — 3039
5. Himachal Pradesh — 563
6. Jammu and Kashmir — 95
7. Jharkhand — 409
8. Meghalaya — 294
9. Mizoram — 200
10. Nagaland — 176
11. Manipur — 109
12. Maharashtra — 84
13. Madhya Pradesh — 8720
14. Orissa — 652
15. Punjab — 216
16. Rajasthan — 1621
17. Sikkim — 155
18. Tamil Nadu — 865
19. Tripura — 191
20. Uttrakhand — 2090
21. Uttar Pradesh — 967
22. Anandaman and Nicobar Islands — 64
23. Lakshadweep Islands — 18
24. Pondicherry — 31

28
12
25. Dadra Nagar Haveli — 21
26. Daman and Diu — 6
27. Andhra Pradesh — 334
28. Karnataka — 207
29. Kerala — 46
30. Goa — 15
31. Gujarat — 66
32. Haryana — 17
33. West Bengal — 167
IX. Media Lab Asia
70. Media Lab Asia was set up as a non-profit organisation under
Section 25 of the Companies Act with a vision of leveraging the
information and communication technologies and other advanced
technologies for the benefit of the common man. The MLAsia works
with the academic/research institutions, industry, NGOs and the
Government to bring these innovations for the benefit of the masses.
However, it has been observed that the expenditure on MLA project
was nil during the 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06. During examination
of DFG (2006-07), it was clarified that MLA was released a sum of
Rs. 65 crores during first 2 years of its operation. MLA had been
using the funds already available with them for ongoing projects and
for the new projects initiated by them. Since the funds were already
available with them, no additional funds have been released by the
Government. Further, during 2006-07, the expenditure was likely to be
Rs. 10 crore. It was informed that the restructuring of Media Lab Asia
would be completed on appointment of a full time MD/CEO, who
will also induct people at senior level. On completion, Media Lab Asia
could operate at its full capacity and also utilise the funds at a level
originally envisaged in the project proposal.
71. Now with a full time MD & CEO, the Committee wanted to
know whether the restructuring of MLA has been done and also the
details of projects proposed to be undertaken during the year
2007-2008. DoIT have replied that the full time MD&CEO of Media
Lab Asia joined w.e.f. October 16, 2006. He has initiated action for
recruitment of other officers and staff and their selection is under

29
process and as expected the Core Team of Media Lab Asia office would
be in place by 30.06.2007 and restructuring of Media Lab Asia would
thus be completed.
72. It has further been informed that the Working Groups in each
of the thrust areas viz. ICT interventions in (i) Healthcare (ii) Education
(iii) Special Education (Empowerment of the Disabled) (iv) Livelihood
Generation and Rural Connectivity met between November-2006 and
February-2007 and recommended taking up of new projects.
73. Asked whether the allocation of Rs. 10 crore would be adequate
to implement various MLA projects during 2007-08, DoIT replied that
the amount allocated was grossly inadequate considering the massive
task of reaching 6.5 lakhs villages with ICT based personalised services
(Development & Pilot testing). The sub-committee on R&D on IT
constituted for making recommendations on 11th Five Year Plan
recommended an allocation of Rs. 150 crores per annum for each year
of the Eleventh Five Year Plan amounting to Rs. 750 crore in total for
Media Lab Asia.
74. In view of the reduced allocation, the Committee enquired
about the further course of action proposed. In reply, it has been stated
that a number of appropriate projects have been initiated and more
have been identified in line with the emphasis of Eleventh Five Year
Plan. DoIT have initiated action for taking up for review of the Media
Lab Asia activities through an Evaluation Committee as per the Cabinet
decision and thereafter action would be taken for allocating additional
appropriate funds for the 11th Plan including the FY 2007-08.
X. Nano-Technology Development Programmes
75. Nano-Technology has been stated to be an emerging, disruptive
and interdisciplinary technology involving development of
nanomaterials, devices and systems, finds revolutionary applications
in almost all fields of science and engineering. Widely recognised as
the next technological revolution, Nano-Technology has attracted the
attention of scientists and engineers all over the world and would
have a profound effect on almost all industry sectors and application
areas. Cognizant of the potential of Nano-technology, governments in
the developed countries have been funding R&D in this area for quite
some time.
76. The Committee have observed that during 2005-06, Rs. 40.43
crore were spent on Nano-Technology Development Programmes
though Rs. 30 crore only had been allocated. Further during 2006-07,

30
BE of Rs. 40 crore kept for the scheme was reduced to Rs. 34 crore at
RE stage and the expenditure has been likely to be Rs. 34 crore. During
2007-08, although Rs. 40 crore were proposed by the Department for
the scheme, only Rs. 29 crore has been sanctioned. When asked whether
the allocation made for the scheme was found adequate, DoIT replied
that under the Semi Conductor Integrated Circuit Lay Out design
(SICLD) Act activities, an allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore was sought for
the Financial Year 2007-08 out of which Rs. 0.75 crore has only been
allocated. They can only continue their routine SICLD Registry activities
and will not be able to initiate the other new related major programme
i.e. Creating a national IPR Institute for Semiconductor Layout Design
in 2007-08 as planned. They would need additional funds as sought,
to start this activity and therefore would take up the matter again at
the RE stage, otherwise the programme will loose momentum if
adequate funding for subject statutory programme would not come
up.
XI. Technology Development for Indian Languages
77. From the material furnished to the Committee, it has been
observed that for the scheme Technology Development for Indian
Languages, the Department of IT had proposed Rs. 30 crore but the
Planning Commission has approved Rs. 11 crore only. Asked about
the projects proposed to be undertaken, the Department of Information
Technology stated that it has various on-going projects to be continued
in the year 2007-08. The details of the on-going as well as new projects
proposed to be initiated in the area of speech technology in Indian
languages, linguistic resources and capacity building, localization and
basic R&D projects in Language computing have been given as under:—
Sl.No. Name of the Project Amount
(In Rs. Crore)
12 3
Ongoing Projects
1. Proliferation of Language Technology 3.73
(National-Roll-Out Plan)
2. Mission Mode Projects
2.1. Development of Eng-Indian Language (IL) 3.04
Machine Translation System
2.2 Development of IL-IL Machine 3.30
Translation System

31
12 3
2.3 Development of Cross Lingual Information Access 3.91
2.4 Development of robust printed text 3.01
document recognition system
2.5 Development of On-line Handwriting 1.96
recognition system
2.6 Development of English-Indian Language 1.94
Machine Translation System with Angla-
Bharti-approach
3. Other On-going Projects
3.1 Standardization of IPA-IL for Indian languages 0.08
3.2 Development of Phonetic engine for Indian 0.15
languages
3.3 Development of Text-to-speech for Nepali language 0.16
3.4 Specialised Manpower Development in 2.00
Language Technology
A. Budget Requirement for On-Going Projects Rs. 23.28 crore
New Projects for 2007-08
4.1 Development of Linguistic Resources and 3.72
Capacity Building
4.2 Basic R&D projects for Language Computing 3.00
B. Budget Requirement for New Projects Rs. 6.72 crore
Total Budget Requirements (A+B) = Rs. 23.28 crore + Rs. 6.72 crore = Rs. 30.00
crore
78. When asked about the strategy adopted to complete the
proposed programmes for Technology Development for Indian
Languages during 2007-08, it has been stated that under the ‘National
Roll-Out Plan’ project of TDIL, software tools and fonts for 10 Indian
languages namely Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Assamese, Kannada,
Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi and Urdu languages have been
released in public domain. Software tools and fonts for remaining
official Indian languages are being developed/consolidated. 6 mission-
mode projects (Sl.No. 2.1 to 2.6) are being implemented in consortium

32
mode and these projects are being technically monitored by various
Project Review and Steering Groups (PRSGs) for their smooth
implementation. The mission mode projects are expected to develop
prototypes of various deployable systems and the new projects would
be initiated as per the recommendations of TDIL Working Group.

33
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
I. Tenth Plan
1. On scrutiny of Demand No. 15 in respect of the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Information Technology), the Committee observe that the total
Budgetary allocation for fiscal 2007-2008 is Rs. 1536 crore with the
Plan Section accounting for Rs. 1500 crore and the Non-Plan section
for Rs. 36 crore. As compared to the Budgetary Support for the year
2006-2007 which was Rs. 1126 crore, consisting of Rs. 1090 crore in
Plan section and Rs. 36 crore in the Non-Plan section, the Committee
note that the overall budget for the year 2007-2008 has been increased
by Rs. 410 crore which marks an increase of 36.41%. The Committee
also note with satisfaction that the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) have been able to almost fully utilise the funds
allocated to them in all the five years of the Tenth Plan. Out of
the Plan Outlay of Rs. 470 crore, Rs. 470 crore, Rs. 750 crore,
Rs. 929.30 crore and Rs. 1090 crore during the years from 2002-2003
to 2006-2007 respectively, the corresponding utilization had been
Rs. 465.35 crore, Rs. 492.88 crore, Rs. 644.74 crore, Rs. 880.10 crore
and Rs. 1090.00 crore (expected). Having seen a steady upward trend
both in Plan allocation and utilization, the Committee are hopeful
that DoIT will leave no stone unturned to ensure optimum utilization
of the funds allocated to them in fiscal 2007-2008.
2. Over the years, the Committee have been closely observing
that drastic cuts continue to be made in the Plan Allocation for a
strategic and fast growing sector like information technology as
compared to the proposed allocations by the DoIT. During the Tenth
Plan, the allocations proposed were Rs. 937.19 crore, Rs. 1146.90 crore,
Rs. 1294.38 crore, Rs. 1400.67 crore and Rs. 1516.00 crore for the
years 2002-2003 to 2006-2007 respectively, against which the allocations
made by the Planning Commission were only Rs. 470.00 crore,
Rs. 470.00 crore, Rs. 650.00 crore, Rs. 882.00 crore and Rs. 1090.00
crore respectively. The DoIT have conceded that as a result of the
reduced allocations, the Department have resort to postponement or
slowing down of some of their projects pertaining to important
schemes like E-Governance, R&D, NIC, etc. In this context, the

34
Committee would like to emphasise the need to provide increased
Plan support to DoIT keeping in view the sustained double-digit
revenue growth, steady expansion into newer service-lines and an
unprecedented rise in investments by MNCs registered in the IT
sector in the recent years. They trust that Planning Commission will
take into consideration these factors while finalising the Eleventh
Plan allocations with a view to ensuring that the current pace of
development in the IT sector is further encouraged.
II. Eleventh Plan & Demands for Grants 2007-2008
3. Having closely scrutinised the scheme-wise details of Annual
Plan allocations for 2007-2008, the Committee note that with the actual
allocation being only Rs. 1500 crore as against the proposed amount
of Rs. 2092.08 crore, there has been a cut of Rs. 592.08 crore. Out of
the allocation of Rs. 1500 crore to DoIT, Rs. 800 crore is meant for
e-Governance and Rs. 320 crore for NIC with only the remaining
Rs. 380 crore available for other schemes/programmes of DoIT. The
Committee sense that this will result in some of the crucial schemes
proposed in the Annual Plan being starved of funds. They are,
however, not inclined to go by the routine plea of DoIT that the
Plan Allocation will be reviewed during consultations with the
Planning Commission at the time of finalization of the Eleventh
Plan considering the past experience. They find that the allocation
was revised upward only once in the year 2003-2004 from Rs. 470
crore to Rs. 495 crore. During 2002-2003 and 2006-07 the allocation
remained unchanged at RE stage at Rs. 470 crore and Rs. 1900 crore
respectively. During 2004-2005 and 2005-2006, the allocations were in
fact reduced at RE stage from Rs. 750 crore to Rs. 650 crore and
from Rs. 929.30 crore to Rs. 882 crore respectively notwithstanding
the good track record of utilization of allocated funds by the
Department in the previous years. The Committee, therefore, desire
that DoIT should plead their case effectively during the Plan
consultations and at the RE stage for enhancing the Plan allocations
to the IT sector in keeping with the emerging trends.
4. The Committee also note that the Planning Commission has
not yet finalised the Eleventh Plan proposals of DoIT though an
allocation of Rs. 1500 crore has been made for the Annual Plan
2007-2008. In the Committee’s opinion, the Eleventh Plan proposals
should have been finalised well before the commencement of the
Plan period so that the Department could have ensured their
preparedness for implementation of the Plan schemes right from
day on of the Plan period. As any further delay in finalisation of

35
the Plan proposals is likely to affect the implementation of the major
schemes envisaged in the Plan, the Committee stress that the Eleventh
Plan proposals in respect of the Department of Information
Technology be finalised expeditiously.
5. The Committee note that Manufacturing, Software Exports,
Domestic Software, Human Resource Development and Research &
Development are the major thrust areas of the Department of IT for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan and accordingly for the year 2007-2008
Manufacturing, Software Exports, Domestic Software are covered
under the major head, Infrastructure Development. After downsizing
the Annual Outlay for 2007-2008 by the Planning Commission, the
schemes for Research & Development, Infrastructure Development
and Human Resource Development were provided only Rs. 238 crore,
Rs. 884.70 crore and Rs. 44.50 crore respectively as compared to the
corresponding proposed allocation of Rs. 410.92 crore, Rs. 1120.16
crore and Rs. 122.00 crore. In the Committee’s opinion, sufficient
funds need to be made available to these schemes if electronics
Industry has to be given a boost for India’s long-term global
competitiveness. This is also required to sustain the country’s global
leadership in software exports, to increase domestic software
production and most importantly to meet the gap of demand and
supply of IT skilled professionals as per the requirement of the IT
industry. Besides, India’s expenditure on R&D ought to be increased,
as at present it is merely 0.80% of the GDP . Needless to say, DoIT
have a significant role to play in supplementing the efforts of the
IT Industry in all the above-mentioned areas. The Committee trust
that the Department would effectively project the above demands at
RE stage for obtaining additional funds so that their targets in these
areas do not remain illusory.
6. The Committee note that the Department has taken the
initiative quite recently to undertake comprehensive, in-depth and
independent evaluation of Plan schemes and programmes under
implementation in order to measure their developmental outcomes,
cost effectiveness and efficiency so as to provide vital inputs for
finalising programmes for the Eleventh Plan. The Plan Schemes
selected for Impact Evaluation Studies (IES) in 2006-07 on the basis
of their importance and implication for the growth of the sector
were Software Technology Parks in India, Convergence,
Communication, Broadband Technologies and Strategic Electronics,
Telemedicine and Technology Development in Indian Languages. The
Committee feel that such an exercise should have been done much
earlier. With the Plan period having commenced, the Impact

36
Evaluation Studies in respect of the above mentioned schemes should
be completed expeditiously so that the findings of the studies could
serve as valuable inputs while formulating Plan strategies and
allocations for the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like
to be informed of the findings of Impact Evaluation Studies (IES)
conducted on the schemes/programmes during 2006-07.They also
desire that the DoIT should continue to conduct such studies
periodically and take corrective measures in the areas found wanting
in order to improve upon the process of effective implementation of
the Plan Schemes.
III. National e-Governance Plan (NeGP)
7. The Committee find that one of the critical areas in
implementation of National e-Governance Programme is the provision
of core and support infrastructure, which will be common for all
the projects across the board, and it is the responsibility of DoIT to
provide it by March, 2008. Core and support infrastructure include
State Wide Area Network (SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs) and
Common Service Centres (CSCs). The Committee hope that the
infrastructure, on which the timely implementation of National e-
Governance Programme depends would be ready in all the States
by the middle of 2008 as indicated by the DoIT.
8. The Committee take a serious note that in some States/Union
Territories, namely Arunachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Daman and Diu, Goa and Andhra
Pradesh, the progress in respect of establishment of SWAN has been
lagging far behind the schedule. With the preparatory work having
not been completed by these States/Union Territories, the SWAN
proposals, as felt by the Department, might not be ready even by
the middle of 2008. In fact, the progress has been extremely slow
even though the scheme for the establishment of SWAN at a total
outlay of Rs. 3334 crore was approved by the Government on 28th
March, 2005. While taking serious note of the inordinate delay in
submission of SWAN proposals by these States, the Committee desire
that the Department should pursue the matter with the remaining
States/UTs and make all out efforts to operationalise the SWAN
project in all the States/UTs within the time frame.
9. As per the Outcome Budget (2007-08), a target had been fixed
to set up 30,000 ICT based kiosks at village levels across the country
by March, 2007 and 1,00,000 kiosks by December, 2007. However, as
of now only 19000 CSCs are likely to be established by March, 2008

37
and a total of 84000 CSCs would be set up by August, 2008. By the
end of October 2008, the Scheme is expected to be completely rolled
out in the country, subject to the speed with which the State
Governments implement the Scheme. As establishment of CSCs is
basically the responsibility of the Department, the Committee stress
that they should effectively monitor the implementation of the project
and also render necessary assistance to the States, wherever required,
so that CSCs are fully rolled out at least as per the revised schedule.
10. The Committee were earlier given to understand that as part
of core and support infrastructure of NeGP , DoIT have considered it
necessary to first complete the establishment of State Wide Area
Network (SWAN) and Common Service Centres (CSC) as these
projects require longer time frame for implementation as compared
to the State Data Centres. However, they feel concerned to learn that
State Data Centres are proposed to be set up only in 20 States by
March, 2008, the time by when SWAN project would be operational
in 28 States/UTs, as assured by DoIT. The Committee desire that the
Department should make serious efforts to establish the SDCs at a
faster speed so that the OSWANs and CSCs do not remain idle and
their benefits begin to accrue to the common people at the earliest.
11. The Committee note that the role of the DoIT, as stated in
the Cabinet approval for NeGP , is to be of the facilitator and catalyst
for the implementation of NeGP by various Ministries and State
Governments and also to provide technical assistance to them either
directly or in collaboration with external professional consultants.
They would serve as a Secretariat to the Apex Committee and assist
it in managing the programme. In addition, they would implement
pilot/infrastructure/technical/special projects and support components.
DoIT would also prepare a suitable template for preparing project
document, which could be used by individual Departments for
preparing their detailed project reports. The Committee have been
informed that for timely and effective roll out, it is necessary that
the programme is undertaken in a mission mode where each initiative
should state clear and well defined timelines, goals and deliverables.
Proper conceptualisation, preparation of detailed project documents
and mechanisms to ensure aspects of change management, awareness,
process reengineering, etc. would speed up the implementation
schedule of the programme. Issues of capacity building, setting up
of project and programme management and monitoring mechanisms
are also certain key requirements for timely and effective roll out of
NeGP . The Committee note that timely implementation of NeGP
would, to a great extent, depend on attending to these basic

38
responsibilities by DoIT. The Committee trust that DoIT would
explore all ways and means to ensure timely and effective
implementation of the NeGP for meeting all the e-Governance
requirements so that there would not be any delay in rolling out
the electronic services to the people of the country.
12. The Committee are given to understand that DoIT have been
facing difficulties in dealing with issues relating to Project
Conceptualization and Capacity Building. In order to accelerate the
implementation of various e-Governance projects, a review meeting
of e-Governance is proposed to be held soon by a high level body,
chaired by the Prime Minister. The Committee desire that DoIT
should utilise this opportunity to highlight and sort out the
difficulties being experienced by them in relation to various agencies
of the Government with a view to facilitating speedier
implementation of the programme.
13. The Committee observe that Programme Management Unit
(PMU) set up in the DoIT is to provide secretarial support for the
NeGP and technical cum managerial support to line Ministries/
Departments. A report prepared by PMU on the status of
implementation of NeGP is also being constantly updated based on
inputs mainly through the concerned line Ministries/Departments.
The Committee would like to be informed of the periodicity of
receiving these inputs from the line Ministries/Departments and the
mode of receiving them in the PMU. They recommend that inputs
in respect of projects implemented/to be implemented by the States/
UTs should also be obtained from them and used as the basis of the
report prepared by PMU. The Committee further welcome the move
by PMU officials to organise field visits to the concerned Ministries/
States.
14. The Committee note that 11 Market research agencies
empanelled by DoIT have been detailed to carry out impact
assessment of e-Governance initiatives across different States and
the Centre. In Phase I of the assessment, about 40 projects covering
10 States and four nationwide projects have been taken up. The
Committee recommend that specific time target for completion of
the assessment should be fixed so that the assessment reports would
be available at the earliest. The shortcomings in the implementation
of the programme on the basis of the assessments should be
communicated to the concerned Departments/States so that corrective
measures thereon could be initiated and the pace of implementation
of e-Governance programme speeded up.

39
15. As informed, the report submitted by PMU would provide a
key snapshot of the implementation status of Mission Mode Projects
under NeGP . DoIT is reportedly exploring the option of placing the
status of implementation of MMPs in the public domain. The
Committee believe that this step would play a meaningful role in
the implementation of NeGP as all the stakeholders will have access
to the status of implementation of MMPs bringing in transparency
in the system. They desire that the possibility of making the public
aware of the status of MMPs and inviting their feedback and
suggestions to facilitate their cooperation and participation, should
also be looked into.
16. The Committee note that in order to spread awareness and
promote usage of e-Governance amongst common man, the DoIT
have adopted a multi-pronged strategy involving multi-media
approach such as use of mass media, advocacy seminars and
workshops for implementers, sensitisation workshops for
implementing agencies, and or ground activities specific to the context
for rural audience. Currently the Department are in the process of
selecting and empanelling advertising agencies to carry out these
tasks. The Committee suggest that the mobilization process should
primarily target the common people who would ultimately be the
users and the strategy and the medium of advertising e-Governance
should be chosen keeping them in mind.
IV. Electronics and IT Sector
(i) Software T echnology Parks of India (STPIs)
17. The Committee express their concern over the drastic cut
that has been made in the allocation for STPI. Out of the proposed
allocation of Rs. 12 crores, the Planning Commission has approved
only Rs. 0.50 crore. However, the Committee hope that the projects
planned under the Scheme will not suffer, as assured by DoIT that
STPI would carry out their programmes with their internal accruals
and will not restrict their activities to the amount provided to them
in the budget for the year 2007-08.
18. The Committee note that at present there are 45 STPI centres
across the country and 5 more are in the pipeline. The Department
have commissioned a study to find out the potential sites for setting
up of STPI centres as they have a plan to set up at least one STPI
in each State. The Committee desire that the possibility of setting
up more STPI centres should be explored, particularly in smaller
cities, in order to generate employment opportunities for the youth
and also promote IT exports from across the country.

40
19. The Committee note with satisfaction that through the efforts
of STPI, software exports in 2006-2007 would be to the tune of Rs.
131,255 crore (estimated). Significantly, STPI accounts for over 92.56
percent of India’s software exports with total exports being to the
tune of Rs. 141,800 crore (estimated). However, it is a matter of serious
concern that the percentage of growth of software exports through
STPI units has been on a declining trend. The percentage of growth
registered was 44 percent, 36 percent and 30 per cent (estimated) in
the years, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively. Needless to
mention that with an ambitious target of achieving software export
of US$ 50 billion by 2008-2009 and US $60 billion by 2009-2010,
STPI will have to devise innovative strategies for stepping up
software exports by its units. It is in this context that the Committee
do not find any justification for reduction of Plan Allocation for
STPI. Instead, they feel that STPI should receive support from the
Government in terms of financial allocation and a hassle-free
environment congenial for its growth.
20. In their 29th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007)
relating to the Department, the Committee had expressed their serious
concern about the sustainability of STP Scheme after the emergence
of Special Economic Zones (SEZs). The SEZs Scheme in its present
form did not meet the objective of spreading the growth of software
industry and the companies under STP Scheme had expressed their
concern about the sustainability of the STP Scheme. Although the
STP Scheme is a standing scheme, the tax holiday would be available
to STPI units only up to 31st March, 2009 with the move to restrict
corporate tax exemption to only new units of SEZ. However, a
committee chaired by Member Secretary, Planning Commission with
Secretaries from Departments of Commerce, Information Technology,
Revenue and Economic Affairs as members had recommended further
extension of fiscal benefits to STPI units as their is no intrinsic
merit in forcing existing STPI units to move to SEZs for availing
the fiscal benefits. The Committee have been informed that based
on the recommendations of the above said committee, DoIT have
taken up with concerned Ministries a proposal for extension of tax
benefits under Section 10A and 10B of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to
STPI units for 10 years and granting to STPI units the same facilities
that are available to SEZs. The Committee trust that the matter would
be pursued to its logical conclusion and STPI units would be
provided with the same tax concessions that are available to SEZs.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final decision taken
in this regard.

41
21. The Committee observe that the export revenue earned by
Information Technology (IT) Software and Related Services have
grown from Rs. 6,723 crore in 1997-1998 to Rs. 104,500 crore in 2005-
2006 and are estimated to reach Rs. 141,800 crore in 2006-2007. India
now accounts for 65 percent of the global market in offshore IT and
46 percent of the ITES market. The growth of the sector has led to
tremendous pay-offs in terms of wealth creation and generation of
high quality employment. In addition to the direct economic impact,
the growth of this sector has also indirectly contributed to economic
and employment development in other parts of the economy such
as the increased demand for commercial and residential real estate,
catalysing urban development, and playing a significant role in
driving demand for other commercial services such as retail,
hospitality and transportation, etc. Looking at the tremendous
prospects of this sector, the Committee consider the reduction in the
Annual Plan allocation for the Scheme, Infrastructure Development
which includes software export, domestic software production and
hardware manufacturing, from the proposed amount of Rs. 1120.16
crore to Rs. 884.70 crore to be unfortunate. Even out of Rs. 884.70
crore provision made for Infrastructure Development, Rs. 800 crore
has been earmarked for the e-Governance programme, practically
leaving only a meagre allocation for schemes meant for software
production and hardware manufacturing. The Committee urge that
the Department should pay focused attention to the area of software
production and hardware manufacturing.
22. The Committee are informed that as only 10 percent of the
US$ 300 billion market potential in IT and IT Enabled Services (IT-
ITES) has been addressed so far, there is significant headroom for
growth. Moreover, India is fundamentally advantaged and uniquely
positioned to sustain its global leadership position, grow its offshore
IT-ITES industries at an annual rate of 24-25 percent, sustain nearly
10 million jobs, and generate export revenues of about US$ 86 billion
by 2012. They also note that the Hon’ble President in his address at
the special session of NASSCOM-2006 had asked the industry to
aspire to increase its market share to $200 billion in the IT services,
ITES and BPO sector. He had also called for the required policy
initiatives in the area of concerns and challenges needed to be
addressed in the IT Industry and proposed to constitute a committee
to conduct mid-term review of the progress on the recommended
policy action and their impact. The Committee would like to be
informed of the status in this regard.

42
23. The Committee further note that the Working Group on IT
sector constituted by the Planning Commission to formulate the
Eleventh Five Year Plan has set-up Study Teams to make
recommendations in their respective sectors. A Study Team thus
constituted for “the Exports of Computer software and services” had
inter alia  recommended some measures like improving the supply
of suitable talent, building adequate basic, business and social
infrastructure, ensuring a favourable business policy and regulatory
environment with a special focus on encouraging SMEs and new
ventures, global trade development and promoting global free trade
in services and fostering a sustainable ecosystem for innovation and
R&D for further growth of IT sector. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the DoIT’s plan on the recommendations made by
the Study Team.
(ii) IT Hardware Manufacturing
24. The Committee note that the Government have identified
growth of Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing sector as a
thrust area. However, they are at loss to understand the delay in
finalization of a Hardware Policy when the discussions and the
process for formulating the Policy had started way back in 2003.
India has the potential to develop and manufacture Electronics/IT
Hardware for the global markets and gain higher global share besides
meeting the country’s future requirement in the converging areas of
information, communication and entertainment. The Committee are
informed that the IT industry suffers disability factors on account of
high incidence of duties/taxes, inadequate infrastructure, high cost
of finance, transaction cost, freight and power, low volume of
production and inverted custom duties structure in some products,
etc. While examining the Demands for Grants of DoIT for
2006-2007, the Committee were informed that the Department had
prepared a paper on “the Conceptual Policy Framework to promote
growth of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry” in
consultation with the industry associations. The Committee were
subsequently informed that a Task Force set up by the Prime
Minister’s Office had submitted its recommendations on 6th March,
2007. Prior to that while examining the Demands for Grants for the
year 2003-2004, they were informed about a similar exercise
undertaken by the Government when another Task Force had gone
into the entire issue and given its report. It is distressing to note
that despite having identified Electronics and IT Hardware
manufacturing sector as a thrust area, the Government have been
dragging their feet on formulation of a policy in this regard. The

43
Committee urge that at least now the report submitted by the Task
Force should be taken up for serious consideration leading to
formulation of policy initiatives for promoting growth of electronics/
IT hardware manufacturing industry.
V. Human Resource Development
25. Manpower Development in IT sector has been engaging the
attention of the Committee year after year. The Committee note that
the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) has projected
a considerable gap of about 0.26 million between the demand and
supply of IT manpower by 2012 which calls for increasing the
enrolment in the colleges and opening of new colleges. AICTE is
reportedly taking steps to speed up the enrolment to engineering
stream to touch the figure of about 1 million by 2010-11 from the
current level of about 0.50 million. Admittedly another major
challenge in this sphere is to make the existing engineering graduates
employable. To cope with the requirement, the Ministry of HRD are
in the process of launching Finishing School courses in seven NITs
at Surathkal, Durgapur, Warangal, Jaipur, Calicut, Trichi and
Kurukshetra from May 2007 on a pilot scale. These pilot Finishing
Schools would formulate model curriculum and syllabus which in
future could be made part of the engineering curriculum so as to
make it compatible with industry needs. The Committee note that
DoIT have also proposed to spread the concept of Finishing Schools
for IT/ITES sector by way of launching pilot projects in the areas of
teacher’s Training/courseware development/conducting Master
Trainers’ Training/Programmes/bridge courses, etc. The Committee
consider it a step in the right direction. At the same time, they are
of the strong view that after assessing the utility of the Finishing
Schools being started on a pilot scale, the concept should be
replicated on an urgent basis and on a large scale. They further
stress that much more is required to be done to develop skilled
workforce for the IT industry and, therefore, it calls for the focussed
attention and concerted efforts on the part of the Department. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up action taken
in this regard.
26. The Committee are informed that DoIT’s HRD activities are
aimed towards generation of trained human resources for the
manufacturing & service sectors of electronics and IT industry.
Projects have been initiated for generation of quality and skilled
manpower in the area of Information Security, VLSI Design and
Computer Science/IT and setting up of a Regional Institute for

44
e-Learning and Information Technology (RIELIT) at Kohima,
Nagaland and ITES/BPO training facilities in Jammu & Kashmir
and in the North-East region. They have also engaged C-DAC and
DOEACC for conducting industry oriented education programme both
in formal and non-formal sectors. DOEACC is implementing ITES-
BPO courses in the North East and Jammu & Kashmir region and
would initiate this course in its other centres and accredited institutes
spread across the country. Besides this, NASSCOM and the
Department of Information Technology & Communication,
Government of Rajasthan have launched an employment
benchmarking test called NASSCOM Assessment of Competence
(NAC) as pilot phase for ITES-BPO Sector during November, 2006.
The NAC would create a continuous pipeline of talent through
continuous assessment of candidates on key skills by a national
standard assessment. DOEACC would reportedly assess the progress
of NAC and its’ impact on the industry for initiating complimentary
training efforts in other areas. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the findings of DOEACC specifically with regard to the
effectiveness of NAC. They recommend that DoIT should review
the situation and draw up a comprehensive action plan in
consultation with the Ministry of HRD for capacity building with a
view to bridging the gap between the demand and supply of IT
skilled workforce. There is also a need to extend the training
programmes undertaken by C-DAC and DOEACC to more centres
across the country.
27. The Committee further note that DoIT are in the process of
setting up a working/Expert Group on HRD for evolving pilot
projects during the 11th Five Year Plan in the areas of capacity
building in selected areas like Nanotechnology, Power and
Communication, Computer Science, Biotechnology, Infrastructure,
Energy, Manufacturing and Mechatronics to address the requirement
of emerging knowledge economy; Technology Incubation Centres and
Hardware Infrastructure facility for entrepreneur development;
Integration of new courses in ITI and support to Women’s
Polytechnics and Spreading the concept of Finishing School teachers
training by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc. Although it is a move in the right
direction, the Committee feel that the allocation of Rs. 43 crore in
the Annual Plan for Manpower Development is quite inadequate to
meet the vast requirements in the sphere. The concern about the
need for funds for DOEACC to start course on generic skills in
States other than the North East and J&K was also voiced by the
Secretary, DoIT during evidence. In fact, DOEACC was provided
only Rs. 50 lakh against the proposed sum of Rs. 22 crore which is

45
quite unfortunate. The Committee trust that the Pilot Projects taken
up by DoIT will go a long way in bridging the gap between demand
and supply of IT skilled workforce at present and also for meeting
the projected requirements in the future. In view of the pressing
needs in the sphere of manpower development, the Committee would
impress upon DoIT to pursue with the Planning Commission the
need for allocation of more funds during the Eleventh Plan for HRD
schemes in the IT sector. The Committee would await the outcome
in this regard.
VI. National Informatics Centre (NIC)
(i) General
28. The Committee note that DoIT have proposed an allocation
of Rs. 427 crore for implementation of various projects/programmes
during the year 2007-2008 against which the Planning Commission
has approved only Rs. 320 crore. They have learnt that on account
of the reduced outlay, NIC would have to carry out the following
activities in a reduced scale, viz. Cyber Security, business continuity
planning, Disaster Recovery Centres, e-Governance Standards, land
records computerisation, knowledge management and training,
strengthening of districts, upgradation of video conferencing facility,
geographic information system, Data Centres, last mile solution, etc.
The urgent need for investing more on business continuity plan,
protection to the system, higher bandwidth, etc. for enhancing and
stabilizing the operations of NIC was forcefully brought out before
the Committee during evidence. The Committee have a strong
conviction that with NIC having been entrusted with the unique
role of providing network backbone and e-Governance solutions to
all the Government institutions, should not be starved of funds for
its key operations. It is crucial that NIC should make a steady
progress in the pursuit of developing state-of-the-art application
software related to various sectors and also for providing cyber
security to its network by incorporating security system. The
Committee would urge that the requirement of additional funds by
NIC should be taken up forcefully with the Planning Commission
while finalising the Eleventh Plan proposals as well as at the
2007-08 RE stage and the Committee be apprised of the outcome
thereof.
(ii) Information Kiosks in all the High Courts
29. The Committee observe that a target had been fixed for NIC
to set up Information Kiosks in all the High Courts and their

46
Benches, Upgrade LAN and Servers to the High Courts and to
develop digital signature and related software in the High Courts
by September, 2006 which has not been executed. However, it has
been stated that approval was given subsequently for computerization
of 1300 district and subordinate courts throughout the country and
upgradation of the computer/IT facilities at the Supreme Court and
21 High Courts at a cost of Rs. 442.00 crore for which NIC has been
made the implementing agency. As a result of this, all activities
connected with provision of IT facilities to the judiciary would be
undertaken as part of this project. In view of the importance of the
project at hand meant to provide IT backup to the entire judicial
system in the country, the Committee trust that NIC will rise to the
occasion and execute the project well within the timeline.
(iii) Government Informatics Training Programme
30. The Committee note that NIC is responsible for organising
various courses for Government employees under the sponsorship
of the Department of Personnel & Training (DoP&T). It is seen that
during the year 2006-2007, the total number of workshops on
e-Governance projects held were only three with one held at NIC,
Chennai and two at NIC, Delhi. During the year 2007-2008, also
only two such workshops are proposed to be organised; one at NIC,
Chennai and another at NIC, Delhi. According to NIC such
programmes would be conducted on demand basis for the States on
e-Governance Projects. In view of the ambitious e-Governance
programme under implementation in the country, there is a growing
need to organise more such workshops at various levels to promote
the concept of e-Governance. The Committee, therefore, stress that
NIC should devise more number of workshops and training
programmes on e-Governance and also take the initiative of offering
its services to the State Governments for creating better awareness
about the e-Governance programme among the people at large.
(iv) Video Conferencing
31. The Committee note with satisfaction that NIC has set up
video conferencing facility in 490 locations in the country using cost
effective solutions. This facility is extensively being used for
monitoring of various projects and discussions. The facility has been
provided in 21 States up to District level so far. Remaining States
and Union Territories have at least one video conferencing location.
The Committee, however, are not satisfied with the rate of utilisation
of multi-point video conferencing facility provided in many of the

47
States. The Committee find that whereas in States like Madhya
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh the facility was used for 8720 hours and
3039 hours respectively, in States like Maharashtra and Jammu &
Kashmir where the video conferencing facility is available up to
district level, the facility was used only for 84 hours and 95 hours
respectively. Therefore, it highlights the need to back up the
provision of infrastructure with imparting of awareness programmes
and training sessions. While the Committee would like to encourage
NIC to network more number of stations in all the States and UT
in the country with video conferencing facilities, they would also
urge that NIC should devise the package for setting up infrastructure
for video conferencing by combining it with training programmes
targeting the users in order that the facility provided is made
optimum use of.
VII. Media Lab Asia
32. The Committee observe that Media Lab Asia was set up as
a non-profit organization with a vision of leveraging the information
and communication technologies and other advanced technologies
for the benefit of the common man. In their 29th Report on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of DoIT, the Committee had expressed their
serious concern that although a sum of Rs. 65 crore was released
during the first two years of its operation, nothing substantial had
been done for four years up to 2005-2006. With an allocation of
Rs. 10 crore to MLA in fiscal 2006-2007, the Committee had also
expressed hopes that its restructuring process would be completed
expeditiously. However, the Committee were further informed that
although a full time MD/CEO had joined on 16th October, 2006 the
full team in MLA is expected to be in position only by 30th June,
2007 as the process of selection of officers and staff has been initiated.
The Committee express their serious displeasure about the manner
in which MLA, set up to take the benefits of new technologies to
the common masses, has been functioning since its inception. They
fail to comprehend as to why the process of selection of officers
and staff should take such a long time on account of which its
operations are practically on a standstill. They, therefore, stress that
the restructuring of MLA should be completed within the shortest
possible time and the Committee be apprised of the status thereon.
33. The Committee observe that the Sub-Committee on Research
& Development on IT constituted for making recommendations for
the Eleventh Plan had recommended an allocation of Rs. 150 crore
per annum for each year of the Plan period which amount to a total

48
of Rs. 750 in five years to MLA for achieving the massive task of
reaching out to 6.5 lakh villages in the country with ICT based
personalised services. Against this, the Plan outlay for 2007-2008 has
been only Rs. 10 crore. However, DoIT have informed that an
Evaluation Committee has been constituted to review the activities
of MLA as per the Cabinet decision and the matter for allocation of
additional funds would be taken up subsequently. While welcoming
the move to review the functioning of MLA, the Committee only
hope that this process would be completed expeditiously. The
Committee recommend that MLA should be revamped on the basis
of the findings of the Evaluation Committee so that it could become
an effective agent for embarking upon the ambitious mission of
reaching the information and communication technologies to the
common man. Soon after this process is completed, allocation of
additional outlay for funding the projects envisaged should also be
taken up for serious consideration.
VIII. Nano-Technology Development Programmes
34. The Committee observe that Nano-technology is an emerging,
disruptive and interdisciplinary technology widely recognised as the
next technological revolution that has attracted the attention of
scientists and engineers all over the world. Realizing the potential
of Nano-technology, governments in the developed countries have
been funding R&D in this area for quite some time. Despite the
trends elsewhere, it surprises the Committee that although Rs. 40.43
crore was spent in the year 2005-2006, an outlay of Rs. 40 crore
provided in 2006-2007 was reduced to Rs. 34 crore at RE stage. Against
the proposed allocation of Rs. 40 crore in 2007-2008 only Rs. 29 crore
has been provided. According to DoIT against an allocation of
Rs. 10 crore sought in 2007-2008 under the Semi Conductor Integrated
Circuit Lay Out Design (SICLD) Act activities, only Rs. 0.75 crore
has been provided on account of which only routine SICLD Registry
activities could be carried out and DoIT would be forced to shelve
the proposal for setting up of a National IPR Institute for
Semiconductor Layout Design in the current year. The trend of
Budget allocation for Nano-technology, widely recognised as the next
technological revolution, has been, to say the least, disappointing.
The fact that the planning process which has not been able to keep
itself abreast with technological advancement the world over calls
for a reversal of the trend. The Committee, therefore, expect the
DoIT to accord highest priority for encouraging Nano-technology
development programmes and, as assured, to pursue the issue of
adequate funding for it at the RE stage. The Committee would like
to be apprised of further developments in this regard.

49
IX. Technology Development for Indian Languages
35. The Committee note that during 2007-08, DoIT had proposed
an allocation of Rs. 30 crore for Technology Development for Indian
Languages (TDIL) in order to carry out various on-going projects
and also take up new projects to be initiated in the area of speech
technology in Indian languages, viz. (i) Linguistic resources and
capacity building and (ii) Localization and basic R&D projects in
language computing against which the approved Plan outlay is
Rs. 11 crore only. The Committee learn that under the ‘National
Roll-Out Plan’ project of TDIL, software tools and fonts for 10 Indian
languages namely Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Assamese, Kannada,
Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi and Urdu languages have been
released in public domain. Software tools and fonts for remaining
official Indian languages are being developed/consolidated. The
Committee believe that in a multilingual and multi script society
like ours where e-Governance programme is being implemented on
an extensive scale, there is an urgent need to develop tools for
information processing in the local languages, applications and
contents and be made available for wider use of ICT to benefit the
people at large. The Committee, therefore, feel that availability of
funds should not become a hindrance in the implementation for
projects under Technology Development for Indian Languages
scheme.
  N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
25 April, 2007 Chairman,
5 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

50
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on the 2 April, 2007 from 1500 hours to
1800 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri Sohan Potai
7. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
8. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT)
1. Shri Jainder Singh, Secretary
2. Shri R. Chandrasekhar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Shri Pankaj Agarwala, Joint Secretary

51
5. Dr. U.P . Phadke, Advisor
6. Dr. A.K. Chakravorti, Advisor
7. Shri B.N. Satpathy, Economic Advisor
8. Dr. B.K. Gairola, Director General, NIC
9. Dr. S.L. Sarnot, Director General, STQC
10. Shri S.N. Zindal, Director General, STPI
11. Shri S. Ramakrishnan, Director General, C-DAC
12. Shri K.R. Kini, Director (SAMEER)
13. Dr. D.K. Sareen, Executive Director, ESC
14. Shri S.N. Goswamy, CEO, Media Lab Asia
15. Shri J.K. Tyagi, Deputy Financial Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representative of the
Department of Information Technology to the sitting of the Committee.
The Secretary and other representatives of the Department of
Information Technology then gave a brief account of the Demands for
Grants (2007-2008) with the help of a power point presentation.
3. The members sought certain clarifications on the issues relating
to the Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of
Information Technology. The representatives of the Department replied
to the queries raised by the members.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department
for appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing the
required information.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately .
The witnesses, then withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

52
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
The Committee sat on the 20th April, 2007 (Friday) from
1500 hours to 1800 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri P .C. Thomas
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
10. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
11. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of NASSCOM
1. Shri Kiran Karnik — President
2. Shri Shyamal Ghosh — Advisor, Cyber Security
3. Shri Nandkumar Sarvade — Dir ector, Cyber Security &
Compliance
4. Shri Ameet Nivsarkar — Vice-President
5. Shri Rajdeep Saharawat —V ice-President

53
Representative of T ulir-Centre for Prevention &
Healing of Child Sexual Abuse
Ms. Vidya Reddy Executive Director
2. *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** ***
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned for tea.
5. *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** ***
The witnesses, then withdrew.
7. Thereafter the Committee took up the following Draft Reports
for consideration and adopted the same:—
 (i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) relating to
the Department of Information Technology.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalize the
above Draft Reports in light of the factual verifications made by the
concerned Ministry/Departments and present the same to the House
on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.