 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)on  
Demands for Grants (2010-11)] 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
February, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
  
 
19 


 
NINETEENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
  Demands for Grants (2010-11)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08/03/2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08/03/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page No. 
 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
Chapter  I    Report 
 
 
Chapter  II    Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 
Chapter  III    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the  Government 
 
 
Chapter  IV    Recommendation/Observations in r espect of which replies 
of the G overnment have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 
 
Chapter  V    Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim in nature 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Information Technology (2010 -11) held on 17 th 
February, 2011. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
           
          Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
   
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Prem Das Rai 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
17. Dr. Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
20. Shri C. Sivasami 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
*25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri T.K. Mukherjee          -   Joint Secretary 
2.     Smt. Sudesh Luthra          -   Director  
3.  Shri H.R. Kamboj       - Additional Director 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (20 10-11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this  Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Commi ttee contained in their Sixth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relating to Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2.  The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on  21 April 2010 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 201 0. The Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on 20 September, 2010. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 17 February, 2011. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi              Chairman 
24  February, 2011                                        Standing Committee on 
05  Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)                            Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  
 
 
 
  
 

 
CHAPTER   I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) 
deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
of the Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2010-11) pertaining to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 st April, 2010 and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on th e same day. It contained 32 
Recommendations/Observations.   
 
3. Action Taken Notes by the Government in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and these have been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos: 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 23, 23, 24, 29, 31 and 32. 
 
   Total 21 
 Chapter II 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Para No: Nil  
 Total    Nil 
 Chapter III 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Para Nos:  5,6,9,10,15 and 17.  
 Total 6 
 Chapter IV 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies are of interim nature:- 
 
 Para No: 25,26,27,28 and 30.  
 Total 5 
 Chapter V 
 
 

 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation.  The 
Committee further desire that Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter - I and final Action 
Taken by the Government to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  
Utilization of outlay by Prasar Bharati 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that Broadcasting sector has been allocated 
Rs.5547 crore during the year 2010 -11 which works out to 87.8% of the 
total allocation made at BE stage. Despit e getting the major chunk of 
allocation of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the status of 
utilization of outlay during the Eleventh Plan particularly during the year 
2008-09 and 2009 -10 is highly unsatisfactory. During the year 2008 -09, 
the allocation provided at BE stage was Rs.475 crore which was reduced 
to Rs.437.41 crore. However, Prasar Bharati could utilize Rs.278.20 crore, 
thus Rs.159.21 crore remained unspent. Similarly, during the year 2009 -
10, the allocation made at BE stage was to the tune of Rs.512 crore which 
was reduced to Rs.203.59 crore i.e. less than half of the allocation 
provided at RE stage. Prasar Bharati could utilize Rs.140.76 crore. The 
reasons put forth by the Ministry for low utilization of allocation by Prasar 
Bharati as informed to the Committee are litigation relating to 
procurement of transmitters, delay in approval of schemes specially 
digitalization scheme of Doordarshan and lengthy procurement procedure 
for machinery and equipments etc. Taking note of the gross un der 
utilization of planned schemes of AIR and Doordarshan, the Committee in 
their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) had recommended 
that Prasar Bharati should streamline the procurement procedure and take 
remedial measures to ensure achievement of targets. The Committee find 
that no head way has been made in this regard. All the major schemes of 
Prasar Bharati viz. Digitalization of Transmitters, E -Governance, Setting 
up of Transmitters for Border Area of J&K etc. are still awaiting 
approval/clearances. Besides, efforts have not been made to streamline 
the procurement process. The various impediments that stand in the way 
of a long drawn procurement cycle for machinery/equipment still need to 
be identified. The Committee conclude from the aforesa id position that 
there are serious problem affecting the working of Prasar Bharati. The 
statement of the CEO Prasar Bharati during the oral evidence that there 
are certain systemic problems in the organization further reinforces the 

 
views of the Committee.  The Committee strongly recommend that such 
state of affairs should not be allowed to continue in an organization like 
Prasar Bharati, which is mandated with the task of Broadcasting sector. 
All the corrective action should be taken to address the various 
impediments in a stipulated time frame.” 
 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under :- 
 (Rs in crore) 
A.             All India Radio XI  Plan 
outlay 
Present status   
I.    Continuing Schemes Cumulative Expenditure upto 
June,2010 
1.    J&K Special Package 25.70 9.95 
2.    Expansion of MW Services 2.00 1.08 
3.    Expansion of FM Services 180.00 47.25 
4.    Digitalization of Production Facilities 6.00 5.57 
5.    Automation of Studio Facilities& Misc 83.10 38.95 
6.    North East special package 150.00 26.49 
7.    Accommodation for staff 20.00 16.68 
Total of Continuing Schemes 466.80 155.97 
II.   New Schemes    EFC/SFC/CCEA 
1. Software Acquisition (AIR News) 100.00 The scheme has been approved 
by the Competent Authority and 
conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 
29.6.2010.  
2.   Upgradation of existing 250 kW SW Tr. 
For DRM operation at  AIR High Power 
transmitter at Khampur and Aligarh 
10.00 Competent authority‟s approval 
has been conveyed to PB on 
18.12.2007 at a cost of Rs.9.80 
cr. 
3. New Technology and Science & 
Technology (R&D) scheme 
20.00 Approval of competent authority 
has been conveyed to PB on 
20.8.2009 at a cost of Rs.19.70 
crores 
4.    Digitalization of transmitters, studios, 
connectivity and DTH Channel 
924.20 The total allocation for 
Digitalization was Rs.924.20 
crores, out of which scheme 
amounting Rs.57 crores was 
approved within the delegated 
powers to CEO, P.B and 
competent authority‟s approval 
conveyed on 18.12.2007 and 
23.01.2008. Scheme for the 
balance amount of Rs.843.45 
crores has been approved by 
CCI on 8.4.2010 and conveyed 
to PB on 27.04.2010   
5.  
        
   
 
 
 
E-Governance, training, 
Commonwealth Games, Resources, 
security, Addl. Office accommodation 
staff Quarters etc. 
 
97.00  Scheme has been split into four 
parts as desired in Department 
of Expenditure O.M. 
No.21(2)PF.II/2009 dated 
29.5.2009. 
(i) Improvement of facilities 
at existing stations  ( 
Rs.28.00 crore) P.B. Board 
has approved  t he scheme 
which was appraised on 

 
21.7.2010.  Minutes of the 
meeting is awaited, 
subsequent to which it will 
need the approval of 
competent authority.     
(ii) Staff qrts in North -East 
(Rs.20 crore). The scheme 
approved by the Competent 
Authority and conveyed to 
Prasar Bharati on 18.6.2010. 
(iii) Augmentation of STI 
(T)’s Schemes  (Rs.20.00 
crore). The scheme has been 
approved by the Govt. on 
17/08.2010 and conveyed to 
PB/AIR on 31.08.2010.    
(iv) Schemes for Enterprise 
Resources Planning –e 
governance and IT 
facilities (Rs.29 crore) .  
SFC chaired by CEO, is yet to  
appraise the scheme.   
6.    Setting up of High Power TV and FM 
Transmitter in Border areas and low 
LPT FM in J&K. 
389.00  Initially this scheme was not a 
part of approved 11 th Plan.  
However, an amount of Rs.100 
crore was provided in the 
Budget for the scheme during 
2009-10.  As the scheme could 
not be approved during 2009 -
10, No expenditure was incurred 
during 2009 -10.  No w the 
scheme has been approved by 
the competent authority on 
04.08.2010 at a cost of Rs.100 
crore.  The approval was 
conveyed to PB on 18.08.2010. 
Total of New Schemes 1540.20  
Grand Total of AIR 2006.08  
 
(Rs in crore) 
B.              DOORDARSHAN XI Plan 
Outlay 
Present status 
I.    Continuing Schemes  Cumulative Expenditure upto 
June,2010 
1. J&K Special Package 314.17 115.83 
2. Production  Facilities (Studio/OB) 165.00 75.10 
3. North East special package 219.83 124.61 
4. DTH 9.00 11.36 
5. HDTV 15.00 8.67 
6. Other spill over X Plan approved 
scheme (Earlier approved as 
Accommodation for staff,  
augmentation of infrastructure & 
295.00 223.38 

 
Security) 
7. Software Acquisition Normal & Misc.) 60.00 0.00 
Total of Continuing Schemes 1078.0
0 
618.84 
II.    New Schemes  EFC/SFC/CCEA 
1. Modernization,  Augmentation & 
Replacement of Transmitter and Studio 
Equipment 
299.00 Revised EFC Memo from PB has 
since been received which is 
under process.  
 
2. Digitalization of studios 620.00 The Scheme has been approved 
by CCI on 8.4.2010 and 
conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 
27.4.2010. 
3. DTH: Modernization, Aug,  
replacement of satellite Broadcast  
equipment  
210.00 Competent authority has  
approved  Modernization, Aug, 
replacement of satellite 
Broadcast equipment Scheme at 
a cost of Rs.125.00 crore.  
Administrative approval 
conveyed to PB   on 04.2.2009. 
 
DTH Scheme for an amount of 
Rs.75.43 crores has been 
approved by the competent 
authority  on 4.8.2010 and 
conveyed to PB on 17.08.2010 
4.
H
D
T
V 
HDTV 165.00 Competent authority has 
approved the scheme and 
communicated to PB on 
19.08.2009. 
5. Staff Quarters and Other Misc. Works 75.00 The scheme has been approved 
by the competent authority at 
cost of Rs.65 Crores and 
conveyed to PB on 23.02.2009. 
6. Software acquisition/production  485.00 EFC was examined by Secretary 
(Expenditure) who advised to 
take up the matter with Planning 
Commission for budget 
provision/assurance of funds 
during the year.   An SFC 
proposal of Rs.142 crores was 
received in the Ministry from PB.  
However, during discussion it 
was decided to further reduce it 
to Rs.100 crore.  PB has been 
requested to send a revised 
proposal which is still awaited.  
Total Of New Schemes 1854.0
0 
 
Grand Total 2932.0
0 
 

 
 
 
Utilization of outlay by Prasar Bharati. 
 
The outlay proposed, the actual allocation at BE stage, at RE stage and 
actual utilization during each of the annual Plan of the Eleventh Plan in 
respect of Prasar Bharati are given as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
11th Plan 
Outlay 
 Year Allocation 
sought 
Outlay approved in the 
Annual Plan 
Actual 
expenditure 
At BE stage At RE stage 
Continuing 
Scheme  
2007-08 1677.30 385.59 329.87 323.67 
1544.80 2008-09 931.49 475.00 466.03* 286.05** 
New 
Schemes 
 
2009-10 1150.07 657.00* 348.57* 203.20** 
(upto 
March,10) 
3105.20 2010-11 1859.14 637.25*  55.98*** 
(Upto 
June‟10) 
Total 
4650.00 
     
 
*             Outlay includes Rs.145.00 crore and Rs.296.77 crore for CWG  for  2009- 10 
and 2010-11 respectively. 
**           Expenditure including CWG. 
***         Expenditure including CWG. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
8. The Committee regret to point out that the action taken note of the 
Ministry is silent on the recommendation of the Committee about the steps to 
be taken to streamline the procureme nt procedure and corrective action to 
address various impediments which are affecting the functioning of Prasar 
Bharati. The Committee had observed that despite getting major chunk of 
allocation of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the utilizat ion of 
outlay by Prasar Bharati during the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 has been 
highly unsatisfactory.  The reasons for low utilization of outlay were stated to 
be litigation relating to procurement of transmitters, delay in approval of 
schemes and lengthy p rocurement procedure for machinery and equipments.  
Taking note of gross under utilization of outlay, the Committee in their 
previous Report has recommended that Prasar Bharati should streamline the 
procurement procedure and take remedial measures to ensur e achievements 

 
of targets. The Ministry in their reply has only indicated the status of 
continuing and new schemes of Doordarshan and AIR and utilization of outlay 
by Prasar Bharati.  The Committee re-iterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that Prasar Bharati should take result oriented steps to tackle various 
impediments within the stipulated time frame.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that if Prasar Bharati is to survive in the present competitive 
broadcasting environment, it has to take expeditious steps to resolve all its 
systemic problems.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee have been informed that the actual timeline for capital 
procurement of equipment as per DG&SD ma nual starting from 
publication of Notice Inviting Tender till placement of advance/final 
acceptance of tender is 52 weeks, which can be reduced to 32 weeks. The 
Committee are of the view that the remedy lies in taking corrective steps. 
Even the period of 32 weeks for purchase of capital goods and machinery 
can be further reduced by carrying out systematic changes in the 
procurement procedure. As such, early decision in this regard should be 
taken and the Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has stated as under: 
“Prasar Bharati has taken various measures for monitoring of speedy 
implementation of Plan Schemes, which includes constitution of 
Committees, such as the Procurement Committee, Monitoring Committee 
etc. The objective of the Procurement Committee is to reduce the 
processing time involved in procurement matter. The Monitoring 
Committees so constituted would review the progress of implementation 
of schemes at Zonal level, Directorate level by E -in-C/DG and final ly at 
the level of CEO at Prasar Bharati Secretariat.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
11. The Committee note that Prasar Bharati has constituted Procurement 
Committee to reduce the processing time involved in procurement matters and 
Monitoring Committee to re view the progress of implementation of schemes.  
However, the precise steps proposed to be taken to reduce the actual timeline 
in procurement matters have not been spelt out.  The Committee are of the 
view that the purpose of Procurement Committee would be  served only if 

 
procurement procedure is streamlined and appropriate measures are taken to 
reduce the procedural commonalities for procurement of capital equipments.  
The Committee desire to be apprised about the specific steps taken by Prasar 
Bharati to shorten the actual time in procuring capital equipments. 
ORGANIZATINAL, CAPITAL AND FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING OF PRASAR 
BHARATI 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9 and 10) 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:  
“Prasar Bharati came into existence on 23rd November, 1997. Even after 
more than a decade of its establishment, the Organization is in a state of 
transformation in crucial matters relating to organizational, capital and 
financial restructuring. The Committ ee in their Reports have consistently 
been recommending to take suitable measures on the above issues 
affecting the Ministry. Regarding organizational restructuring, the 
Committee note that the National Productivity Council (NPC), which has 
been engaged by  Prasar Bharati to suggest suitable measures in this 
regard, has given its report to Prasar Bharati. The National Productivity 
Council also made presentation to the Board of Prasar Bharati in this 
regard. As per the information furnished to the Committee, it has been 
stated that the report is now under consideration with Prasar Bharati. 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous 
year in October, 2009, the same status with regard to furnishing the 
proposal by Prasar Bharati was in dicated. The Committee express their 
unhappiness over the way Prasar Bharati is delaying the proposal on such 
an important issue related to Organizational restructuring of Prasar 
Bharati.” 
 
“The Committee note that on the issue of financial restructuring a nd 
funding pattern as desired by the earlier Group of Ministers, the proposal 
formulated in consultation with Prasar Bharati, was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). The proposal was 
amended after several discussion and consul tation based on the gap -
funding approach. The observations of the Department of Expenditure are 
now under consideration of Prasar Bharati. Once the proposal is finalized 
and forwarded by Prasar Bharati to the Ministry, the same will be placed 
before the Gr oup of Ministers. The Committee desire that Prasar Bharati 
may be asked to finalize its views and forward the Report to the Ministry 
by a stipulated date. Thereafter the Ministry may submit a comprehensive 
proposal before the re -constituted Group of Minist ers so that the entire 
gamut of issues relating to financial, organizational and technological 
aspects is deliberated and a permanent solution is worked out.” 
 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has stated as under :- 
“The reconstituted GOM has he ld two meetings on 16th April 2010 and 
17th June 2010. On the issue of capital restructuring and funding pattern, 
the GOM recommended as under: - 
(i) 50% of the annual operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be 
borne by Prasar Bharati from its Internal Ext ra Budgetary 
Resources and the remaining 50% will henceforth be met by Non -
Plan grant-in-aid by the Government. 

 
(ii) The level of 50% Non -Plan support by the Government may be 
maintained  for the next 5 years i.e. 2010 -2011 to 2014-2015 and 
will be reviewed thereafter in order to scale down  the quantum of 
Non-Plan  support by the Government to Prasar Bharati. 
(iii) Space segment and Spectrum charges incurred by Prasar Bharati  
will also be included  in computing the total operational expenses. 
(iv) Accumulated arrears of Space segment and Spectrum charges upto 
31.3.2010 may be waived. A proposal to this effect may be moved 
by Prasar Bharati to Department of Expenditure. 
(v) Plan Capital funding by Government to Prasar Bharati may 
henceforth be in the for m of grant -in-aid and not in the form of 
loan. 
(vi) Director General of Audit, Central Revenues (DGACR) will continue 
to be nodal auditor of Prasar Bharati and will be assisted by 
qualified commercial audit staff for audit of the annual accounts. 
(vii) Recommendations on non-cash proposals made by the earlier GOM 
were reiterated and follow up action may be taken accordingly. 
 
(viii) Prasar Bharati will take up the matter of whether there is any 
balance amount in the Non -Lapsable Fund available for transfer to 
Prasar Bharati, with the Controller General of Accounts and in case 
there is any amount required to be transferred the same shall be 
communicated to the Department of Expenditure for effecting 
transfer of the funds as per the provisions of the Act.  
(ix) Property and Assets w ill be transferred on book value to Prasar 
Bharati as per provisions of Section 16 (a)  of the Prasar Bharati 
Act, 1990. Normal accounting principles will be followed to 
determine their future value. 
 
GoM has recommended that the ban on recruitments in Pra sar Bharati 
may be relaxed.  Prasar Bharati has been asked to submit a proposal by 
July 9th, 2010 for filling essential categories of posts to Ministry of I&B 
/Department of Expenditure giving full justification for such recruitment 
and based on the report  of the NPC.  The Department of Expenditure 
would then process the case in accordance with the decision of the GoM 
by July 23rd, 2010.  Prasar Bharati is required to immediately take steps 
to frame and notify Recruitment Regulations and Service conditions for its 
employees and set up Recruitment Boards as envisaged under the Prasar 
Bharati Act, 1990 for such recruitments. GoM has directed that the 
Recruitment Regulations and Service Conditions for all categories of 
employees and the proposal for constitutio n of the Recruitment Boards 
will be finalized in a time bound manner.            
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
14. The Committee observe that in the two meetings of Group of Ministers 
held on 16 th April and 17 th June 2010, some decision has been taken on the  
issue of capital restructuring and funding pattern.  The Committee note that 
GoM has recommended to relax the ban on recruitment in Prasar Bharati.  

 
Accordingly for filling up essential categories of posts, Prasar Bharati was 
required to submit the propos al to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting/Department of Expenditure by 9 th July, 2010.  The proposal 
would then be processed by the Department of Expenditure by 23rd July, 2010.  
The Committee hope that the desired proposal would have been submitt ed by 
now to the Department of Expenditure. The Committee would appreciate if the 
proposal is finalized expeditiously so that the recruitment process could start 
at the earliest. 
The Committee have consistently been recommending to the 
Government to expedi te organizational, financial and capital restructuring of 
Prasar Bharati. Regarding the organizational restructuring even when GoM has 
recommended that the ban on recruitments of Prasar Bharati may be relaxed, 
Prasar Bharati is required to frame and notify  recruitment regulations and 
service conditions for its employees to enable the organization to undertake 
recruitments. With regard to the capital restructuring and funding pattern, the 
Committee find that GoM has made certain recommendations. The Committe e 
while expressing serious concern over the delay in framing and notifying 
recruitment regulations and service conditions for employees of Prasar 
Bharati, emphasize Prasar Bharati to act fast so that the vacancies in Prasar 
Bharati can be filled. As recommended earlier the final decision with regard to 
Financial and Capital restructuring should be taken at the earliest so that the 
entire gamut of issues are addressed and a permanent solution is worked out. 
CONTENT REGULATION MECHANISM 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:  
“The Committee have been informed that the Ministry are in the process 
of drafting Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill to receive and dispose of 
complaints on content telecast by TV channels and to deal with other 
regulatory issues in the Broadcasting Sector. The Bill has been 
necessitated due to the concerns expressed by Hon‟ble Courts, 
Parliamentary Committees, civil society organizations, viewers, media 

 
critiques and the State Governments. The Committee have also been 
informed that views of the all the State Governments have been solicited 
on the above draft Bill. So far 18 State Governments and 6 UTs have 
submitted their comments on the proposed Bill. To take the process 
further, the Ministry has constituted a Task Force under the Chairmanship 
of the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with 
representatives from other agencies. The Task Force is holding 
consultations with all the stakeholders so that it could submit its findings 
to the Government at the earliest. The Committee have been informed 
that the pr ocess of consultation by the aforesaid Task Force with all the 
stakeholders was going on and hopefully by March end, the consultation 
would be over. The Committee hope that the consultations with all the 
stakeholders would have been over by now and the Tas k Force would 
have submitted the report to the Ministry. The Committee are of the 
strong opinion that the Ministry should at least now bring a 
comprehensive legislation covering the issues related to Broadcasting 
Regulation and Regulatory Authority without wasting further time.” 
 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has stated as under : 
“The Task Force is in the process of finalizing its views and has so far held 
eight consultation meetings.  As regards the timelines to complete the 
consultations pr ocess with stakeholders and submission of 
report/recommendations, the process is proposed to be completed by end 
of October 2010.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
             
17. Expressing displeasure over the tardy progress, the Committee in their 
earlier Report had desired that the process of consultation should be 
completed in a time bound manner and the Broadcasting Services Regulation 
Bill introduced to Parliament. The Committee have now been informed that the 
process of consultation by the Task Force with the stakeholders and 
submission of report/recommendations, is proposed to be completed by the 
end of October, 2010.  The Committee hope that by now the Task Force would 
have submitted its report to the Ministry.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should take immediate steps to finalize the proposed Broadcasting 
Services Regulation Bill and for its introduction to the Parliament.   
PRASAR BHARATI ACT 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
18. The Committee had recommended as under : 
“The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 contains provisions for the constitution of a 
Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting Council which have never 
been put into operation. During the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants of the previous year, the Committee have been informed that two 

 
Committees of Prasar Bharati (Sengupta Committee in its report dated 
August, 1996 and subsequently the Narayanmurthy Committee in its 
report dated 20.5.2000) have recommen ded that there is no need for 
these provisions in the light of Standing and Consultative Committees of 
Parliament. The Committee note that apparently there are two 
alternatives before the Government i.e. (i) to constitute the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee or Broadcasting Council in the light of the mandatory 
provisions made in the Prasar Bharati Act, or (ii) to agree to the 
recommendations made by the aforesaid two Committees and bring 
suitable amendments to the Parliament. Even when almost 20 years have  
passed since the Act came into effect and 13 and 9 years respectively 
have passed since these two Committees have given their views, the 
Ministry is yet to take the decision in this regard. While deploring the way 
the Government has handled such an import ant issue, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the decision in this regard should be taken 
without any further delay.” 
 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has stated as under:- 
“The issue of constitution of Parliamentary Committee and the 
Broadcasting Council has been considered by the reconstituted Group of 
Minister (GoM) on Prasar Bharati.  GoM in its 2nd meeting held on 17th 
June 2010.   After deliberating on the role envisaged for the Parliamentary 
Committee vis-à-vis the Standing Committee and after taking note of the 
categorical recommendation of the Shunu Sen Committee, the GoM had 
felt that not much purpose would be served by having a separate 
Parliamentary Committee. The GoM also noted that the role envisaged for 
the Broadcasting Council is advisory in nature with regard to redressal of 
consumer grievances and the discharge of functions by Prasar Bharati in 
accordance with the objectives set out in Section 12. GoM also felt that 
the Shunu Sen Committee‟s recommendation that there should be a single 
complaints mechanism for all broadcasters under the aegis of the 
proposed Broadcasting Authority deserves merit. However since Prasar 
Bharati cannot be equated with the private broadcasters in view of the 
mandate it carries, the proposed Broadca sting Authority can be assigned 
separate functions in relation to the private broadcasters and Prasar 
Bharati. If this is done then there will be no need to have a separate 
Broadcasting Council as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act. Keeping 
in view that the Act was enacted in 1990 and no substantive amendments 
had been made thereafter till date, the GoM has decided that the Ministry 
of Information & Broadcasting should have a comprehensive look at the 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act and recommend such amendments as 
are required to be made in the Act in the light of developments over the 
last twenty years, subsequent to the Shunu Sen Committee report.”  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
20. Having observed that the provisions contained in the Prasar Bharati Act, 
1990 regarding constitution of Parliamentary Committee and Broadcasting 
Council, have never been put into operation, the Committee had pointed out 
that there were two alternatives bef ore the Government i.e. either to 
constitute the Parliamentary Committee and Broadcasting Council as per the 

 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990; or to amend the Act in view of the 
recommendations of two Committees of Prasar Bharati (Sengupta Commit tee 
report dated August 1996 and Narayanmurthy Committee report dated 
20.5.2000).  The Ministry have now informed that the issue of constitution of 
Parliamentary Committee and the Broadcasting Council was considered by the 
re-constituted Group of Ministers  (GoM) in meeting held on 17 th June, 2010.   
After deliberating on the role envisaged for the Parliamentary Committee vis -
à-vis the Standing Committee and taking note of the categorical 
recommendation of the Shunu Sen Committee, the GoM had felt that not m uch 
purpose would be served by having a separate Parliamentary Committee.  The 
GoM also felt that Shunu Sen Committee’s recommendation that there should 
be a single complaints mechanism for all broadcasters under the aegis of the 
proposed Broadcasting Auth ority deserve merit.  The GoM has asked the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to have a comprehensive look at the 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act and recommend such amendments as are 
required to be made in the Act in the light of developments ove r the last 
twenty years, subsequent to the Shunu Sen Committee report.   
While expressing serious concern over the non -implementation of 
important provisions made under the Prasar Bharati Act, the Committee again 
emphasize to take the decision either  to set up  the Parliamentary Committee 
and the Broadcasting Council as mandated under the Act  or to have a 
comprehensive look at the provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act without any 
further delay. 
 
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Grants for the year 2010-11 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
  The Committee observe that as per Demand No.59 pertaining to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation is for a total amount of 
Rs.2604.25 crore, which include Rs.850.00 crore as Plan outlay and Rs.1754.25 crore 
as non-Plan outlay. As against this, the Budgetary support for the year 2009 -10 was 
Rs.2568.07 crore (Plan Rs.800 crore + non -Plan Rs.1768.07), which was reduced to 
Rs.2107.07 crore at the Revised Estimates stage. The overall outlay for the year 2010 -
11 both for the Plan and non-Plan segment has, therefore, been increased by Rs.497.18 
crore over the budgetary allocation for the year 2009 -10, which is an increase of 
23.5%. The Committee note that the total Plan allocation to the three sectors of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting viz. Information Sector, Film Sector and 
Broadcasting sector is Rs.6311 crore. As against this, the actual expenditure during the 
first thre e years of the Eleventh Plan is Rs.1193.50 crore upto 18th March, 2010 
(Information Sector Rs.149.71 crore, Film Sector Rs.101.23 crore and Broadcasting 
Sector Rs.942.56 crore) which is approximately 18.91% of the total budgetary 
allocation. The sector wise utilization of the Plan expenditure for the first three years of 
Eleventh Plan is 47.6% in respect of Information Sector, 22.4% in respect of Film 
Sector and 17% in respect of Broadcasting Sector. The analysis of the budgetary 
allocation speaks about the  dismal performance of the Ministry in utilization of funds. 
The reasons for under utilization of funds has been stated to be delay in approval of 
schemes, long procurement process in Prasar Bharati for purchase of capital goods and 
litigation involved in implementation of some of the schemes of Prasar Bharati. Taking 
note of the under utilization of allocated funds, the Committee in their Second Report 
on Demands for Grants (2009-10) had recommended that all efforts should be made to 
ensure that financial and physical targets under each of the project/scheme are fully 
achieved. From the facts stated above, it is abundantly clear that it has not been 
possible for the Ministry to adhere to the physical targets as envisaged in the Eleventh 
Plan. What has cause d concern to the Committee is that year after year the 
representative of the Ministry during oral evidence has been advocating that the 
Ministry has been closely monitoring the Plan schemes at various levels and the pace of 
implementation would be stepped up. But, the examination of the Demands for Grants 
depicts all-together a different story wherein under utilization of funds is a perennial 
problem with the Ministry. In the opinion of the Committee, the under utilization of 
allocation is an indicator of t he Ministry‟s poor budgeting mechanism and the failure of 
its monitoring mechanism to review the implementation of various schemes /projects. 
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to make the implementation more 
effective and step up the moni toring mechanism both qualitatively and quantitatively. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should make serious efforts to identify the 
weakness in the system and streamline the planning process so as to ensure effective 
utilization of Plan outlay i.e. Rs.850 crore during the year 2010-11.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted for strict compliance 
and all efforts are being made to ensure effective utilisation of the Plan outlay in 
2010.11. 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 4/11/2010-PC (Vol.V) dated -20.09.2010] 
 

 
On-Going and New Schemes            
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note with concern that a number of schemes meant for 
implementation during 2010 -11 are still awaiting approval/clearance. Out of 28 on -
going schemes, the requisite approval/clearance in respect of 2 schemes viz. National 
Press Centre under Information Sector and Museum of Moving Images under Film 
Sector is still pending. Besides, out of total 38 new schemes included in the Annual Plan 
for 2010 -11 of the Ministry, 13 schemes are still awaiting requisite approval. These 
include some important schemes like Converting Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication into Media University under Information Sector; Setting up of Centre of 
Excellence for Animation, Gaming and special Effects, Equity Participation of NFDC, 
National Film Heritage Mission under Film Sector; and Digitalization of Transmitters, E -
Goverance, Setting up of Transmitters for Border area of J&K etc. u nder Broadcasting 
Sector. The Committee in their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had 
expressed serious concern over the delay in approval/clearance of the schemes. In 
spite of that 13 schemes are still awaiting approval/clearance even when precious three 
years of the Plan period have already passed. All this clearly indicates that there are 
serious problem in the whole planning process. The Committee find the extant situation 
not conducive for overall working of the Ministry. The Committee des ire that the 
Ministry should vigorously pursue the matter with the Planning Commission so that 
these schemes get approval/clearance without any further delay. The Committee 
further emphasize that the Ministry should work out a more streamlined approval 
system and all clearances may be obtained well before the commencement of the Plan 
so that the uncertainty about a new scheme is eliminated and its implementation starts 
in right earnest from day one of the Annual Plan. Since the preparation for the Twelfth 
Plan would start shortly the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
take all the initiatives, so that the situation of non -clearance of the schemes during the 
major part of the Plan period does not repeat during the Twelfth Plan.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
1. The suggestion of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted for compliance.   
 
2. The position with respect to project clearance, as indicated in the observation of 
the Committee at para 2 of the Sixth Report, is as under: 
 
(i) National Press Centre:           
Approval of the Competent Authority has since been obtained on 30.10.2009. 
 
(ii) Museum of Moving Images (MOMI):  
Approval of the Competent Authority has since been obtained on 25.03.2010. 
  
3. With respect to project clearance of  13 new schemes observed by the Committee at 
para 2 of the report, it is clarified that  the following schemes have been approved  
(i) Software Acquisition (AIR) 
(ii)  Digitalization of Transmitters (AIR)  
(iii)  Digitalization of Transmitters (DD) 
(iv)  Setting up of Transmitters for Border Areas and uncovered area of J&K 
State (AIR)  
(v)  DTH (Doordarshan)  
(vi)  Staff Quarters in North East and Augmentation of STI(T) Schemes ( 
under  E-Governance project)  
(vii) Conversion of IIMC into International Media University. 
(viii) Equity Participation of NFDC 

 
 
4.  The  schemes which are yet to be approved and  are at various stages of approval 
are as follows:-  
(i)  Global Film School (FTII, Pune) 
(ii)  National Centre for Animation, Gaming & Special Effects  
(iii)  National Film Heritage Mission 
(iv)  Software Acquisition (Doordarshan) 
(v)  International Channel of Doordarshan. 
(vi)  Improvement of facilities at existing stations & Enterprise Resources 
Planning Schemes   (under E-Governance project)  
 
5. Special efforts will be made to expedite the approval of pending plan schemes.  
The Ministry will also take necessary steps to avoid a situation of non -clearance and 
delay in the approval of the new schemes during Twelfth Five Year Plan.   
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 4/11/2010-PC (Vol.V) dated -20.09.2010] 
 
Commonwealth Games 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The XIX Commonwealth Games, mega sporting event, are scheduled to be held 
at New Delhi from 3rd to 14th October, 2010. The Commonwealth Games -Delhi 2010 
will consist of 17 sports events spread over 12 competition venues and 5 non -
competition venues besides the Opening and Closing ceremonies. While scrutinizing the 
Demands for Grants 2010 -11 of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the 
Committee have noted that for Commonwealth Games, the original estimate approved 
was for Rs.412.80 crore, which was revised to Rs.473.52 crore. Out of this, Rs.155.00 
crore have been utilized and the balance amount is Rs.338.52 crore, which include 
Rs.232 crore for Prasar  Bharati, Rs.21.75 crore for Press Information Bureau and 
Rs.64.77 crore for ITPO remain unutilized. Prasar Bharati is the host broadcaster for 
these games. The host broadcaster will generate and provide basic feed signal to the 
Right Holding Broadcasters of different countries at the IBC. The entire coverage of the 
games is planned in the High Definition (HDTV) format. In addition to setting up 
coverage facilities at various competition and non-competition venues at Delhi, the host 
broadcaster is also requ ired to set up an International Broadcasting Centre at Pragati 
Maidan. As per the information made available to the Committee, the implementation of 
the projects is in progress. The detailed design, drawings of RFP documents for various 
media facilities for setting up of Main Press Centre for the Commonwealth Games have 
been finalized and the date for award of works is 30th April, 2010. For Production and 
coverage activities, the contract for execution of the work has been signed between the 
Prasar Bharati and the executing agency. Till date, hands on training for nine sports 
disciplines have been completed. The work of design, installation and operation of 
International Broadcasting Centre (IBC) has also been awarded by Prasar Bharati on 
12th January 2010 a nd the contract was signed on 8th March, 2010. According to the 
Ministry, the rates quoted by the two bidders for the work relating to Booking cum 
Information activity were not reasonable as per the EFC report and therefore, the bids 
were discharged. The w ork is now being done by Doordarshan with technical support 
from NIC. The bids for Broadcasting facilities at venues are under process. The second 
World Broadcast Meeting has been scheduled to be held from 16th to 18th April, 2010 
and necessary preparations for the meeting have been started. 
 
The Committee are anxious about timely completion of the all the projects 
relating to Commonwealth Games. Since the countdown for the Commonwealth Games 
has already started, the Committee desire the Ministry to speed u p the implementation 
of all the on -going projects so that there are no slippages in adhering to the targets 
assigned for timely completion of the projects. Since organizing the games is a national 
honour, the Committee hope that Prasar Bharati, which is th e host broadcaster for the 

 
event, will be able to meet all the challenges which lies ahead and the responsibilities 
assigned to the organization would be discharged in a highly professional manner. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Regarding the preparedness for the Commonwealth Games, the latest status 
report is as follows: 
1. Production and Coverage activities: 
 Contract between the Host Broadcaster, Commonwealth Games Delhi 2010 and 
engaged entity for „production and coverage activities‟ for Commonwealth Games 
Delhi 2010 under HB assignment i.e. SIS Live was signed on March 5, 2010 at a 
contract value of Rs.246 cr. 
 SIS Live has submitted Basic Production plan for coverage of the Games which 
has since been approved. 
 Two instalments of payment to M/s.SIS Live have already been made. 
 The facilities at all venues are likely to be made operational by 28-09-10. 
2.  IBC activities: 
 The contract between the Host Broadcaster, Commonwealth Games Delhi 2010 
and engaged entity for „Internation al Broadcast Centre Activities‟ for CWG Delhi 
2010 under HB assignment i.e. Consortium of M/s.Global Television Services Pvt. 
Ltd., Australia and Shaf Broadcast India, was signed on March 8, 2010 at a 
contract value of Rs.65.90 Cr. 
 The IBC has been made op erational and inaugurated by Hon‟ble MIB on 20 -09-
10. 
3. World Broadcasters Meeting – II 
 M/s. Wizcraft has been selected as the entity for Event management at a 
contract value of Rs.2.70 cr. and the contract has been signed with them.  The 
first WBM was he ld from October 26, 2009 to October 28, 2009 at Hotel the 
Ashok, New Delhi. 
 The second WBM was held from 16 -18 April, 2010 at Hotel Shangri -La, New 
Delhi.  The RHBs from Commonwealth Countries as Australia, New Zealand, 
South Africa, Asia Pacific Broadcasting Union (ABU), Canada and UK participated 
in the WBMII. 
4. Booking-cum-Information Office and HB Website: 
 The booking -cum-Information activity is being done by Doordarshan with 
technical support from NIC at a cost of Rs.2.16 Cr. The entire payment has be en 
released to NIC for the project on 31.3.2010. 
 The indicative rate card for the bookable facilities and services was distributed to 
the Right Holder Broadcasters during the WBM -I.  The final rate card has been 
uploaded on the website and RHBs are in the process of booking facilities and 
services.  RHBs have booked their first orders. 
5. Broadcast Facilities at Venues: 
 BECIL  has been selected as the entity for „Provision and customization for 
Broadcast facilities at Venues‟ under HB assignment for Commonw ealth Games 

 
Delhi 2010 for Rs.19.80 Cr. The assignment includes customization of Broadcast 
Compounds at Venues, Presentation studios, technical furniture, commentary 
tribunes, camera platforms, power supply distribution panels and air-conditioning 
etc. 
 Total budget allocated to Prasar Bharati for the year 2010-11 is as below: 
 
 Prasar Bharati : Rs.232.00 crore  
 ITPO   : 64.77 crore  
 Total   : Rs.296.77 crore  
 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated 20 .09.2010] 
 
 
Functioning of Prasar Bharati 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee during the deliberations have observed that there is 
disagreement between the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati 
on a number of issues. As per the information made available by the Minist ry, the 
commercial receipts of both Doordarshan and AIR have been decreasing. When the CEO 
during the deliberations was asked to comment on this aspect, he straightaway 
disagreed with the data furnished by the Ministry. Again on the issue of Commonwealth 
Games, which is a proud event for the country, the CEO stated that he would not have 
liked Doordarshan to be the Host Broadcaster. Besides during the deliberations it 
emerged that CEO Prasar Bharati was not in favour of the existing arrangement 
whereby Prasar Bharati is accountable to Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. He 
was on record stating that the accountability of Prasar Bharati with the constitution of 
the Parliamentary Committee as per the provisions made in Prasar Bharati Act would be 
directly to the Parliament. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid situation that 
there is an apparent conflict between the Prasar Bharati and the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting. This is a sorry state of affairs and the Committee apprehend that it is 
affecting the overall functioning of Prasar Bharati. The Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need to sort out the differences between the Ministry and Prasar Bharati 
particularly the issue regarding accountability of Prasar Bharati to Ministry as emerged  
during the deliberations, expeditiously by the Government when the Commonwealth 
Games, a prestigious event for the country would be held shortly which would be 
telecast by Prasar Bharati. The concern of the Committee in this regard should be duly 
communicated to the Cabinet Secretary. All care should be taken by the Government 
that Prasar Bharati meets the expectations of the country by presenting world class 
telecast during the Commonwealth Games.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 The position in regard to the commercial receipts of Doordarshan and All India 
Radio is as follows:-  
On receipt of the questionnaire from the Standing Committee to furnish 
replies by 16th March, 2010, this Ministry vide its letter dated 12th March, 
2010 addressed to CEO, Prasar Bharati, with a copy to Member (Finance), 
DG : Doordarshan  and DG : All India Radio, required Prasar Bharati  to 
furnish the requisite replies by 15th March, 2010.  A reminder was also 
sent on 17th March, 2010.  However, since no replies were forthcoming 
and since the furnishing of replies to Standing Committee was getting 
delayed, this Ministry was left with no other alternative but to call the 
officials of Prasar Bharati to prepare and furnish the replies.  The data 
pertaining to the commercial receipts o f both Doordarshan and All India 

 
Radio was provided by Senior General Manager (Finance), Prasar Bharati 
and duly signed by her.  The information submitted by Ministry to the 
Standing Committee, was thus  based on the data given by Prasar 
Bharati. The disag reement expressed by CEO, Prasar Bharati regarding 
the data furnished by the Ministry is therefore not understood.  
 On the issue of Doordarshan being appointed as the Host Broadcaster for 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 and the views of CEO, Prasar Bharati there on, it is 
submitted that when the bids were filed by OC as far back as the year 2003 for 
allocation of the games, Doordarshan was mentioned as the agency which will 
discharge the role of the Host Broadcaster under the Host City Contract and as per the 
CGF Guidelines.   Therefore, Doordarshan / Prasar Bharati are now required to 
discharge their obligations as per commitments already made. Any personal opinions at 
divergence with the above decision, are irrelevant and uncalled for, particularly at this 
stage.  
  As per various provisions contained in Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation 
of India) Act, 1990, the Central Government has been assigned specific roles vis -a-vis 
Prasar Bharati.  As per „The Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961‟, 
the work of administration of Prasar Bharati Act has been allocated to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  Therefore, it is the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting which is required to deal with all Parliamentary business concerning 
Prasar Bharati. Accordingly, as per the extant law the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting is required to discharge its responsibilities vis-a-vis Prasar Bharati despite 
any individual opinions to the contrary.   In addition to the role envisaged for the 
Central Government the accountability to Parliament was also envisaged through the 
Parliamentary Committee  as per Section 13 of the Prasar Bharati Act.  This 
accountability towards Parliament is also being achieved through the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee and the Consultative Committee. Even if the Parliament 
Committee as envisaged under the Act had been constituted, the Central Government 
through the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting would have continued to play the 
role as envisaged under the Act.   
 On the concern expressed by the Standing Committee regarding the smooth 
conduct of the Commonwealth Games, it is submitted that regular reviews are being 
undertaken inter-alia at the level of this Ministry and the Cabinet Secretariat to ensure 
that Doordarshan / Prasar Bharati are able to complete the requisite preparations in 
time.  A high level Oversight Committee, co -chaired by Minister of Information and 
Broadcasting & Minister of Law and Justice and consisting of senior officers from the 
Ministry, Prasar Bharati and other concerned Departments/organizations has also been 
constituted and has held meetings to review the progress of works relating to the 
Commonwealth Games. Cabinet Secretary has been holding regular review meetings on 
the progress of preparation for Commonwealth Games including issues of Broadcasting.  
Further, any issues which have been requiring the attention / intervention at the level 
of Cabinet Secretary are being brought to his notice by this Ministry or by Department 
of Sports for resolution.    
 
           [Min. of I&B, ID No.5/1/2010-BP&L, Dated-05/07/2010.] 
 
 
Revenue earnings by Prasar Bharati 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee‟s examination has revealed that unsatisfactory performance of 
the Ministry was not confined to under utilization of funds, but extends to other areas 
also. The Committee note that the revenue earned by Prasar Bharati (All India Radio 
and Door darshan) is mainly through commercial means (advertisements, sporting 
events etc.). However the commercial receipts have been gradually decreasing. During 

 
the year 2007-08, the commercial receipts were Rs .936.78 crore, which came down to 
Rs.933.61 crore during 2008-09 and further reduced to Rs.762.58 crore (upto January, 
2010) during 2009 -10. Another problem area identified by the Committee during the 
course of the examination of the Demands for Grants pertains to increasing gap 
between the operational cost and revenue generation and increasing grant-in-aid (non-
Plan). The Committee find that during the year 2007 -08, the gap between operational 
cost and revenue generation was Rs.712 crore, which increased to Rs.1185 crore in the 
year 2008 -09 and the gap furt her enlarged to Rs.1742 crore during 2009 -10. The 
Committee have been informed that both All India Radio and Doordarshan can generate 
revenue by taking some policy decisions which inter -alia include sharing of Prasar 
Bharati infrastructure such as towers, building and land with private broadcasters, 
mobile service providers on licence basis; providing value added service such as IVRS 
and SMS based service to the listeners; rationalization of rate structure of the rental 
resources; turnkey solutions for esta blishing 50/100 watt community radio stations to 
Universities/Colleges/residential schools etc. The Committee are of the opinion that as 
an autonomous organization, Prasar Bharati should find out the ways and means to 
mobilize funds to reduce dependence on  Government‟s grants to cover up the 
operational cost. The Committee feel that with vast infrastructure and skilled 
manpower, which private channels may not possess, Prasar Bharati can reasonably 
enhance its revenue by adopting suitable marketing strategie s. In the opinion of the 
Committee to increase commercial revenue of both All India Radio and Doordarshan, 
the Ministry should take all possible measures including aggressive marketing, content 
improvement, increasing the quality of in -house programs by ex ploring better talent 
from professional theatre and film fields. The measures are essential in an organization 
like Prasar Bharati which is facing stiff competition from Private Channels. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to examine these suggestions a nd respond to the 
Committee. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Prasar Bharati has noted the suggestions made by the Committee with regard to 
increasing the revenue generation by taking policy decisions and would explore the 
various suggestions made by the Committee in this regard. 
As already submitted to the Committee, Prasar Bharati being a Public Service 
Broadcaster is not guided by commercial motives and its primary object is to inform, 
educate and entertain the masses across the length and breadth of th e country.  
Revenue generation can only be a by-product of its main focus.  
However, Prasar Bharati has taken various steps to attract clients on 
Doordarshan Channels, which include discount schemes for direct booking of the 
advertisements on Doordarshan a nd the bases for telecast of Advertisement including 
the Government schemes and projects.  Value addition is also being given to clients in 
the form of branded promos on DD Channels to promos the programme free of cost.  
As regards AIR rationalisation of r ate card and aggressive marketing of the medium, 
content improvement are amongst the steps taken to attract more advertisements.  
Besides this, other steps are: a) In -house capability for marketing of programmes (b) 
Self Finance Commissioning success in DD  National Channel is being extended to 
regional Kendras to achieve more revenue. (c) Under New guidelines of procurement of 
Hindi feature films, the films are to be procured from right holders directly, which would 
increase the revenue of the channel. It is expected that these steps would help improve 
revenue earning by Prasar Bharati considerably.  The revenue earned by Prasar Bharati 
during 2009-10 and the projections of Revenue earning during 2010-11 are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 Net revenue 
earned during 
2009-10 
Gross Revenue 
projections during 
2010-11 
Net Revenue 
projections during 
2010-11 
AIR 295.23   340.00 315.00 

 
DD 835.75 1300.00 961.00 
PB 25.00    26.00 26.00 
Total 1155.98 1666.00 1302.00 
 
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated      .09.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
  Prasar Bharati is the host broadcaster for the Commonwealth Games, being held 
at New Delhi from 3rd to 14 October, 2010. Commonwealth Games is a prestigious 
event for the country when India would be show casing its capabilities to the world. The 
Committee feel that it is a great opportunity for Prasar Bharati to meet the expectations 
of the country by presenting the world class telecast. Besides, it is also an opportunity 
for Prasar Bharati to bridge the gap betwe en operational expenditure and revenue by 
earning through commercial advertisements. Prasar Bharati should chalk out the 
detailed strategy in this regard and take desired action.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Prasar Bharati is making preparations to provide a World Class coverage in High 
Definition TV format.  The updated status of preparations is given in reply to Para 3.  As 
regard the possible revenue earning from the telecast of CWG-2010, it is submitted that 
the as per the agreement entered into between HB and OC, revenue sharing of all Net 
Revenue Realization arising out of International Broadcast Rights Sales by the OC of the 
Games from outside the territory of India has been agreed in the ratio of 70% to  the 
account of OC and 30% to the account of Prasar Bharati, and revenue sharing of all Net 
Revenue Realization arising out of Television Broadcast & Radio Broadcast of the Games 
respectively by Doodarshan & Akashvani in the territory of India, in the rati o of 60% to 
the account of OC and 40% to the account of Doordarshan & Akashvani. 
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated      .09.2010] 
North East Special Package 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that the projects under the Nort h East Special Package 
entails Rs.43.00 crore during the year 2009 -10. However, out of the allocated amount, 
only Rs.6.81 crore could be utilized upto December, 2009. Several projects like 
commissioning of 19 new FM stations, 1 KW FM transmitters at Kolkat a, 5 KW FM 
transmitters at Silchar, 10 KW FM transmitters at Gangtok, 1000 KW MW Transmitters 
at Chinsura, 100 watt FM relay centres in remote locations and procurement of 
equipment for DSNG/MSS terminals are at various stages of execution. The non -
utilization of funds has been attributed mainly due to litigation, delay in construction of 
approach road to AIR sites at some places. The Committee have been informed that the 
litigation is now over and BECIL, a PSU under the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting is executing the project. Now, when the basic hurdle in the 
implementation of the programme is over, the Committee emphasize that Prasar 
Bharati should take up the project in right earnest and closely monitor the 
implementation of the projects to ensure  that there are no slippages in terms of 
physical and financial targets.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
North East Special Package 
                     (Rs in crore) 
Schemes 2009-10 2010-11 
 Plan Outlay 
(BE) 
Expenditure 
(upto March,10) 
Plan Outlay 
(BE) 
Capital  40.00 10.66 37.00 

 
Revenue 3.00 0.00 3.00 
Total 43.00 10.66 40.00 
  
Timeline for completion of North East Special plan. 
S. 
No.  
Project  Status (as on 
21.05.2010) 
Targets 
expected to be 
achieved during 
the year 2010-
11 with revised 
timelines 
showing the 
Quarterly 
Targets  
Remarks 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 New FM 
Stations with 
1 KW FM Trs. 
(1) Acquisition  of 
sites: 
 
In addition to 10 
sites taken over 
last acquired during 
the current year at 
Lumding 7 
Karimganj in 
Assam, 
Cherapunjee 
(Meghalaya) , 
Kolasib (Mizoram) 
& Wokha 
(Nagaland). 
2. more sites also 
finalised at Anini 
(Arunachal 
Pradesh) and 
District authorities 
are being pursued 
to issue Demand 
notes. 2 more Sites 
remain to be 
acquired at 
Tamenglong 
(Manipur) and 
Ukhrul (Manipur)   
 
(2) Civil works 
 Boundary wall / 
Security fencing 
Wall completed 
at Udaipur & 
Nutan bazaar 
and fencing work 
is I progress at 8 
places at  
Bomdila,Goalpara
, Lumding, 
Daporijo, 
Khonsa, 
Tuepang,Champh
 (1) 
Acquisition  of 
sites:  
 
Q2- Remaining 
4 sites are 
expected to be 
acquired.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Civil works 
Q1- Completion 
of Security 
fencing at 9 
places and 
award of 
building works 
at 4 sites 
already taken 
over. Tendering 
of Towers for 6 
palaces  
There has been delay 
in handing over of 
sites by State Govt. 
At Tamenglong, 
district 
administration has 
shown inability to 
vacate the land 
earier offered and 
has suggested 
alternative land. 
Matter is being 
pursued. 
 
- At Ukhrul, site will 
be available only 
after the district SP‟s 
office at site moves 
to new building of 
the District 
Secretariat which is 
likely by June 2010. 
Matter is being 
pursued. 
 
Progress of work is 
slow as concerned 
State Government 
have to construct 
approach road to AIR 
sites at Chemphai, 
Phek, Goalpara  & 
Kolasib. Estimate 
awaited from local 
body for shifting HT 
line at Kolasib. 
Matter is being 
pursued.    
 
Installation/testing at 
six places will be 
complete this year. 
For 9 places the 

 
 
 
 
ai & Kolasib. At 
Changlang, civil 
work could not 
start even after 
clearance by 
court, due to 
problem at site. 
After pursuing 
the matter with 
DC, Changlang, 
work is expected 
to start shortly. 
 Building Works -
Foundation work 
of building is in 
progress at 6 
places at 
Goalpara, 
Daporijo, 
Tuipang, Kolasib, 
Nutan Bazar and 
Udaypur. At 2 
places at 
Changlag & 
Champhai, 
tenders are 
under process. 
Estimate for 
building is under 
process at 2 
places for Khonsa 
& Lumding. 
 
 
 Building Works - 
Foundation wors 
of building is in 
progress at 6 
places at 
Goalpara, 
Daporijo, 
Tuipang, Kolasib, 
Nutan Bazar and 
Udaypur. At 2 
places at 
Changlang & 
Chemphai, 
tenders are under 
process. 
Estimates for 
building is under 
process at 2 
places for Khonsa 
& Lumding. 
1 KW FM  Trs 
received. 
Q2- Completion 
of Security 
fencing at 4 
places. 
Q3- Completion  
of Building and 
Start of 
installation at 6 
places 
Q4- Completion 
of building at 
remaining 7 
places 
 
 
installation is 
expected to be 
completed by 
Dec,2012 and the 
remaining 4 places 
during 2012-13. 
  

 
 
2. Silchar-5 KW 
FM Tr. 
Civil works are 
complete. Purchase 
proposal for Tr. Is 
under process.  
Order is yet to be 
placed as Internal 
Finance is yet to 
clear the proposal. 
 
Q1- Ordering of 
Tr.  
 
Q3- Receipt of 
Tr. & start of 
installation  
 
Q4- Completion 
of installation & 
start of testing. 
 
 
3. Gangtok- 10 
KW FM Tr.- 
Civil works are 
complete. Tr. Is 
part of the 
consolidated 
procurement 
proposal for 42 Trs. 
Purchase order 
could not be placed 
due to litigation. 
Presently formal AT 
has been placed. 
 
Q1-. Formal AT 
for Tr.  
 
Q3- Receipt of 
Tr. & start of 
installation 
Q4- Completion 
of installation & 
start of testing   
 
4. Chinsura – 
1000 KW MW 
Tr.- 
Outside civil works 
are complete. After 
decision of case by 
Supreme court in 
October,10, formal 
order for 
Transmitter has 
been placed with 
delivery expected 
in Dec.10. 
Q1- Completion 
of civil 
modification 
works inside the 
Tr. Building  
Q4. Receipt of 
Tr. and Start of 
installation, 
Completion of 
installation & testing 
is expected by 
Sept,2011 
5. DSNG 
systems 
Purchase order for 
DSNG systems 
could not be placed 
due to ret endering. 
Tenders not found 
technically 
acceptable. Tenders 
called again with 
revised 
specifications. 
Q1- Receipt & 
scrutiny of 
tenders  
Q2- Technical 
Evaluation of 
tenders 
Q3- Opening of 
commercial bids 
and processing 
of purchase 
proposal  
Q4- Ordering of  
equipment. 
DSNG systems are 
expected to be 
available by 
June,2011. 
6. MSS 
Terminals  
For MSS terminals, 
order was placed. 
But the firm 
intimated a change 
in model number of 
equipment quoted 
which is not 
acceptable. 
Procurement of 
MSS terminals 
is proposed to 
be dropped. 
 

 
Proposal put up for 
cancellation of 
order. 
7. 100 Watt FM 
Relay Trs. At 
100 places. 
Installation has 
been completed at 
80 places and is in 
progress at another 
9 places. For the 
remaining 11 
places (7 in 
Mizoram &  4 in 
Manipur), matter is 
being pursued with 
the concerned 
State Governments 
to finalise the 
locations. 
Q1- Completion 
of installation at 
places which 
remain after 
March,2010. 
(Subject to 
availability of 
space by the 
State Govt.  
Law and order 
situation in  Manipur, 
Tripura, Nagaland 
and Karbi  
Anglong District of 
Assam. At some 
places  the nodal 
officers of State Govt 
changed. Work got 
delayed in the 
process due to 
identification and 
finalization of new  
sites. Mizoram Govt. 
is yet to allot sited.  
 
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated      .09.2010] 
 
Digitalization of Transmitters, Studios, Connectivity and DTH channel 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Committee in their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had 
expressed serious concern over the delay in approval/clearance of important projects of 
the Ministry of I&B during the Eleventh Plan. In the context of All India Radio, one of 
the imp ortant programmes is digitalization of transmitters, studios, connectivity and 
DTH channel. The Eleventh Plan allocation for the scheme is Rs. 924.20 crore out of 
which projects for Rs. 57 crore were sanctioned in 2007 -08. As regards the balance 
amount of Rs. 867.20 crore, the Committee have now been informed that the project 
has been cleared at the level of EFC for an amount of Rs. 843.54 crore. A CCEA note 
has been submitted for consideration of the Cabinet. The Committee again express 
serious concern ove r the way the important projects/schemes are being processed by 
the Ministry. The major portion of such an important scheme of All India Radio is still to 
be finalized even when precious three years of the Eleventh Plan have already been 
over. The Committee emphasize that programme for the balance amount of Rs. 867.20 
crore should be cleared expeditiously so that there is some headway at least during the 
remaining two years of Eleventh Plan.  
Action Taken by the Government 
Cabinet Committee on Infrastructur e (CCI) has approved the scheme of 
Digitalization of transmitters, studios, connectivity and DTH Channel of AIR (11 th Plan) 
at a cost of Rs. 843.54 crores in its meeting held on 08.04.2010.  Cabinet Secretariat 
has conveyed the approval of CCI to the Ministry vide their letter dated 12.04.2010 and 
accordingly sanction/approval has been conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 27.04.2010 
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated      .09.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee are  disappointed to note the progress of the various projects 
being implemented with Rs. 57 crore of the aforesaid scheme which were sanctioned in 
2007-08. During the year 2008-09, an amount of Rs. 63.88 lakh was earmarked under 
the scheme. However, no expend iture could be incurred during the year. For the year 
2009-10 allocation of Rs. 28 lakh was made and again expenditure up to December, 

 
2009 as reported by the Ministry is nil. The Committee‟s examination has further 
revealed that low expenditure is on account of the long procurement cycle. As stated in 
the earlier part of the report, there are serious problems with regard to procurement 
procedure. As such the Committee again emphasize that urgent steps should be taken 
to streamline the procurement procedure . Immediate action in this regard should be 
taken and the Committee informed accordingly.  
 
 The Committee further find that a number of projects which are part of the 
scheme viz. replacement of 31 old MW DRM transmitters with captive power plant at 
Arunachal-China border, replacement of 6 nos. KW MW mobile by MW DRM transmitters 
and conversion of 36 existing DRM compatible MW transmitters to DRM are pending 
completion. The Committee in this regard urge the Ministry to give the detailed 
information about th e aforesaid projects indicating the date of execution and timeline 
for completion of projects so as to know about the progress of these important projects.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
With a view to streamlining the procurement procedure, Prasar Bhara ti has 
drawn a time schedule for the procurement activities with the approval of CEO.  The 
activity chart for procurement in Prasar Bharati is enclosed at Annexure.   
The total outlay under the Scheme “Digitalization of transmitters studious and 
connectivity and DTH Channels” is Rs.924.20 crore.  
 
1. Out of total outlay the following 3 Schemes were approved for Rs.57 crore.   
 Present Status are as under:- 
(i) Upgradation and Replacement of 6 
Nos. of 10 kW MW Mobile Transmitter   
 
Order was placed on 9.12.2009. LC has been 
opened. Pre -dispatch inspection/testing of 
Transmitters by AIR Engineers  is to be 
carried out before shipping of equipment 
(ii) Replacement of STL NIT was issued on 20.06.2008 but none of 
the Tenders were found technically 
acceptable.  Then re -tendering was done on 
25.06.2009. One of the firms has now 
represented and issue is under 
consideration. in Prasar Bharati.   
(iii) C-Band RN Terminal Re-tendering was done on 26.06.2010 and 
tender has been opened on 28.08.2010. The 
Technical Evaluation is under process 
 
2. Approval of rest of the Schemes for  an amount of Rs. 843.54 crores including  
Replacement of 31 Old MW transmitters by MW DRM transm itters with Captive 
power plant at Twang, Passighat  and Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh and 
conversion of 36 existing DRM compatible MW transmitters to DRM Mode  under 
digitalization of AIR network of 11 th Plan, was conveyed  to Prasar Bharati on 
27th April, 2010.  
The present status is:- 
 As per timeline,  NIT (Tender)  has been issued for most of the equipment 
in the month of June, 2010 and Tender. opening would be completed 
during the month of September, 2010. 
 Procurement committee has been constituted in AIR Directorate under the 
Chairmanship of DG:AIR, to review the procurement action of equipment 
fortnightly. 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated  20 .09.2010] 

 
Digitalization and modernization of production facilities (Studio/OB) 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 For the Eleventh Plan, digitalization is one of the major schemes for upgrading 
the infrastructure and improving its operation both for All India Radio and Doordarshan. 
The scheme envisages digitalization and modernization of production fa cilities for 
enhancement of technical quality of programmes. The Committee note that digitization 
of transmitters will be a major steps towards `go digital‟. The switch over from analog 
transmission to digital transmission has been necessitated due to adva ncement in 
technology as the analog transmitters will be switched off in 2017. During the year 
2009-10, Rs.20.00 crore were earmarked, out of which Rs.8.96 crore (upto December, 
2009) could be utilized. The reasons for low level of utilization have been st ated to be 
delay in supply of equipments like multi camera OB van. The Committee also note that 
as in the case of other new schemes, this scheme is also awaiting approval from 
Expenditure Finance committee. While expressing their displeasure over delay in 
approval of the scheme and also tardy implementation of the digitalization process, the 
Committee desire that all necessary approvals should be expedited and the Ministry 
should endeavor towards expeditious implementation of the scheme. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Doordarshan has a total of 6 New schemes in 11th Plan.  Out of these, 4 schemes 
viz. DTH augmentation, Modernization, augmentation & replacement of Satellite 
Broadcast equipment: High Definition TV (HDTV); Staff Quarters & other misc. works 
and Digitalization of Studios in DD Network have already been approved and are at 
different stages of implementation and remaining two  schemes  viz. (i) Replacement, 
Modernization & Augmentation of Transmitter & Studio equipment and (ii) Software 
Acquisition/Production are yet to be approved.  The proposal pertaining to 
Replacement, Modernization/Augmentation of Transmitter & Studio Equipment, revised 
EFC has since been received which is under examination of the Ministry.  In respect of 
Software Acquisition/Production, PB has been asked to submit a revised SFC proposal.                                                   
Doordarshan is taking every possible step to utilize the allocated funds for 2010-
11. In order to cut short the time in procurement of equipme nt (NIT to order), a 
Procurement Committee with DG as Chairperson and E -in-C, CE (Purchase), CE 
(System Design), DDG (Fin.)/IFA and DE (Purchase) as members has been formed at 
Doordarshan Directorate. Monitoring mechanism has also been strengthened. 
Switch off date for analog transmitters are mentioned as 2017.  In this regard it 
is to mention that for digitalization of its terrestrial transmitter network, Doordarshan 
has planned establishment of 630 digital transmitters (HPTs -230, LPTs-400) to provide 
the current level of coverage as being provided by 1412 analog transmitters.  Out of 
the above 630 transmitters, 40 transmitters are to be set up under 11 th Plan.  The 
remaining 590 transmitters will have to be set up subsequently.  The digitalization 
projects, as approved under the present schemes, are expected to be completed by 
2013.  The complete digitalization of the network of Doordarshan/All India Radio is 
targeted to be completely by 2017 depending on the availability of Plan funding. Analog 
& digital transmission will have to continue simultaneously for some time. 
 
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated     20 .09.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee observe that now-a-days there are large choices of watching the 
content appearing on TV like internet, IPTV, DTH, Headend in the Sky etc. Besides, as 
stated by the representative of the Ministry, mobile TV when it comes into existence will 
actually be largely tak ing content from the already existing broadcasters. Since the 
internet is under the jurisdiction of the Department of Information Technology, there is 

 
an urgent need to have a holistic approach on the issue of content regulation 
mechanism. The Committee, t herefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
ensure that the proposed regulatory mechanism addresses to the content of 
broadcaster appearing in various other services like IPTV, mobile TV internet etc. by 
having wider consultations with the Depart ment of Information Technology and other 
related Departments.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
In so far as content regulation is concerned, there is no independent regulator at 
the moment and the Ministry of I&B acts as a  regulator.  Every Broadcaster, t hrough 
various Policy guidelines, has been mandated to follow the Programme and Advertising 
Codes prescribed under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and Rules 
framed thereunder.  These codes also apply to IPTV, DTH and HITS and will also  be 
required to be followed by Mobile TV service providers, the policy for which is under 
consideration.  However, Internet is not proposed to be covered by the Broadcasting 
Law and it is separately governed by the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 
administered by the Department of Information Technology.  The proposed 
Broadcasting Authority is envisaged to regulate both the carriage and content of 
broadcasting services. 
[Min. of I&B, ID No.5/1/2010-BP&L, Dated-05/07/2010.] 
 
Community Radio          
             
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
The Community Radio campaign in the country has been a recent development. The 
Community Radio, a low power radio station is installed and run by local communities, 
civil societies organization, established educational institutions including IITs/IIMs, Non-
Governmental Organizations. The Committee have been informed that presently 52 
Community Radio stations are functional in the country, which are run by 8 NGOs and 
44 educational i nstitutions. Presently about 340 applications are pending with the 
Ministry for grant of licence. The Committee are of the view that community radio can 
become an effective tool for development because community radio can focus on 
specific areas, highlight ing the area specific problems and addressing those concerns, 
something which may not be possible through the conventional mass radio. The 
progress of setting up of Community Radio Station as stated above, indicates that the 
growth is very slow. As such th ere is an urgent need to evolve a strategy for 
popularizing and sustaining the community radio. Efforts should be made to replicate 
successful models in other States and there is need to ensure its long term survival.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 Community Radio Stations, have a great potential to reach out to every person in 
the country with useful and constructive information. The Ministry is fully in agreement 
with  the views of the Hon‟ble Committee that there is an urgent need to evolve a 
strategy for popularizing and sustaining the Community Radio movement in the 
Country.  
 In order to popularize and spread awareness about Community Radio, the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been organizing State Level Workshops in 
which people who wis h to set up a Community Radio Station have been invited to 
participate and learn about the policy, methodology, application processing and other 
technical details. For this purpose a special scheme was proposed by the Ministry in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan under the Head “ IEC Activities for Community Radio”. Ministry 
has been organizing the Local Level Workshops in various States of the country for the 
purpose of spreading awareness. 10 Workshops were organized during 2007 -2009 and 
10 State Level Consultations were organized during 2009-10. Participants from various 

 
states like North-East, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh etc., were invited. These 
Workshops are organized for a period of three days. Followings areas are covered. 
1. Participants are explain ed about CRS objectives, eligibility criteria, policy 
guidelines, how to fill up application and licensing procedure etc.. There is 
experience sharing with functional community radio operators, field visits 
are organised to villages for live demonstration on Community Radio 
Station by using mobile phones. 
 
2. Different models of CR Stations, their installation, available technology of 
community radio and resources of funding from multilateral   agencies, 
are discussed. 
 
3. Details about types of programmes which can be broadcast on CRS, 
community participation in management of CRS and programme 
production etc., are discussed. 
 
 It is proposed to organise 12 State Level Consultations during 2010 -11. These 
local level workshops have not only helped in creation of aw areness, but have also 
helped in catalyzing the spurt in the receipt of applications from the applicants. 800 
participants have participated in these Workshops. Letters of Intent have been issued to 
231 organizations. 102 organizations have signed the Gran t of Permission Agreement 
(GOPA), 57 Community Radio Stations are operational in the country. 
 With regard to the need to ensure the long term survival of various Community 
Radio Stations in India, Government has made a significant change in the policy in year 
2006 wherein Community Radio Stations have been allowed to receive advertisements 
and make announcements relating to local events, business services and employment 
opportunities etc.. For this purpose a rate of Rs.1.00 per second has been permitted by  
the Ministry in the Policy. The Community Radio Station can broadcast advertisements 
up to 5 minutes per hour. This is expected to generate revenue for the Community 
Radio Stations to help them to meet the recurrent charges. 
   [Min. of I&B, ID No.503/106/2010-CRS, Dated-29/06/2010.] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note that per hour cost of Broadcasting by Community Radio is 
approximately Rs.5000. The Government is not providing any financial assistance to set 
up a Community Radio Station and the applicant has to arrange funds for establishment 
and to run a Community Radio Station. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
Government may consider extending financial and technical assistance for setting up 
Community Radio in the backward and remote areas of the Country.  
Action Taken by the Government 
With regard to extension of financial assistance for setting up of Community 
Radio Stations in backward and remote areas of the country, Ministry has held 
discussions with stakeholders in this reg ard, though at present there is no proposal to 
sanction funds to the community Radio Stations. However, Ministry is actively engaged 
in discussion with various stakeholders to arrive at a solution for formulating a suitable 
Plan Scheme to assist Community Radio Stations in the country in the XII Plan. 
   [Min. of I&B, ID No.503/106/2010-CRS, Dated-29/06/2010.] 
 
Information Sector 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee observe that out of the allocation of Rs. 6311 crore as the DBS 
component, the Information Sector has been allocated Rs.314 crore, which works out to 

 
4.9%, of the total allocation. The Committee‟s examination has revealed that there has 
been under utilization of Outlay. During the year 2008 -09, the allocation at BE stage 
was Rs.51.28 crore, which was enhanced to Rs.75.89 crore at RE stage and the actual 
utilization was 66.86 crore, which comes to 88%. During the year 2009 -10, RE stage 
allocation was Rs.76.00 crore, which was increased to Rs.85.27 crore out of which only 
Rs.47.58 crore, could be utilized upto February, 2010, which is 55.7%. What has 
caused concern to the Committee is that an important scheme under the Information 
Sector viz. Converting Indian Institute of Mass Communication into Media University is 
awaiting SFC approval. Therefore, the Committee desire that the process of seeking 
clearance to the pending schemes should be expedited and all corrective action may be 
taken so as to utilize the outlay effectively.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In this regard, it is submitted that the utilization of grants in the Information 
Sector was due to the following reasons: 
1. Non-finalisation of the hiring of accommodation for the new office at 
Guwahati by RNI. 
2. The revised cost estimate of Rs. 60 crore for setting up of National Press 
Centre got mandatory clearances from various authorities by December, 
2009 only. Hence PIB surrendered Rs.1 crore at the RE stage. 
3. Due to enforcement of model code of conduct for Lok Sabha Elections, 
2009, no public information campaign could be organized between April 
2009 to June 2009. 
4. PIB could not also organize exchange of media persons under the Cultural 
Exchange Programme due to non -receipt of response from participating 
countries. 
  
It is reiterated that all efforts are being made to increase utilization of funds by 
all the Media Units in the Information Wing by having periodical meetings at the level of 
Joint Secretary with the Heads of the Media Units. 
As far as IIMC is concerned, during the year 2008 -09, Rs. 1.00 crore was 
allocated for the Scheme for conversion of IIMC into an International Media University. 
However, the amount could not be utilized as th e „in -principle‟ approval of Planning 
Commission was received only in March, 2009.  In 2009 -10, Rs. 3.70 crores was 
earmarked in the BE/RE, which was reduced to  Rs. 40.00 lakhs in Final Grant due to 
non-finalization of SFC Memo. IIMC has incurred an expen diture of Rs. 37.30 lakh on 
pre-investment activities during the financial year 2009 -10.  SFC Meeting was held on 
15.07.2010 for consideration of IIMC‟s Plan Scheme “Converting IIMC into International 
Media University”, which has been renamed as “Upgradati on of IIMC to International 
Standards” in terms of the recommendations of SFC.  The proposal as recommended by 
the SFC has since been approved by the competent authority. 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 23/16/2010-IP&MC dated 4.08.2010] 
 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Ministry proposes to convert the Indian Institute of Mass Communication 
(IIMC) into an International Media University, which will allow it to award its own 
degrees in place of existing post graduate diploma courses. The Committee in their 
Second Report  on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) presented to Parliament on 16 
December, 2009 had recommended that the Ministry should take up the project in right 
earnest and expedite approval of all mandatory clearances paving the way for 
conversion of IIMC into an Inte rnational Media University. The Committee find that no 
headway has been made in this regard except seeking `in -principal‟ approval of 

 
Planning Commission on 23rd March, 2009. The comments of IIMC on the revised draft 
SFC memorandum are still awaited. There after, the draft memorandum will be placed 
before SFC for its approval. In addition to mandatory approvals at the Ministry level, 
the recognition of the degrees to be awarded by IIMC will require approval of the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development in re spect of their equivalence with MA 
degree. The matter is yet to be taken up with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development. Further, `no objection‟ from Jawahar Lal Nehru University will also be 
required for starting construction of the building as the la nd belongs to that University. 
With regard to the financial performance during the year 2008 -09, a sum of Rs.1.00 
crore was allocated to the Institute at BE stage, which was reduced to Rs.0.01 crore at 
RE stage and the actual expenditure was reported to be zero. During the year 2009-10, 
a sum of Rs.3.70 crore was allocated to the Institute both at BE and RE stage, but no 
expenditure could be incurred. The chain of events during the years 2008 and 2009 
gives an impression that the scheme has been conceived i n haste resulting in gross 
under utilization of outlay during each of the Eleventh Plan.  
 
 The Committee feel that the Ministry should have done adequate preparatory 
work before embarking upon the scheme. Once the scheme has been conceptualized, 
the reaso ns for under performance are untenable. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should take up the project on priority basis and expedite approval of all 
mandatory clearances paving the way for conversion of IIMC into an International 
Media University. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) has now completed the pre -
investment activities, such as Topographical Survey, Soil Testing, Structural Survey, 
Site Plan, Line Drawings of proposed Constructions, etc. The Executive Summary of the 
detailed project for “Conversion of IIMC into an International Media University” has 
been revised accordingly. Keeping in mind the immediate requirement for converting 
One-year PG Diploma Courses to Two-year Advanced PG Diploma Courses and addition 
of two new Advanced PG Diploma Courses, IIMC has already sent a request to Ministry 
of Human Resource Development for equivalence of the proposed two year diploma 
course to PG Degree.  The proposal is under consideration of Ministry of HRD and the 
necessary clearance is expected by the end of March, 2011.   
Similarly, IIMC has also requested Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) for „no -
objection‟ certificate for addition of new floors on the existing buildings and also 
construction of new build ing on the available vacant land.  Necessary clearance of the 
JNU is likely to be completed by December, 2010. IIMC has incurred an expenditure of 
Rs. 37.30 lakh on pre -investment activities during the financial year 2009 -10.  SFC 
Meeting was held on 15.07 .2010 for consideration of IIMC‟s Plan Scheme “Converting 
IIMC into International Media University”, which has been renamed as “Upgradation of 
IIMC to International Standards” in terms of the recommendations of SFC.  The 
proposal as recommended by the SFC has since been approved by the competent 
authority. 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 23/16/2010-IP&MC dated 14.06.2010] 
 
National Press Centre 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 22 and 23) 
 
  The National Press Centre (NPC) has been continuing as a Plan scheme of the 
Ministry since Eighth Five Year Plan (1992 -97). Despite the land being allotted at 7 
Raisina Road in November/December 2001, the scheme has been pending completion 
for more than two decades. Since the time of sanctioning of the scheme, the project 
could hardly make any progress and the construction of the Centre has been delayed 
inordinately. During the 10th Plan, this scheme was approved with an outlay of 

 
Rs.35.00 crore. The project was approved by the EFC in January, 2005. The MoU was 
signed with National Bu ilding Construction Corporation on 16th February, 2006 for 
construction of NPC within 18 months from the date of approval of drawings by 
statutory authorities. During the year 2009-10, Rs.4.37 crore were allocated at both BE 
and RE stage and the actual exp enditure has been reported to be „nil‟ due to the 
reasons that statutory approvals were received in November/December, 2008. Having 
noted that all the mandatory clearances are in place, the Committee in their Second 
Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had hoped that the construction work would 
now start. However that did not happen. The Committee have now been informed that 
due to increase in construction area, the estimated cost as well as the period of 
completion has increased from Rs.35.00 crore to Rs.60.00 crore and from 24 months to 
30 months respectively. The revised cost has been approved by EFC on 15.09.2009 and 
fresh contract with NBCC is under finalization, following which the construction work 
would start.  
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 The Committee would further like to highlight that in March, 2006, Rs.7.00 crore 
was released to NBCC as initial deposit as per MOU even when drawings/plans etc. 
were pending clearance from the statutory authorities and therefore, NBCC could not 
undertake any construction activities till 2009. Taking a serious note about release of 
Rs.7.00 crore to NBCC without undertaking any construction activities, the Committee 
in their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had recommended that the 
matter should be thoroughly investigated. Now the Committee have been informed that 
the interest earned on the unspent amount of Rs.7.00 crore would be credited in the 
Government account. Again, at the instance of the Committee, to ensure timely 
completion of the project, penal provision has been made in the Agreement whereby in 
case of delay NBCC shall be liable to pay damages to PIB a sum calculated @ 0.5% of 
the agency charges of 9.5% for each week of delay subject to a maximum of 10% of 
the agency charges for the ba lance work. All these developments clearly indicate that 
there is lack of planning and vision on the part of the Ministry. To the solace of the 
Committee, the representative informed that the contract between PIB and NBCC has 
been signed. A sum of Rs.4.00 crore has also been released and the work will start very 
soon. The Committee trust that confidence shown by the representative will at least 
yield the desired result and the construction work would start so that the project is 
completed within the stipulated period of 30 months. The Committee strictly emphasize 
that at least now the programme of construction of the building should be closely 
watched so that there are no further delay and cost escalation.  
          (Recommendation No. 23) 
Action Taken by the Government  on Para 22 & 23: 
 The implementation of the Project is being monitored closely by the Monitoring 
Committee under the chairpersonship of Pr. DG (M&C), PIB as well as at the 
level of AS&FA, M/o I&B. 
 NBCC has awarded the work and excavation work  has been started by the 
Contractor. 
 NBCC has submitted a cheque Rs. 62,14,801/- on 13.05.2010 to PIB in r/o the 
interest earned by them on the initial deposit of Rs. 700 lakh after deducting 
expenditure of Rs. 35,85,199/- incurred during 01.04.2006 to 30.09.2009.  
 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated 14.06.2010] 
    
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) – Clearance of 
outstanding dues from Ministries/Departments      
    
 
 

 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity is the nodal multi media 
advertising central agency to execute publicity campaigns through advertisement etc. 
on behalf of various Ministries/Departments of Government of India, Autonomous 
Bodies and Public Sector Undertakings. The Committee are unhappy to note that total 
outstanding dues to DAVP from various Ministries/Departments of the Government of 
India at the end of 2008-09 were to the tune of Rs.48 crore. The Committee have been 
informed that the pe ndency is getting cleared. For the year 2009 -10, the outstanding 
claims are to for Rs.45.39 crore as on 18th March, 2010. It seems that concerted 
efforts have not been made by DAVP to ensure settlement of dues in time. The 
Committee desire that the matter may be pursued vigorously and all the dues may be 
realized within a period of three months. The Committee also desire that DAVP should 
evolve a system whereby the Ministries/Departments may be asked to settle their dues 
within one month from the date of issue of Letter of Intent.  
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The total pendency was Rs.48.00 crore at the end of financial year 2008 -09.  In 
this regard it is stated that the total pendency was reduced to Rs.15.00 crore at the end 
of November, 2009 and Rs.3 3.00 crores have been paid to the newspapers and 
channels.  This pendency of Rs.15.00 crores was due to the special drive launched to 
clear the backlog from the years 2004 -07, which yielded bills of Rs.8.00 crore for 
newspapers and Rs.7.00 crore for Audio Visual channels.  It is also submitted that DAVP 
has released the advertisement for Rs.31.00 crore (approx.) on commitment basis 
during the month of February and March, 2010 on behalf of the client Ministries/Deptt., 
Autonomous bodies and PSUs, with the re sult the outstanding again increased to 
Rs.46.00 crore at the end of 2009-10. 
 DAVP have been making vigorous efforts to clear the outstanding dues.  Director 
General, DAVP has written a D.O. letter to the Secretaries of the client 
Ministries/Departments c oncerned to provide funds. Consequently, the client 
Ministries/Department have begun transferring funds to DAVP towards meeting their 
outstanding dues.  In this regard, it is also informed that DAVP is not releasing the 
advertisement on behalf of the clien t Ministries/Departments without having fund 
provision in advance.  Once again it is submitted that the concerted efforts are being 
made by DAVP to ensure that funds are received from the clients for settlement of dues 
in time. 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 10/10/2010-MUC, dated 29.07.2010] 
 
Museum of Moving Images (MoMI) 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee note that setting up Museum of Moving Images (MoMI) by Films 
Division was started in the Tenth Plan and is continuing in Eleventh Plan with hardly any 
progress under the scheme. During the year 2009 -10, a sum of Rs.12.5 crore was 
earmarked for the scheme. The amount was retained at RE stage. However, the actual 
expenditure upto 15th March, 2010 has been reported to be `nil‟. The Committee 
express serious concern that the Ministry was unable to utilize the funds earmarked for 
the scheme `Museum of Moving Images‟. The reasons for non -utilisation of funds have 
been stated to be the dilemma on the part of the Ministry whether to carry out the 
project in two phases or in one go so as to have the Museum ready by 2013 when India 
cinema is going to celebrate its centenary year. The scheme is also pending approval of 
EFC/SFC. The Committee deplore the sorry state of affairs of seeking funds both at 
budget est imates and revised estimates stage and then surrendering the amount 
without spending at all. It gives an impression that the scheme lacks clarity. Expressing 

 
their deep concern over inordinate delay in implementation of the scheme, the 
Committee in their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) had recommended 
that definite time lines should be drawn up so that MoMI is set up within a definite time 
frame. Since for the year 2010-11, Rs.29.00 crore has been allotted under the scheme, 
the Committee desir e that the Ministry should devise a clear cut strategy so that the 
funds allotted for the scheme could be utilized fully. The Committee recommend that 
expeditious steps may be taken for finalizing the scheme of MoMI. A periodic review of 
the progress of the project may be undertaken.        
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 In this regard, it is submitted that the plan scheme “Museum of Moving Images” 
(MoMI) was appraised by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 11.01.2010 and 
was approved by the compet ent authority on 25.3.2010.  Further, Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) has been signed between Films Division and National Buildings 
Construction Corporation (NBCC) and in accordance with the same, Rs.10 crore was 
released to NBCC in the last financial year 2009-10. Timelines for implementation of the 
project have been devised and meetings are being held at the level of Joint Secretary 
with the implementing agencies of the project on a regular basis to review the progress 
of the construction of the museum.   As submitted by Special Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting at the time of oral evidence, the project will take about 
30 months to complete.  
            [Min. of I&B, ID No.H-11013/04/2010-F(A), Dated-08/07/2010.] 
 
Children’s Film Society, India 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 The Committee note that the proposal of CFSI to construct a film complex for in-
house facilities for all aspects of film making has been a non -starter since Ninth Plan. 
Earlier Ministry had decided to construct CFSI film complex at Hyderabad. However, the 
project could not fructify. Now, the Government of Maharashtra has been requested to 
allot land in Film City for the benefit of children‟s cinema. The Committee have been 
informed that the Maharashtra Film Sta ge and Cultural Development Corporation 
Limited has offered 1600 sq. meters of land at Film City at Goregaon, Mumbai. The 
response of the Government of Maharashtra is awaited. Since the project has been 
languishing for the last more than a decade, the Comm ittee desire that the matter for 
allotment of land at Mumbai may be taken up at the highest level and the definite 
timelines may be drawn for its expeditious implementation.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The matter was discussed in the 99 th meeting of t he Executive Council of CFSI 
held on 04/06/2010 and Executive Council of CFSI has authorized the Chairperson of 
CFSI to have a meeting with the Chief Minister of Maharashtra along with a detailed and 
comprehensive proposal in the matter.  
            [Min. of I&B, ID No.H-11013/04/2010-F(A), Dated-08/07/2010.] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 The Committee also note that to attract budding talents and good scripts, CFSI 
had given advertisements in various newspapers inviting proposals for making 
children‟s films, stipulating the guidelines for submitting proposals for feature/short 
films and T.V. serials. In response to the same, CFSI had received 48 proposals out of 
which, two proposals were found suitable to produce children‟s films. Now, the 
Executive Council of CFSI has decided to approach the Film Institute and request them 
to encourage the students to do their diploma films on children‟s subject. Accordingly, 
CFSI has written to Director, FTII, Pune. A meeting is also being arranged between 

 
Chairperson/CEO of CFSI with the Director and Faculty Members of FTII to impress 
upon the students to  produce diploma films on children‟s subject. The Committee feel 
that there is no dearth of talents within the country in the field of creative writing and 
good scripts. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Society should give wide 
publicity for its  requirements. To attract budding talents, the Society should contact 
reputed Universities/Educational Institutions and encourage students for making 
children‟s film. The Society may also consider the proposal to provide scholarship to 
students for creative writings. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
In response to the letter written by CFSI to various Film Institutes, a very good 
response from the Heads of following Institutes has been received for making children‟s 
films: 
1. L.V. Prasad Film & T.V. Academy, 
2. National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, 
3. City Pulse Institute of Films & TV , 
4. Digital Academy – The Film School.  
5. SRFTI, Kolkata. 
6. Asian Academy of Film & TV Institute, New Delhi. 
7. FTII, Pune. 
  
M/s Comet Media Foundation, an NGO, engaged by CFSI in spreading awakening 
and interest in children films has organized under its project „Filmi Chasma‟ various 
workshops and interaction programmes and brain storming sessions with students and 
media institutes in Chitrabani, Kolkata, Birla Industria l and Technological Musem, 
Kolkata, FTII, Pune,  L V Prasad Film and TV Academy, Chennai, FLAME School of 
Performing Arts, Pune and Consortium for Educational Communication, UGC, Delhi. 
With regard to providing scholarship to students for creative writings  as of now, 
there is no such plan scheme presently with CFSI. 
 
            [Min. of I&B, ID No.H-11013/04/2010-F(A), Dated-08/07/2010.] 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
  

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee observe that Broadcasting  sector has been allocated Rs.5547 
crore during the year 2010-11 which works out to 87.8% of the total allocation made at 
BE stage. Despite getting the major chunk of allocation of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting, the status of utilization of outlay during the Eleventh Plan particularly 
during the year 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 is highly unsatisfactory. During the year 2008 -
09, the allocation provided at BE stage was Rs.475 crore which was reduced to 
Rs.437.41 crore. However, Prasar Bharati could utilize Rs.278.20 crore, thus Rs.159.21 
crore remained unspent. Similarly, during the year 2009 -10, the allocation made at BE 
stage was to the tune of Rs.512 crore which was reduced to Rs.203.59 crore i.e. less 
than half of the allocation provided at RE stage . Prasar Bharati could utilize Rs.140.76 
crore. The reasons put forth by the Ministry for low utilization of allocation by Prasar 
Bharati as informed to the Committee are litigation relating to procurement of 
transmitters, delay in approval of schemes spec ially digitalization scheme of 
Doordarshan and lengthy procurement procedure for machinery and equipments etc. 
Taking note of the gross under utilisation of planned schemes of AIR and Doordarshan, 
the Committee in their Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) had 
recommended that Prasar Bharati should streamline the procurement procedure and 
take remedial measures to ensure achievement of targets. The Committee find that no 
head way has been made in this regard. All the major schemes of Prasar Bharati  viz. 
Digitalization of Transmitters, e-Governance, Setting up of Transmitters for Border Area 
of J&K etc. are still awaiting approval/clearances. Besides, efforts have not been made 
to streamline the procurement process. The various impediments that stand  in the way 
of a long drawn procurement cycle for machinery/equipment still need to be identified. 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid position that there are serious problem 
affecting the working of Prasar Bharati. The statement of the CEO Prasar Bharati during 
the oral evidence that there are certain systemic problems in the organization further 
reinforce the views of the Committee. The Committee strongly recommend that such 
state of affairs should not be allowed to continue in an organization like Prasar Bharati, 
which is mandated with the task of Broadcasting sector. All the corrective action should 
be taken to address the various impediments in a stipulated time frame.  
Action Taken by the Government  
(Rs in crore) 
A.             All India Radio XI  Plan 
outlay 
Present status   
I.    Continuing Schemes Cumulative Expenditure upto 
June,2010 
1.   J&K Special Package 25.70 9.95 
2.   Expansion of MW Services 2.00 1.08 
3.   Expansion of FM Services 180.00 47.25 
4.   Digitalization of Production 
Facilities 
6.00 5.57 
5.   Automation of Studio 
Facilities& Misc.  
83.10 38.95 
6.   North East special package 150.00 26.49 
7.   Accommodation for staff 20.00 16.68 
Total of Continuing Schemes 466.80 155.97 
II.   New Schemes    EFC/SFC/CCEA 
1.   Software Acquisition (AIR 100.00 The scheme has been approved by 

 
News) the Competent Authority and 
conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 
29.6.2010.  
2.  Upgradation of existing 250 
kW SW Tr. For DRM operation at  
AIR High Power transmitter at 
Khampur and Aligarh 
10.00 Competent authority‟s approval has 
been conveyed to PB on 18.12.2007 
at a cost of Rs.9.80 cr. 
3.New Technology and Science & 
Technology (R&D) scheme 
20.00 Approval of competent authority has 
been conveyed to PB on 20.8.2009 at 
a cost of Rs.19.70 crores 
4.   Digitalization of transmitters, 
studios, 
connectivity and DTH Channel 
924.20 The total allocation for Digitalization 
was Rs.924.20 crores, out of which 
scheme amounting Rs.57 crores was 
approved within the delegated 
powers to CEO, P. B and competent 
authority‟s approval conveyed on 
18.12.2007 and 23.01.2008. Scheme 
for the balance amount of Rs.843.45 
crores has been approved by CCI on 
8.4.2010 and conveyed to PB on 
27.04.2010   
5..   E-Governance, training, 
commonwealth games, 
Resources, security, Addl. Office 
accommodation staff Quarters etc. 
        
   
 
 
 
97.00  Scheme has been split into four 
parts as desired in Department of 
Expenditure O.M. No.21(2)PF.II/2009 
dated 29.5.2009. 
(i) Improvement of facilities at 
existing stations ( Rs.28.00 crore) 
P.B. Board has approved  the scheme 
which was appraised on 21.7.2010.  
Minutes of the meeting is awaited, 
subsequent to which it will need the 
approval of competent authority.     
(ii) Sta ff qrts in North -East (Rs.20 
crore). The scheme approved by the 
Competent Authority and conveyed 
to Prasar Bharati on 18.6.2010. 
(iii) Augmentation of STI (T)‟s 
Schemes (Rs.20.00 crore). The 
scheme has been approved by the 
Govt. on 17/08.2010 and conveyed 
to PB/AIR on 31.08.2010.    
(iv) Schemes for Enterprise 
Resources Planning –e governance 
and IT facilities (Rs.29 crore) .  SFC 
chaired by CEO, is yet to  appraise 
the scheme.   
6.   Setting up of High Power TV 
and FM Transmitter in Border 
areas and low LPT FM in J&K. 
389.00  Initially this scheme was not a part 
of approved 11th Plan.  However, an 
amount of Rs.100 crore was provided 
in the Budget for the scheme during 
2009-10.  As the scheme could not 
be approved during 2009 -10, No 
expenditure was incurred during 
2009-10.  Now the scheme has been 
approved by the competent authority 
on 04.08.2010 at a cost of Rs.100 

 
crore.  The approval was conveyed to 
PB on 18.08.2010. 
Total of New Schemes 1540.20  
Grand Total of AIR 2006.08  
 
(Rs in crore) 
B.              DOORDARSHAN XI Plan 
Outlay 
Present status 
I.    Continuing Schemes  Cumulative Expenditure upto 
June,2010 
1.    J&K Special Package 314.17 115.83 
2. Digitalization & Modernization 
of  
       Production  Facilities 
(Studio/OB) 
165.00 75.10 
3.    North East special package 219.83 124.61 
4.     DTH 9.00 11.36 
5.    HDTV 15.00 8.67 
6.    Other spill over X Plan 
approved scheme (Earlier   
approved as Accommodation for 
staff,  augmentation of 
infrastructure & Security 
295.00 223.38 
7.Software Acquisition Normal & 
Misc.) 
60.00 0.00 
Total of Continuing Schemes 1078.00 618.84 
II.    New Schemes  EFC/SFC/CCEA 
1.   Modernization,  Augmentation 
& Replacement of Transmitter and 
Studio Equipment  
299.00 Revised EFC Memo from PB has since 
been received which is under 
process.  
 
2.    Digitalization of studios 620.00 The Scheme has been approved by 
CCI on 8.4.2010 and conveyed to 
Prasar Bharati on 27.4.2010. 
3.    DTH: Modernization, Aug, 
replacement of satellite 
Broadcast equipment  
210.00 Competent authority has  approved  
Modernization, Aug, replacement of 
satellite Broadcast equipment 
Scheme at a cost of Rs.125.00 crore.  
Administrative approval conveyed t o 
PB   on 04.2.2009. 
 
DTH Scheme for an amount of 
Rs.75.43 crores has been approved 
by the competent authority  on 
4.8.2010 and conveyed to PB on 
17.08.2010 
4. HDTV 165.00 Competent authority has approved 
the scheme and communicated to PB 

 
on 19.08.2009.  
 
5. Staff Quarters and Other Misc. 
Works 
75.00 The scheme has been approved by 
the competent authority at cost of 
Rs.65 Crores and conveyed to PB on 
23.02.2009. 
6.   Software 
acquisition/production  
485.00 EFC was examined by Secretary 
(Expenditure) who advised to take up 
the matter with Planning Commission 
for budget provision/assurance of 
funds during the year.   An SFC 
proposal of Rs.142 crores was 
received in the Ministry from PB.  
However, during discus sion it was 
decided to further reduce it to Rs.100 
crore.  PB has been requested to 
send a revised proposal which is still 
awaited.  
Total Of New Schemes 1854.00  
Grand Total 2932.00  
Utilization of outlay by Prasar Bharati. 
The outlay proposed, the actual allocation at BE stage, at RE stage and actual utilization 
during each of the annual Plan of the Eleventh Plan in respect of Prasar Bharati are 
given as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
11th Plan 
Outlay 
 Year Allocation 
sought 
Outlay approved in the 
Annual Plan 
Actual 
expenditure 
At BE stage At RE stage 
Continuing 
Scheme  
2007-08 1677.30 385.59 329.87 323.67 
1544.80 2008-09 931.49 475.00 466.03* 286.05** 
New 
Schemes 
 
2009-10 1150.07 657.00* 348.57* 203.20** 
(upto 
March,10) 
3105.20 2010-11 1859.14 637.25*  55.98*** 
(Upto 
June‟10) 
Total 
4650.00 
     
 
*   Outlay includes Rs.145.00 cr and Rs.296.77 cr for CWG  for  2009-10 and 2010-
11 respectively. 
**  Expenditure including CWG. 
***  Expenditure including CWG. 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated     20.09.2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the actual timeline for capital 
procurement of equipment as per DG& SD manual starting from publication of Notice 

 
Inviting Tender till placement of advance/final acceptance of tender is 52 weeks, which 
can be reduced to 32 weeks. The Committee are of the view that the remedy lies in 
taking corrective steps. Even the period  of 32 weeks for purchase of capital goods and 
machinery can be further reduced by carrying out systematic changes in the 
procurement procedure. As such, early decision in this regard should be taken and the 
Committee informed accordingly.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Prasar Bharati has taken various measures for monitoring of speedy 
implementation of Plan Schemes, which includes constitution of Committees, such as 
the Procurement Committee, Monitoring Committee etc. The objective of the 
Procurement Co mmittee is to reduce the processing time involved in procurement 
matter. The Monitoring Committees so constituted would review the progress of 
implementation of schemes at Zonal level, Directorate level by E -in-C/DG and finally at 
the level of CEO at Prasar Bharati Secretariat.  
  [Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 2/8/2010-B (Fin) dated      20.09.2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9 and 10) 
 
 Prasar Bharati came into existence on 23rd November, 1997. Even after more 
than a decade of its establishment, the Organization is in a state of transformation in 
crucial matters relating to organizational, capital and financial restructuring. The 
Committee in their Reports have consistently been recommending to t ake suitable 
measures on the above issues affecting the Ministry. Regarding organizational 
restructuring, the Committee note that the National Productivity Council (NPC), which 
has been engaged by Prasar Bharati to suggest suitable measures in this regard,  has 
given its report to Prasar Bharati. The National Productivity Council also made 
presentation to the Board of Prasar Bharati in this regard. As per the information 
furnished to the Committee, it has been stated that the report is now under 
consideration with Prasar Bharati. During the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants of the previous year in October, 2009, the same status with regard to furnishing 
the proposal by Prasar Bharati was indicated. The Committee express their unhappiness 
over the way Prasar Bharati is delaying the proposal on such an important issue related 
to Organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati.      
 (Recommendation Para. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that on the issue of financial restructuring and funding 
pattern as desired by the earlier Group of Ministers, the proposal formulated in 
consultation with Prasar Bharati, was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Expenditure). The proposal was amended after several discussion and consultation 
based on the gap-funding approach. The observations of the Department of Expenditure 
are now under consideration of Prasar Bharati. Once the proposal is finalized and 
forwarded by Prasar Bharati to the Ministry, the same will be placed before the Group of 
Ministers. The Committee desire that Prasar Bharati may be asked to finalize its views 
and forward the Report to the Ministry by a stipulated date. Thereafter the Ministry may 
submit a comprehensive proposal before the re -constituted Group of Ministers so that 
the entire gamut of issues relating to financial, organizational and technological aspects 
are deliberated and a permanent solution is worked out. 
(Recommendation Para. 10) 
 

 
Action Taken by the Government on Para 9 & 10 
The reconstituted GOM has held two meetings on 16 th April 2010 and 17 th June 2010. 
On the issue of capital restructuring and funding pattern, the GOM recommended as 
under: - 
(i) 50% of the annual operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be borne by 
Prasar bharati from its Internal Extra Budgetary Resources and the remaining 
50% will henceforth be met by Non-Plan grant-in-aid by the Government. 
 
(ii) The level of 50% Non -Plan support  by the Government may be maintained  
for the next 5 years i.e. 2010 -2011 to 2014 -2015 and will be reviewed 
thereafter in order to s cale down  the quantum of Non -Plan  support by the 
Government to Prasar Bharati. 
 
(iii) Space segment and Spectrum charges  incurred by Prasar Bharati  will also 
be included  in computing the total operational expenses. 
 
(iv) Accumulated arrears of Space segment and Spectrum charges upto 
31.3.2010  may be waived. A proposal to this effect may be moved by Prasar 
Bharati to Department of Expenditure. 
(v) Plan Capital funding by Government to Prasar Bharati  may henceforth be in 
the form of grant-in-aid  and not in the form of loan. 
 
(vi) Director General of Audit, Central Revenues (DGACR) will continue to be 
nodal auditor  of Prasar Bharati and will be assisted by qualified commercial 
audit staff for audit of the annual accounts. 
 
(vii) Recommendations  on non -cash proposals made by th e earlier GOM were 
reiterated  and follow up action may be taken accordingly. 
 
(viii) Prasar Bharati will take up the matter of whether there is any balance 
amount in the Non -Lapsable Fund available for transfer to Prasar Bharati,  
with the Controller General of Accounts and in case there is any amount 
required to be transferred the same shall be communicated to the 
Department of Expenditure for effecting transfer of the funds as per the 
provisions of the Act.  
 
(ix) Property and Assets will be transferred on book valu e to Prasar Bharati  as 
per provisions of Section 16 (a)  of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990. Normal 
accounting principles will be followed  to determine  their future value. 
  
GOM has recommended that the ban on recruitments in Prasar Bharati may be 
relaxed.  Prasar Bharati has been asked to submit a proposal by July 9th, 2010 for filling 
essential categories of posts to Ministry of I&B /Department of Expenditure giving full 
justification for such recruitment and based on the report of the NPC.  The Departmen t 
of Expenditure would then process the case in accordance with the decision of the GOM 
by July 23rd, 2010. 
Prasar Bharati is required to immediately take steps to frame and notify 
Recruitment Regulations and Service conditions for its employees and set up  
Recruitment Boards as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 for such 
recruitments. GOM has directed that the Recruitment Regulations and Service 
Conditions for all categories of employees and the proposal for constitution of the 
Recruitment Boards will be finalized in a time bound manner.   
              [Min. of I&B, ID No.5/1/2010-BP&L, Dated-05/07/2010.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee have  been informed that the Ministry are in the process of 
drafting Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill to receive and dispose of complaints on 
content telecast by TV channels and to deal with other regulatory issues in the 
Broadcasting Sector. The Bill has been necessitated due to the concerns expressed by 
Hon‟ble Courts, Parliamentary Committees, civil society organizations, viewers, media 
critiques and the State Governments. The Committee have also been informed that 
views of the all the State Governments have been solicited on the above draft Bill. So 
far 18 State Governments and 6 UTs have submitted their comments on the proposed 
Bill. To take the process further, the Ministry has constituted a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with 
representatives from other agencies. The Task Force is holding consultations with all 
the stakeholders so that it could submit its findings to the Government at the earliest. 
The Committee have been informed that the pr ocess of consultation by the aforesaid 
Task Force with all the stakeholders was going on and hopefully by March end, the 
consultation would be over. The Committee hope that the consultations with all the 
stakeholders would have been over by now and the Tas k Force would have submitted 
the report to the Ministry. The Committee are of the strong opinion that the Ministry 
should at least now bring a comprehensive legislation covering the issues related to 
Broadcasting Regulation and Regulatory Authority without wasting further time. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Task Force is in the process of finalizing its views and has so far held eight 
consultation meetings.  As regards the timelines to complete the consultations process 
with stakeholders and submission of report/recommendations, the process is proposed 
to be completed by end of October 2010. 
            [Min. of I&B, ID No.5/1/2010-BP&L, Dated-05/07/2010.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 contains provisions for the constitution of a 
Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting Council which have never been put into 
operation. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous 
year, the Commi ttee have been informed that two Committees of Prasar Bharati 
(Sengupta Committee in its report dated August, 1996 and subsequently the 
Narayanmurthy Committee in its report dated 20.5.2000) have recommended that 
there is no need for these provisions in th e light of Standing and Consultative 
Committees of Parliament. The Committee note that apparently there are two 
alternatives before the Government i.e. (i ) to constitute the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee or Broadcasting Council in the light of the mandatory provisions made in the 
Prasar Bharati Act, or (ii) to agree to the recommendations made by the aforesaid two 
Committees and bring suitable amendments  to the Parliament. Even when almost 20 
years have passed since the Act came into effect and 13 and 9 years respectively have 
passed since these two Committees have given their views, the Ministry is yet to take 
the decision in this regard. While deploring  the way the Government has handled such 

 
an important issue, the Committee strongly recommends that the decision in this 
regard should be taken without any further delay. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The issue of constitution of Parliamentary Committee  and the Broadcasting 
Council has been considered by the reconstituted Group of Minister (GOM) on Prasar 
Bharati. GoM in its 2 nd meeting held on 17 th June 2010.  After deliberating on the role 
envisaged for the Parliamentary Committee vis-à-vis the Standing Committee and after 
taking note of the categorical recommendation of the Shunu Sen Committee, the GOM 
had felt that not much purpose would be served by having a separate Parliamentary 
Committee. The GOM also noted that the role envisaged for the Broadcas ting Council is 
advisory in nature with regard to redressal of consumer grievances and the discharge of 
functions by Prasar Bharati in accordance with the objectives set out in Section 12. 
GOM also felt that the Shunu Sen Committee‟s recommendation that th ere should be a 
single complaints mechanism for all broadcasters under the aegis of the proposed 
Broadcasting Authority deserves merit. However since Prasar Bharati cannot be equated 
with the private broadcasters in view of the mandate it carries, the prop osed 
Broadcasting Authority can be assigned separate functions in relation to the private 
broadcasters and Prasar Bharati. If this is done then there will be no need to have a 
separate Broadcasting Council as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act. Keeping  in 
view that the Act was enacted in 1990 and no substantive amendments had been made 
thereafter till date, the GOM has decided that the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting should have a comprehensive look at the provisions of the Prasar Bharati 
Act and recommend such amendments as are required to be made in the Act in the 
light of developments over the last twenty years, subsequent to the Shunu Sen 
Committee report.  
          
 [Min. of I&B, ID No.5/1/2010-BP&L, Dated-05/07/2010.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I) 
 
       
  
  

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Press Council of India 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Press Council is the repository of the trust of the Parliament in guiding the 
press to high standards of its functioning and preservation of its freedom against any 
onslaught. Press Council of India, established under an Act of Parliament in 1978, acts  
as an independent quasi Judicial Authority having adjudicatory, advisory and regulatory 
functions. In the discharge of its twin functions of preserving the freedom of the press 
and maintaining and improving the standards of the press, the Council performs a multi 
faceted role. The Committee are shocked to note from the information furnished by the 
Ministry that various representations have been addressed to the Press Council of India 
with reference to the alleged payment taken/received by media during the Lok Sabha 
elections conducted in April/May 2009 for coverage relating to candidates. The Press 
Council of India has constituted a sub -Committee on the issue which has already 
submitted its report which is to be considered by full Council.  
 
 The Committee find that the phenomena of `paid news‟ is a serious matter for 
the country which can cause harm to Parliamentary democracy and the Parliamentary 
system. While expressing deep concern over the phenomena of „paid news‟ which 
influences the func tioning of the free press, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Ministry should look into the matter seriously. Since the Press Council of India is 
already seized of the matter and the sub -Committee is examining the issue, the 
Ministry should ensure that the report of the Press Council is placed before the Ministry 
within the definite time frame. The findings of the sub-Committee along with the action 
taken by the Ministry should be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Press Council of India released its “Report on Paid News” on 20th July, 2010.  
The recommendations made by PCI in the Report are under consideration in the 
Ministry for further action by the Government. 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated 14.06.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 During the examination of Demands for Grants of the previous year, the 
Committee had been informed that to give more powers, a proposal to amend the Press 
Council Act is under consideration of the Government. In view of the aforesaid 
development, the Committee emphasize that urgent action should be taken to amend 
the Press Council of India Act so as to provide adequate powers to the Council to enable 
it to deal with such a serious issue like „paid news‟.    
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The proposal to amend the Press Council Act, 1978 is under examination. 
[Ministry of I&B I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated 14.06.2010] 
 
Publication Division 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
       

 
 The mandate of the Division is production, sale and distribution of popular books 
and journals. The Division is the largest publishing house in the public sector and 
publishes priced books, journals and other printed material in English, Hindi and 
regional languages on a wide variety of subjects. The Publication Division is selling its 
books and journals through a network of sales emporia located in various parts of the 
country. The Committee are of the opinion that there is a need for Publication Division 
to maintain effective tie-up with the libraries in the country particularly at the State and 
district levels to broaden its readership and also to improve the financial resources. The 
Committee desire that an exhaustive list of district and State levels li braries should be 
prepared and all such institutions be directly contacted to facilitate purchase of books, 
journals and other printed material brought out by the Publication Division.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As recommended by the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010-
11), an exhaustive list of State and District level Libraries is being prepared to contact 
them to facilitate purchase of books and journals being brought out by Publications 
Division.    
 These libraries would be approached to consider Division‟s book and journals for 
bulk purchase.  
[Ministry of I&B‟s I.D. Note No. 3/2/10-FS dated 04.06.2010] 
Film Sector 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Film Sector has been allocated Rs.450 crore, 
which works out to 7.1%, of the total allocation made at Budgetary Estimates stage. 
The trend of under utilization persists with the Film Sector as is the case with 
Broadcasting and Information Sector. During the year 2008 -09, the allocation at BE 
stage was Rs.67 crore, which was reduced to Rs.50.06 crore at RE stage and the actual 
utilization was 37.69 crore, which comes to 75.2%. During the year 2009 -10, RE stage 
allocation was Rs.60 crore, which was increased to Rs.66.84 crore out of which only 
Rs.34.54 crore could  be utilized upto February, 2010. From the information made 
available to the Committee, the Committee again note that some of the important 
schemes viz. Setting up of Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special 
Effects and National Film Heritage  Mission are is pending `in principal‟ approval of 
Planning Commission. The Committee would again like to emphasize that schemes of 
national importance should not be allowed to languish for years together and the 
system of approval should be expedited. The  pending schemes should at last now be 
approved without any further delay.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In this regard, it is submitted that the utilization of grant in the Film Wing during 
the previous financial year 2009-10 was Rs. 63.52 crore as aga inst an allocation of Rs. 
66.84 crore. It is, therefore, submitted that utilization in 2009 -10 has improved 
considerably over 2008 -09. It is reiterated that all out efforts are being made to 
increase utilization by all the Media Units in the Film Wing by h aving monthly meetings 
at the level of JS(Films) with the Heads of the Media Units. 
 
 It is submitted that with respect to the above mentioned two schemes i.e. 
Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Visual Effects 
and National Film Heritage Mission, the task of preparation of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) is currently underway. It is pertinent to point out here that the DPR of National 
Film Heritage Mission is under preparation and during the current financial year of the 
11th Plan a token outlay of Rs. 1 crore has been made. 
 
(O.M.No. 110/12/2010-F (I) dated- 20.07.2010.) 
 

 
National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 In view of the growing demand for skilled manpower in the areas of animation, 
gaming and special effects, the setting up of a National Centre of Excellence for 
Animation, Gaming and Special Effects has been envisaged  as a new scheme in the 
Eleventh Plan. As the proposed Centre is essentially being created to address the issue 
of shortage of skilled manpower in the field of animation, gaming and special visual 
effects, the Committee in their Second Report on Demands fo r Grants (2009 -10) had 
recommended that the project may be implemented at the earliest. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note that not much has been done towards 
implementation of the project. The scheme is still awaiting `in-principal‟ approval of the 
Planning Commission. The Ministry has engaged an agency for preparation of a detailed 
project report so that the same could be placed before the Planning Commission for 
seeking its approval. Keeping in view the importance of the scheme which envisages to 
meet growing demand for skills in animation, gaming and special effects, the 
Committee recommend that the scheme may be implemented at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that the Scheme  is 
being pursued in right earnest and making all out efforts to implement the scheme at 
the earliest.  In this regard, it is further submitted that when „in-principle‟ approval was 
sought earlier from Planning Commission, they had directed us to submit to  them an 
Executable Detailed Project Report (EDPR).  We had been further requested to 
examine, inter alia, the need for such a Centre in the light of existing Film & Television 
Schools at Pune and Kolkata and the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIM C).  
In principle approval was sought from Planning Commission on the basis of a detailed 
HR Gap study carried out by a Consultant which had submitted its finding, as per which 
there is a definitive HR Gap between the demand and the supply of human resourc es 
for animation, gaming and special effects, which is expected to grow further particularly 
where high-end skills are required.  The Consultant had categorically recommended to 
set up the proposed Centre of Excellence.  The Consultant had carried out a st udy on 
the requirements of different skill sets for this industry at present and changes to come 
about in future years. 
 The consultant was further mandated to prepare an Executable Detailed Project 
Report, as required by Planning Commission.  The DPR will  be submitted by October, 
2010. 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
      February, 2011                               Standing Committee on 
      Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)  Information Technology 
 
  

 
 Confidential 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1 7th February, 201 1 from 1 500 
hours to 1 700 hours in Committee Room „ D‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
6. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Abdul Rahman 
8. Shri Tufani Saroj 
9. Dr. Bhola Singh 
10. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
11. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
12. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
13. Shri Salim Ansari 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
15. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj   - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 

 
*****             ******           ******           *****             ***** 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports and 
to have preliminary meeting with the Department of Telecommunications on 
the subject „Current status of Indian Telecom development growth and policy 
including the status as well as measures  to accelerate penetration and 
availability of Cellular, Broadband and Rural Telephony‟. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following two Reports:- 
(i)    Draft Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations    
contained in their  Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; and  
 
(ii)    *****             ******           ******           *****             *****. 
 
4. The draft Action Taken Report on the Eighth Report relati ng to the 
Department of Telecommunications was adopted by the Committee without any 
modification.  The draft Action Taken Report on the Sixth Report relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was adopted with modification in Para 
No. 14 of the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the two Action 
Taken Reports in the light of factual verifications made by the 
Ministry/Department concerned and present the same to the House on a date 
convenient to him.   
 
6.  *****             ******           ******           *****             *****. 
 
 A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
* Matters not related to the Report. 
 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 3 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-
1,2,3,4,7,8,11,12,13,14,16,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,29,31 
 and 32 
 
 Total 21 
 Percentage 65.63 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Paragraph No:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Paragraph Nos:- 5,6,9,10,15 and 17  
 Total 6 
 Percentage 18.75 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim nature:- 
 
 Paragraph Nos:- 25,26,27,28 and 30  
 Total 05 
 Percentage 15.62 
 
 
 
 
 