 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Disbursement of Wages to labourers 
under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act by Post Offices’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
35 


 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Disbursement of Wages to labourers 
under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act by Post Offices’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 August, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 August, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-26 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
27-38 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
39 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the C ommittee and require 
reiteration ………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
40-55 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
56-59 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology (2011-12) held on 18th June, 2012…………………………………………… 
 
60-61 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
62 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Dr.  Charles Dias 
* 7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
#14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
@ 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
24. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
**27. Dr.  Bhushan Lal Jangde 
28. Shri Prabhat Jha 
  29. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
@ 31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
             $ 1.    Shri T.K. Mukherjee  -  Joint Secretary 
              2.    Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice  Shri P. Rajeeve, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
#   Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17th May, 2012   
@    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11th July, 2012 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar and Shri Ravi 
Shankar Prasad, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
$ Superannuated w.e.f. 30th June, 2012. 
 
(ii) 
 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (201 1-12) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty-fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -fifth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Disbursement of Wages to Labourers under Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Gu arantee Act by Post Offices ’ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 25 August, 2011. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes 
on Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on   
13 December, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 18 June, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-l of the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-ll. 
 
 
New Delhi; RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
8 August, 2012_______ Chairman 
17 Shravana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Disbursement of wages to 
labourers under Mahatma Gandhi National rural employment Guarantee Act by Post 
Offices’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok S abha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
25th August, 2011. It contained 33 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government   
 Para Nos.:- @1,5, 7, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 27, 30, 31 and 32  
 Total 15 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 20, 24, 25, 28 and 29    
 Total 15 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl ies of the Government are of 
interim in nature 
 
 Para Nos.:-  4, 26 and 33  
 Total 03 
 Chapter V 
 
@Recommendation No. 1 was just the introductory recommendation.  Hence no action 
taken note has been furnished by the Ministry/Department. 
 

 
 
4. The Committee had examined the subject  ‘Disbursement of wages to labourers 
under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act by Post Offices’ in 
detail and made 33 recommendations/observations in their Twenty -fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha).  The conclusions  drawn in the recommendations were arrived at 
after getting inputs from the Department of Posts and procuring the feedback from the 
Department of Rural Development through written repl ies and deliberations  held on 
various aspects related to examination of the subject.     
The Co mmittee’s analysis of the action taken notes furnished by Department of 
Posts and Ministry of Rural Development indicates that in as many as 1 5 
recommendations made in the report , the aforesaid Ministry and the Department have 
not addressed the issues sati sfactorily and hence these recommendations have been put 
under Chapter -III and commented in Chapter -I of the report.  The Committee regret to 
note that the serious revelation made during the course of examination of the subject 
which include discrepancy of  data with regard to MGNREGA as maintained by the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Posts, delay in disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA, corruption in disbursement of wages and the grievance redressal mechanism 
could not ma ke the Ministry and  the Department to probe the issue and take urgent 
initiatives as suggested in the report.  Not only that the sense of complacency is reflected 
in the replies whereby the existing systems in respect of disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA and other related issu es have been found to be satisfactory.  What is mo re 
disappointing is the fact that the Ministry of Rural Development and Posts have tried to 
sidetrack the important suggestions made in the report.  On the issue of having 
coordination between the Ministry of Rural Development and Department of Posts as 
strongly emphasized by the Committee , nothing concrete seems to have been done.  The 
disconnect between the Ministry of Rural Development and the Posts is again reflected in 
the action taken notes. The Minist ry of Rural Development could not bother to share the 
data on various aspects with Posts as raised by the Committee.  The aforesaid 1 5 
recommendations of the Committee have been analyzed independently and commented 
in Chapter -I of the report.  While reiter ating their recommendations/observations, the 
Committee hope that the Ministry of Rural Development and Department of Posts would 
act urgently particularly when the issues raised in the report relates to one of the flagship 
schemes of the Department i.e. providing employment guarantee to rural masses.    

 
 
5. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be give n to implementation of 
the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is 
not possible for the Department to implem ent the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to 
the Recommendations /Observations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
 
I. Contradiction between the data as furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development 
and the Department of Posts with regard to number of accounts and amount 
disbursed under MGNREGA  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 2, 3 & 24) 
 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The input provided by both the Departments i.e. Department of Posts and 
Department of Rural Development indicates contradiction on various aspects, 
particularly on the number of accounts and amount disbursed through Posts. 
During the year 2008 -09 there is a difference of 10 lakh in the number of 
accounts and Rs.289.94 crore in the amount disbursed. During the year 2009 -
10 such gap is much wider. In the number of accounts there is gap of 13 lakh 
and in respect of amount disbursed,  the gap is Rs. 1026.25 crore. During the 
year 2010-11 although the Department of Rural Development has furnished 
the data one month beyond the data furnished by the Department of Posts 
such gap is 29 lakh in respect of number of accounts and Rs. 1221.99 c rore in 
respect of the amount disbursed. The representative of the Department of 
Rural Development during the course of deliberations agreed that there is 
discrepancy in the data. However, the representative of Posts tried to justify 
the discrepancy by sta ting that there is a time lag between actual 
disbursement of wages through Post Offices and Banks and the loading of the 
figures on the website. The Committee observe that the aforesaid reasoning 
of Posts can be accepted in case of the year 2010 -11. Such a huge gape in the 
data furnished by the Department of Rural Development and Posts is not 
understandable in case of the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 which have been 
over long back. The Committee feel that huge gaps in the data of the two 
Departments raises question mark about the system of maintaining as well as 
monitoring of accounts under MGNREGA, one of the biggest centrally 

 
 
sponsored scheme of the Union Government. While expressing strong 
displeasure over the matter, the Committee desire explanation from bo th the 
Departments i.e. the Department of Rural Development and the Department 
of Posts.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The Committee further note that as per the Operational Guidelines 2008 
there is an elaborate provision for audit and review of accounts maintained 
under MGNREGA at various levels by Local Fund Auditors, Chartered 
Accountants, District Programme Coordinator  and Gram Sabhas. From the 
discrepancy of the data as mentioned above it seems that all the provisions 
made in the Operational Guidelines are not being strictly complied with. Not 
only that the representative of the Department of Rural Development do not 
seem to be serious with the discrepancy in the data as pointed out during the 
course of deliberations. He tried to argue that such discrepancy cannot be 
eliminated unless online real time entry system is implemented. From the 
status of computerization and the connectivity scenario, the analysis of which 
has been done in the later part of the report, the Committee find that it 
would take years to have online real time entry of the accounts throughout 
the country. The Committee observe that the country cannot wait and sit 
silently till online system is operational particularly when the discrepancy in 
the data is very large. The Committee are of the firm opinion that there is 
disconnect between the Department of Rural Development and Posts with 
regard to the mai ntenance of MGNREGA wage accounts. While expressing 
unhappiness over the way the wage accounts are being maintained, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the audit of accounts as per the 
prescribed procedure should be undertaken at various levels. Not onl y that 
the data with regard to the wages disbursed under MGNREGA by the Rural 
Development and Posts should be reconciled by proper coordination 
between the said two Departments and there should be transparency in the 
system. All the desired initiatives sho uld be taken to address the issue and 
the Committee informed accordingly.  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
The Committee during the course of deliberations with the representatives of 
the Department of Posts and Department of Rural Development have been 
apprised th at the payment system not connected on a real time basis with 
the MGNREGA ICT system was the major deficiency resulting into discrepancy 
in the data being maintained by both the Departments.  Besides, the 
Department of Rural Development has acknowledged th at integration of 
MGNREGA MIS with the Postal Department MIS is proposed for tracking fund 
flow and wages crediting into accounts of wage beneficiaries.  Not only that 
computerization and the proposed ICT induction in rural Post Offices is 
considered a pan acea to address the various problems which include limited 
outreach of financial services in the country, complicated and lengthy 
procedures for disbursement of wages and above all delay in disbursement of 
wages to labourers etc.   
 

 
 
Even when such a great importance has been given to the computerization of 
Post Offices, the progress in the task of computerization does not seem to be 
very optimistic.  As per the data furnished by Posts out of 25538 
Departmental Post Offices, 12604 Departmental Post Offices c ould be 
computerized so far.  What is more disappointing is that out of the 
computerized 12604 Departmental Post Offices 9483 Post Offices could be 
provided broadband/dial -up connectivity.  So far as the issue of 
computerization of Extra Departmental Post Offices is concerned, the 
Department’s proposal to provide ICT device to Gramin Dak Sewaks, Branch 
Post Master is still on the proposal stage.  Integration of MGNREGA MIS with 
Postal Department MIS which would provide better coordination between 
the two De partments and address to various issues as highlighted above is 
possible when all the Post Offices are computerized.  The information 
furnished by Posts indicates that data entry for the Post Offices in account  
jurisdiction of Ajmer HO (Rajasthan), Dorand a HO (Jharkhand) and Raipur 
GPO (Chhattisgarh) could only be completed on NREGASoft.  The system in 
these Post Offices could not be integrated with the system of State 
Governments for want of submission of wage list in electronic form from the 
concerned St ate Government Offices.  The Committee conclude from the 
aforesaid scenario that computerization of Post Offices and the various 
technological interventions suggested by both the Departments are still on 
initial stage.  It would take years together when al l the Post Offices would 
actually be computerized.  The Committee here may like to emphasize to 
speed up the process of computerization of Post Offices so as to make the 
system of disbursement of wages effective.   
(Recommendation No. 24) 
Replies of the Government 
8. The Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
The data available with Department of Posts (DoP) was compiled from the 
reports received from the Postal Ci rcles which indicates actual number of 
MGNREGA accounts and amount disbursed from these accounts. Circles have 
reconfirmed the data provided earlier. It is further submitted that all 
transactions including those involving transfer of money from State 
Governments to Head Offices (HOs), are checked at HO level by Savings Bank 
Control Organisation (SBCO). 
 
The details of number of accounts and amounts disbursed under MGNREGA 
during the last three years are as under: 
 
      Year No. of accounts Amount disbursed 
2008-09 2.92 crores Rs. 3,863 crores 
2009-10 4.25 crores Rs. 7,900 crores 
2010-11 4.90 crores Rs.9,179 crores  

 
 
Discrepancy in data available with MoRD and DoP can be removed if State 
Governments transfer data online to post offices. MGNREGA software 
(NREGASOFT) was installed in three Head Post Offices (Ajmer HO, Doranda 
HO and Raipur GPO) on pilot basis.  MGNREGA data with respect to these 
HPOs has already been entered into the software but it could not be 
operationalized in real time as the concerned State Governments have not 
been able to supply their data in the soft form.  The matter has been taken up 
with MoRD to instruct the State Governments for supply of wage lists in soft 
form.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 2) 
 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The data regarding MGNREGA accounts with post offices and MGNREGA 
wages disbursed through post office accounts with the Ministry of Rural 
Development is based on Monthly Progress Report (MPR) and MIS reports 
entered/furnished by the State Governments.  It is n ot possible for the 
Ministry of Rural Development to physically verify this data with the data 
available with the Department of Posts. The Ministry of Rural Development 
has to rely on data furnished by the States. Unless the Department of Posts 
and the Sta te Governments use the same platform for MIS reporting and 
transactions, there are bound to be discrepancies and mismatch in the data 
among both sources. The Ministry of Rural Development has already offered 
the MGNREGA software for sharing with the Depart ment of Posts to shift to a 
single data source.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 2) 
“Reply of DoP: 
As far as Department of Posts is concerned it has an elaborate provision for 
audit of all accounts. MGNREGA accounts are treated as SB accounts for 
procedural purposes. All transactions relating to these accounts are checked 
by Savings Bank Control Organization (SBCO). In addition, there is a provision 
for annual audit by P&T audit and half yearly inspections by adm inistrative/ 
accounts officers”  
(Reply to Recommendation No. 3) 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
The data regarding MGNREGA accounts with post offices and MGNREGA 
wages disbursed through post office accounts with the Ministry of Rural 
Development is based on Monthly Progress Report (MPR) and MIS reports 
entered/furnished by the State Governments.  It is not possible for the 
Ministry of Rural Development to physically verify this data with the data 
available with the Department of Posts. The Ministry of Rural Development 
has to rely on data furnished by the States. Unless the Department of Posts 
and the  State Governments use the same platform for MIS reporting and 

 
 
transactions, there are bound to be discrepancies and mismatch in the data 
among both sources. The Ministry of Rural Development has already offered 
the MGNREGA software for sharing with the De partment of Posts to shift to a 
single data source.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 3) 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
In all 24015 Departmental post offices have been computerized.  The rest of 
1279 Departmental post offices would be computerized considering the 
space avai lability in these post offices.  The Department of Posts has 
undertaken an end to end IT Modernisation Project (India Post 2012) to equip 
itself with requisite modern tools and technologies.  A part of the larger 
initiative (India Post 2012) is the Rural I nformation and Communication 
Technology (ICT) solution which shall enable Department of Post to connect 
various Extra Departmental Post Offices.  The rural post offices will be 
provided with Rural ICT devices with required applications for performing 
Postal, Banking, Insurance and MGNREGS and Retail operations.  The Rural 
ICT will enable electronic networking of 129497 rural post offices” 
  
(Reply to Recommendation No. 24) 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
  
The Ministry of Rural Development has already offered the MGNREGA 
software for sharing with the Department of Posts for shifting to a single 
platform and data source” 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
9. The data with regard to the number of accounts and amount dis bursed under 
MGNREGA as furnished by the Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural 
Development during the course of examination of the subject had revealed that every 
year the Ministry of Rural Development records indicated higher level of number of 
accounts and the amount of wages disbursed under MGNREGA. Such gap was to the 
extent of 10 lakh in the number of accounts and Rs. 289.94 crore in the amount disbursed 
during the year 2008 -09 and 13 lakh in the number of accounts and Rs. 1026.25 crore in 
the amount disbursed during the year 2009 -10.  When the issue was emphatically raised 
in the report, the Ministry of Rural Development did not bother to check such discrepancy 
State/UT wise.  The casual attitude of both the Department of Posts and the Ministry  of 
Rural Development is reflected from the action taken notes furnished to the Committee .  
The Department of Posts seems contended by simply stating that they have verified their 
data and found the information furnished to the Committee during the course of 

 
 
examination as correct  and consider their audit review of accounts as satisfactory.  Not 
only that the Ministry of Rural Development has expressed helplessness in physically 
verifying the data maintained by the Posts. 
  
The Committee are further disappo inted to note the response of the Ministry of 
Rural Development whereby it has been stated that such discrepancy and mismatch in 
the data among both sources are bound to happen unless the Department of Posts and 
State Governments use the same platform for MIS reporting and transactions.  So far as 
the status of using the same platform for MIS reporting and transactions by Posts is 
concerned the Committee note from the reply furnished by Posts that MGNREGA 
software was installed in three Head Post Offices (A jmer HO, Doranda HO and Raipur 
GPO) on pilot basis.  Even in these Head Post Offices the software could not be 
operationalized in real time as the concerned State Governments have not been able to 
supply their data in the soft form.  The Committee are cons cious of the fact that MIS 
reporting by Posts and the State Governments using the same platform for MIS reporting 
by Posts and the State Governments is possible  only when all the Post Offices , local 
bodies, the local/district administration in various States/UTs in rural areas are 
computerized and e-enabled. So far as the status of computerization of rural Post Offices 
is concerned, Department’s proposal to provide ICT device s to Gram een Dak Sevaks, 
Branch Post Master is still on proposal stage.  The Po sts has acknowledged in the reply 
that integration of MGNREGA MIS with Postal MIS which is considered as the panacea to 
solve the various problems, is possible only when all the Post Offices are computerized.   
 
The Committee further observe that the data of Posts indicates actual expenditure 
met with regard to disbursement of wages and it should be at par with the amount 
disbursed by Posts.  Such discrepancy clearly indicates that there are irregularities in 
implementation of MGNREGA.  Moreover, the Minist ry of Rural Development not 
verifying the data with the State Governments/district administration is not acceptable to 
the Committee particularly when such gaps are huge.  Huge discrepancy clearly indicates 
some problem in the system of audit/review with r egard to the MGNREGA accounts.  
Besides, having elaborated provisions in the Operational Guidelines for audit, it is utmost 
necessary to ensure that proper audit/review of MGNREGA accounts is undertaken by the 

 
 
State Governments, local administration as wel l as Posts.  The Ministry of Rural 
Development which is the nodal Ministry cannot simply be contended by showing the 
helplessness on the issue.   MGNREGA is a Central Act and it is the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Rural Development to ensure that the  Guarantee Scheme is implemented 
properly and money reaches to the beneficiaries.    The Committee would like the 
Department of Posts to convey their concerns at the highest level in the Ministry of Rural 
Development.  Besides, the Cabinet Secretary should also be informed about the concerns 
of the Committee.  Some sort of structured mechanism should be evolved whereby the 
data maintained by various sources can be properly coordinated.   The country cannot 
afford such irregularities and wait for the computeriza tion of all Post Offices and the total 
rural areas in the country which is taking long time.   Initially some sort of efforts should 
be made on the part of Posts as well as the Ministry of Rural Development to find out the 
name of the States/UTs, where ther e is huge gap between the data of Posts and Rural 
Development so that the issue can be probed further and remedy found.  The Committee 
again exhort the Posts as well as the Ministry of Rural Development to find out ways and 
means so that such discrepancy is not reported in future.   
 
II. Delay in payment of wages under MGNREGA  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 6 & 8) 
10. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 Section 3(3) of the MGNREG Act provides for disbursement of daily wages on 
weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which 
the work was done. Besides, as per Para 7.2 of Annexure II of MoU, payments 
are to be completed withi n 3 days from the date of receipt of wage list and 
availability of funds. Besides, the flow chart indicating the specific time limit 
for each of the activity has been suggested to the States by the Department 
of Rural Department to ensure payment of wages within a fortnight. In spite 
of the statutory requirement and the specified time limit at each level as 
suggested, there have been cases of delay in payment of wages. Whereas 
CAG Performance Audit Report number 11 of 2008 undertaken in 17 States 
has pointed out delay in payment of wages in 213 GPs, to the surprise of the 
Committee, the Department of Rural Development has received only 40 
complaints in this regard. Even when as per the Department of Rural 
Development one of the bottlenecks in timely disburse ment of wages is delay 
in payment of wages through Post Office even after timely issuance of 
payment advice to sub -Post Office, the Department of Posts do not seem to 

 
 
be serious on the issue of delay in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA. 
At one point Pos ts claimed that no specific complaint of delay has been 
received. At another point during the course of examination, the Department 
while acknowledging the delay has stated that there are cases where wage 
earners could not withdraw the amount within the st ipulated timeframe of 
three days.  
 
 With regard to the onus of delay, the Department of Posts has tried to 
shift the major burden to the State Governments. The Committee conclude 
from the aforesaid scenario that efforts are not being made by Posts to know  
the ground reality with regard to the disbursement of wages. The Committee 
observe that the ground reality in this regard is much worse. There are cases 
of delay in payment of wages. There is an urgent need on the part of the 
Department of Rural Developme nt and Department of Posts to find out the 
actual scenario and take all the desired initiatives so that the labourers who 
are poorest of the poor in the country get timely wages to meet their day to 
day requirements.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that as per the reply given by the Department of Posts, 
the average time taken in disbursement of wages to one labourer in Post 
Office is six minutes. When the issue of average time taken for disbursement 
of wages was addressed to the De partment of Rural Development, the 
representative during the course of deliberations responded that the delay 
with regard to wages can be captured through MIS data and assured the 
Committee that the status of average time in disbursement of wages would 
be submitted. When the question was specifically raised through post 
evidence question, the Department instead of furnishing the details about 
the average time taken in disbursement of wages has furnished the status of 
delay with regard to disbursement of wag es. Whereas in the earlier replies 
furnished by the Department of Rural Development, it has been stated that 
40 complaints relating to delay in payment of wages have been received in 
the Department, the post evidence replies states that in 86 per cent of t he 
cases wages have been paid within the stipulated time which means that in 
14 per cent cases there is delay in disbursement of wages. Not only that in 
1.61 per cent of the cases, the delay has been reported to be beyond 90 days. 
The sum total of number o f accounts in Post Offices for the three years i.e. 
2008-09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 (upto November) is 11.78 crore as per the 
data furnished by the Department of Rural Development. Even if the number 
of Bank accounts is not taken into consideration, and it is  presumed that in 
one MGNREGA account payment has only been made once in each year, in 
1.6492 crore cases (14 per cent of the 11.78 crore accounts) there has been 
delay. The said data clearly indicates that the situation is alarming. The 
ground situation i n this regard may be further worse. What is more 
disappointing to the Committee is the lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts. The Committee at the various 
stages of examination of the subject have been furnished v arious data with 

 
 
regard to delay in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA. The initial 
information furnished by both the Departments indicated a very satisfactory 
position. However, when the issue was dug further by the Committee, the 
aforesaid data which in dicates the delay in as much as 14 per cent of the 
cases has been furnished by the Department of Rural Development.  
 
While expressing serious concern over the ground situation in this regard, the 
Committee strongly recommend to identify the districts, blo cks, villages 
where the number of delay cases are much more and identify the reasons for 
the delay so that the corrective action can be taken. The action on the 
suggested line should be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.   
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Replies of the Government 
 
11. The Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
As soon as post offices receive wage bills and funds are made available by the 
State Government, disbursement of the wages starts. In some exceptional 
cases where cash is not readily available due to law and order problem or 
inability of Banks to provide cash, it may be delayed for a few days. However 
wages of the wage earners get credited  in their respective accounts 
immediately and these accounts start earning interests. 
 
The mechanism of mandatory inspections and visits serves the purpose of 
finding ground reality regarding time taken in disbursement of wages to the 
labourers under MGNRE GA through Post Offices. Payments of wages start 
from the next day of receipt of wage list if funds are made available. As 
stipulated in MOU, payments are completed in 3 days if wage earner attends 
post office for payment. It has been noticed that there ar e cases where wage 
earners do not withdraw the amount within 3 days. In most of these cases, 
delay in payment is due to non -appearance of wage earner on the dates of 
payment made by post offices” 
 (Reply to Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The State Governments have been advised by the Ministry of Rural 
Development to identify such Branch Post Offices and Sub Post Offices where 
cash limit and line limit are inadequate leading to delay in wage payments 
and take up the matter with concerned Chief Post Master General (CPMG). In 
addition to this, the Minister of Rural Development has also met the Minister 
of Communication & IT to discuss issues relating to speedy disbursement of 
MGNREGA wages through post offices. The State Governments have also 

 
 
been advised to place cash equivalent to one month average wage payment 
in advance with post offices to address delay, if any, arising due to time taken 
between release of payment by State Government and actual receipt of funds 
by Post Offices.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 6) 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to share the data 
which indicates the delay in as much as 14 percent of the cases relating to 
payments through post offices so that corrective action may be taken in thi s 
regard. As per our reports, some delay in payment by Post Offices occurs only 
in difficult areas. MoRD has also been requested to intimate the basis on 
which delay is worked out which may be with reference to the date of 
completion of work or it may be w ith reference to receipt of wage bills and 
availability of cash at post office.  DoP works out delay with regard to the 
receipt of wage bill and availability of cash.  The desired information from 
MoRD is still awaited.  However, data available on MoRD web site has been 
examined by some Circles. In case of Haryana, delay was reported by MoRD 
to have occurred in post Offices of Ambala, Hisar, Jind, Kaithal and panchkula 
districts. However, Haryana Circle has reported that no account has been 
opened in the Pan chayats of Ambala, Hisar, Jind and Panchkula districts. In 
case of Kaithal district Circle has reported that there has been no case of 
delayed payment. In case of other Circles too, the delay ha s been found in 
some cases only” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8) 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The total number of accounts in post offices indicated by Ministry of Rural 
Development as on 31st March of a  financial  year is the cumulative number 
of accounts on that date and include accounts opened in previous years also.  
As on 31st March 2011, 4.36 crore MGNREGA accounts were reported to be 
opened.  This includes all post office accounts opened till 31st March 2011. 
Delay in disbursal of wage payment is a result of delays that occur at different 
stages of processes involving va rious agencies. In order to ensure timely 
payment, State Governments have been advised  by the Ministry of Rural 
Development  to make use  of Information Communication and Technology 
enabled models like Business Correspondent, Rural ATM, handheld devices, 
smart cards, bio -metrics, mobile banking etc, for easy wage payments to 
MGNREGA workers. To strengthen the institutional outreach for MGNREGA 
wage disbursement, it has also been decided that State Governments will roll 
out the Business Correspondent Model to make wage payment through 
Banks with Bio -metric authentication at village level on competitive bid basis 
from Banks by inviting Expression of Interest (EOI)/Request for Qualification 
(RFQ).” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8) 
 

 
 
12. The Committee during the course of examination of the subject had been informed 
by the Ministry of Rural Development that in 86 per cent of cases wages under MGNREGA 
have been paid within the stipulated time which means that in 14 per cent of cases there 
is delay in disbursement of wages.  As per the information made available to the 
Committee by the Ministry of Rural Development, in 1.61 per cent of the cases the delay 
has been reported to be beyond 90 days.  The Committee while taking note of the 
alarming situation in this regard had strongly recommended to identify districts, blocks 
and villages where the number of delay cases are much more.  The Committee are 
concerned to note that even after acknowledging the delay in disbursement of MGNREGA 
wages to the extent of 14 per cent of the cases, the Department of Posts and the Ministry 
of Rural Development have not been able to identify the cases as is apparent from the 
action taken notes.  The Ministry of Rural Development instead of giving details of the 
specific data has stated in a vague manner that delay in disbursement of wages is a result 
of delay that occur at different stages of processes involving various agencies.  On the 
part of the Department of Posts, the data available on MoRD website has been ex amined 
by some Circles and it has been found that no account has been opened in the Panchayats 
of most of the places indicated on the MoRD website.   
 
The Committee express unhappiness over the way such an important issue has 
been addressed by the Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development.  Even 
when it is a acknowledged fact that there is delay in disbursement of MGNREGA wages, 
the Ministry of Rural Development which is the nodal Ministry has not been able to give 
specific details of the de lay cases where the Posts has been involved.  The Committee 
again emphasize that the districts, blocks and villages where the number of delay cases 
are much more should be identified so that corrective action can be taken.  The concerns 
of the Committee in  this regard should be duly conveyed to the Ministry of Rural 
Development.  Besides the Department of Posts on their own should also monitor the 
position of time taken in disbursement of wages through their own mechanisms so that 
the information with regar d to delay in disbursement of wages by Posts is regularly 
maintained.  Not only that the said information should be made transparent by putting 
the information on the website as well as through other mechanisms like display of 
information in Post Offices and Panchayat Offices etc.   

 
 
  
III. Payment of compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA    
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 9 & 10) 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
  The information furnished by the Department of Rural Development indicates 
that only in Jharkhand compensation to 249 persons in Khunti and Murhu 
blocks has so far been made whereas the labourers as per the Act are entitled 
to receive payment of compensati on as per the provisions made under 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). What is more disappointing is the 
fact that the Department of Rural Development on its own has never tried to 
find out the status of compliance of the aforesaid provision by the va rious 
State Governments. It was only when the issue was raised by the Standing 
Committee on Information Technology during the course of deliberations 
that Ministry of Rural Development agreed to seek the clarification from all 
States in this regard. The Co mmittee would like the Department of Posts to 
follow the Department of Rural Development in this regard and the response 
received from the State Governments should be furnished to the Committee. 
Besides, efforts should be made to ensure that all the labour ers where the 
delay is there are duly compensated as per the provisions made in the Act.  
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
The Committee from the status of payment of compensation to labourers 
observe that perhaps labourers are not aware of their statutory rights.  There 
is an urgent need to take the initiative to make the labourers aware of their 
rights as envisaged under MGNREGA through various mechanisms which may 
include print and electronic media, Gram Sabha meetings, display of 
information at Panchayat Headqua rters etc. The Department of Posts in 
coordination with the Department of Rural Development should take all the 
initiatives for spread of awareness amongst labourers about their rights 
under MGNREGA so that they can put pressure on the Posts and Banks for 
timely payment of wages.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
Replies of the Government 
 
14. The Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
Department of Posts is making all efforts for timely payment of wages. All the 
circles have already been asked to identify the cases of delay and take 
corrective action at the earliest. The Rural Development Department has 
been requested to share specific cases of delay so that corrective action can 
be taken in such cases. As desired by the Committee, the Department of 

 
 
Posts will continue to maintain close coordination with the concerned state 
Governments to ensure that no unreasonable delay takes place in respect of 
payment of wages to the MGNREGA workers.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 9) 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development administers several schemes/programmes 
including Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) for rural areas.  Information, Education and Communication  
activities by the Ministry of Rural Development for all programmes of the 
Ministry are done in a holistic manner both in electronic and print media out 
of the budget allocation for each year for generating awareness across the 
country for effective implementation of these progrmmes.   
 
As per para 30 of  Schedule II of the Act, in case of delay in payment, the 
labourers are entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the 
provisions of the payment of Wages Act 1936.  Section 4 of the Act further 
provides that States are to make arrangements for the proper 
implementation of the Scheme.  Ministry has, from time to time, issued 
instructions to the States for timely payment of wages to the workers as per 
the provisions of the Act.  Wherever delays in payment occur, the workers 
need to claim compensation from the State Government as per the provisions 
of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and the States Governments are obliged 
to pay compensation.” 
 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to intimate to 
Department of Posts, their initi atives for spreading of  awareness amongst 
labourers about their rights under MGNREGA. If any specific 
suggestions/proposals are received from Ministry of Rural Development, it 
will be considered by Department of Posts.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 10) 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development administers several schemes/programmes 
including Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) for rural areas. Information, Education and Communication 
activities by the Ministry of Rural Development for all programmes of the 
Ministry are done in a holistic manner both in electronic and print media out 
of the budget allocation for each year for generating awareness across the 
country for effective implementation of these programmes. 
 
As per para 30 of Schedule II of the Act, in case of delay in payment , the 
labourers are entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the 

 
 
provisions of the payment of Wages Act 1936. Section 4 of the Act further 
provides that States are to make arra ngements for the proper 
implementation of the Scheme.  Ministry has, from time to time, issued 
instructions to the States for timely payment of wages to the workers as per 
the provisions of the Act. Wherever delays in payment occur, the workers 
need to cla im   compensation from the State Government as per the 
provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and the State Governments are 
obliged to pay compensation.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 10) 
 
15. The Committee while taking note of the fact that payment of compensation in 
cases of delay in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA was made only in Jharkhand to 
249 persons in Khunti and Murhu blocks so far had recommended to take the initiative to 
make labourers aware of their rights for compensation as envisaged under the Act.  Even 
when the various mechanisms to spread awareness were indicated in the 
recommendation of the Committee like print and electronic media, Gram Sabha 
meetings, display of informati on at Panchayat Headquarter etc. the Department of Posts 
in the action taken notes has tried to avoid the specific suggestions.  In an evasive way, 
Posts has stated that if any specific suggestion/proposal is received from the Ministry of 
Rural Development it would be considered by Posts.  On the part of the Ministry of Rural 
Development too the specific suggestions have been ignored.  In a casual way, the 
Ministry of Rural Development has tried to justify their awareness mechanism s.  It has 
been stated tha t IEC activities by the Ministry of Rural Development for all programmes 
of the Ministry are done in a holistic manner both in electronic and print media.  The 
Ministry has not  even bothered to check whether the specific campaign contains the 
information a bout the statutory rights of the MGNREGA workers to compensation in 
cases of delay in wage disbursement under MGNREGA.  The Committee express 
unhappiness over the way the suggestions of the Committee have been dealt with by the 
Ministry of Rural Developmen t as well as Posts. They again exhort the Department of 
Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development to consider the specific mechanisms 
suggested by the Committee for spreading awareness amongst the MGNREGA workers 
about their entitlement for compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages. The 
specific action as suggested should be taken and the Committee informed.  
  
 

 
 
IV. Corruption and role of middleman in disbursement of wages  
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 11) 
16. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee find that as per the records of the Department of Rural 
Development, a total 244 cases relating to corruption in disbursement of 
wages have so far been reported. With regard to the number of corruption 
cases in Posts, as per the Department of Posts, 7 cases of loss and fraud 
related to MGNREGA accounts have been found and in four such cases FIRs 
have been lodged. The Committee are surprised to note that with the 
aforesaid specific cases of corruption as reported during examination, the 
Department of Posts when specifically asked about the role of middleman, 
ransom money received by officials and the labourers getting wages lesser 
than the amount declared has chosen to be ignorant of the matter. The 
Committee are unhappy over the way the Department has responded to such 
a serious question raised by the Committee during the course of 
deliberations.  
 
The Committee further feel that the number of corruption cases as reported 
is just the tip of iceberg and the real situation in this regard may be more 
serious. There may be a number of cases of role of middleman, ransom 
money demanded and the labourers ge tting wages lesser than the amount 
declared. Besides, Benami wage system is prevailing in the country. The 
Committee find that some sort of guarantee of employment has been 
envisaged through MGNREGA which if implemented in a proper way can help 
to eradicat e poverty in the country. Moreover, money in the hands of the 
poor persons can increase their purchasing power which can boost the 
economy of the country. There is an urgent need to pay serious attention by 
all the stakeholders which include the Ministries  concerned, State 
Governments, Banks, Post Offices and Civil Societies. The Department of 
Posts and Rural Development should take all the desired initiatives so that 
the guarantee scheme is implemented in a proper way thereby benefitting 
the last person of the society in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
17. The Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development  in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
The Department is having efficient internal mechanism to deal with all types 
of complaints. When a complaint is received, the same is sent for detailed 
enquiry after acknowledging the receipt to the complainant. Complainants 
are invariably contacted as par t of the enquiry, which is followed by 

 
 
interrogation of concerned officials and going through the relevant 
documents by the field officers. Appropriate action is then taken to address 
the grievance of the complainant and suitable action is taken against er ring 
officials, if any. 
 
Department is not aware of any specific complaint of the role of middleman 
and the ransom money received by officials for disbursement of wages. The 
Rural Development Department has already been requested to share specific 
instances of such complaint but no reply has been received so far. MORD has 
been again requested to share serious complaint of role of middleman and 
corruption cases so that corrective action may be taken in this regard.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 11) 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
Ministry of Rural Development has taken multipronged measures for 
ensuring that the rights of the workers under MGNREGA Act are protected 
and integrity of the process of MGNREGA administration is preserved. 
Complaints received in the Ministry are  forwarded to concerned State 
Government seeking action taken report and comments thereon. For 
investigation into complaints of serious nature National Level Monitors are 
deputed by the Ministry and their reports are analysed and findings are 
forwarded to the concerned State Government for taking corrective 
measures. Grievance redressal through the Ombudsmen to be appointed by 
the State Governments under MGNREGA has also been established for this 
purpose. The Ministry has been repeatedly reminding State Gov ernments to 
ensure that they establish all suitable mechanisms for redressal of grievances 
and disposal of complaints in accordance with the relevant provisions of 
MGNREG Act.   
 
State Governments are regularly reminded about their duty under the Act to 
have serious complaints investigated and action taken to ensure that in cases 
of mis -appropriation and embezzlement of funds disciplinary action should 
be initiated under Indian Penal Code and Prevention of Corruption Act, 
besides recovering the amount inv olved from the persons concerned in 
accordance with law.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 11) 
 
18. The Committee are concerned to note that even when the Ministry of Rural 
Development during the course of examination of the subject had informed the 
Committee that 244 cases relating to corruption in disbursement of wages have so far 
been reported, the Ministry has not shared the details of the specific complaints with 
regard to role of middleman, ransom money received by officials with regard to 

 
 
disbursement of  wages under MGNREGA with Posts as informed by the Department of 
Posts in the Action Taken Notes.   
 
The Committee again emphasize that the corruption cases as reported is just the 
tip of the iceberg and the real situation in this regard may be more seriou s.  The action 
taken notes of the Ministry of Rural Development simply highlight the various 
mechanisms as provided under MGNREGA for redressal of grievances and disposal of 
complaints as per the provisions made in MGNREGA.  The reply of Posts further indi cate 
complacency with regard to tackling the serious issue of corruption  which involve role of 
middleman, ransom money demanded, the labourers getting wages lesser than the 
amount declared and the Benami wage system.  The Department instead of finding out  
the reality in this regard is quite satisfied with their mechanisms.  The Committee have 
been informed that the Department is having efficient internal mechanism to deal with all 
types of corruption. The Ministry of Rural Development and Posts are quite i gnorant of 
the reality at the ground level.  The Committee again exhort the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Posts to pay serious attention to the issue.  The system with regard to 
disbursement of wages should be made transparent.  Moreover, the MGNREGA w orkers 
should be made aware of the grievance redressal mechanisms and their rights under the 
MGNREGA which would make them lodge complaints against the erring officials. Only 
then the Ministry of Rural Development and Posts would know the reality about the  
system of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA.  The Committee again emphasize to 
have coordinated approach amongst various agencies to deal with the issue of corruption 
so that the real guarantee of employment is provided to the rural poor as envisaged 
under the Guarantee Act.         
 
V. Toll Free Helpline Number for redressal of grievances  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 14, 15, 16 & 29) 
19. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee are satisfied to note that National Toll Free Helpline Number 
1800110707 to enable any person to make the complaint or query has been 
set up by the Ministry of Rural Development and a total of 708 complaints 
have so far been entered on the Na tional Helpline. The Committee would like 
the Department of Rural Development to give publicity to the aforesaid 

 
 
helpline so that more and more persons make use of the National Helpline, to 
address their grievances.  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
With regard to the Helpline by the State Governments, the Committee note 
that 24 States/UTs have set the Helpline as reported by the State 
Governments. The Committee emphasize that the remaining States should be 
further motivated to set up the Helplines.  
(Recommendation No. 15) 
On the issue of setting up of Helpline by the Department of Posts, the 
Committee are unhappy to note the casual attitude of the Department. When 
the issue was specifically raised, the Department in an uninterested way has 
stated that there is no s uch plan to establish a Helpline. The Committee 
strongly recommend that on the lines of National Helpline and State Helpline, 
the Department of Posts should immediately set up a Helpline at the National 
level as well as at Circle/local level whereby the la bourers can report with 
regard to their grievances about the payment of wages through Posts 
accounts, the issue being delay in payment of wages, ransom demanded by 
the officials or any other matter connected with the disbursement of wages 
by Posts.  
(Recommendation No. 16) 
The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending to make 
Divisional Superintendent of Postal Department as a nodal officer for the 
purpose of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA and display the phone 
number of the nodal offic er on the display board erected as the workplace.  
The Committee have been apprised that Circles have been asked to request 
the State Governments to arrange for display of the phone number of the 
postal nodal officers at the workplace in MGNREGA.  The Comm ittee in this 
regard may like to emphasize that there is an urgent need to coordinate with 
the local bodies so that the information about the nodal officer for the 
purpose of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA is displayed at the work 
site.  Besides, as s uggested by the Committee in this report, the toll free 
numbers for grievance redressal should be identified and the information 
displayed at the work site after duly coordinating with the local bodies. 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 
Reply of the Government 
20. The Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of MoRD: 
As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/Union 
Territories have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance 
redressal.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 14)  

 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/Union 
Territories have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance 
redressal.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 15)  
 “Reply of DoP: 
 
Phone numbers of nodal officers have been circulated for display at work 
place. Labourers can report their grievances to nodal officers.”  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 16)  
 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/Union 
Territories have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance 
redressal. “ 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 16)  
 
 “Reply of DoP: 
 Details of nodal officers has been supplied to State Governments.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 29) 
 “Reply of MoRD: 
If post offices are able to make arrangements for payment of MGNREGA 
wages at the workplace, the Ministry of Rural Development would welcome 
it.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 29) 
 
21.  The Committee while reviewing the facility of toll free helpline number provided 
for redressal of grievances under MGNREGA had raised a series of issues as elaborated 
below.  
(i) While appreciating setting up of a national toll free helpline number 
1800110707  by the Ministry of Rural Development to enable any person to 
make complaint or query, the Committee had recommended for publicity of 
the national toll free helpline number  through various mechanism so that 
more and more persons make use of the helpline to address their 
grievances;  
 

 
 
(ii) While noting that 24 States/UTs had set up State Helpline s, the Committee 
had emphasized that the remaining States should be further motivated to 
set up the helplines;  
 
(iii) The Committee had strongly recommended to set up helpline by Posts at 
the National level as well as Circle/local level whereby labourers can report 
their grievances about the payment of wages through Posts accounts;   
 
(iv) The coordination with local bodies wa s emphasized.  The Committee had 
recommended to display the  information about the nodal officers 
appointed by Posts for disbursement of wages as well as the toll free 
number at the worksite after duly coordinating  with the local bodies.  
The aforesaid issues have not been addressed in the right perspective by both the 
Department of Posts and the Ministry of Rural Development.  Both the 
Ministry/Department have tried to sidetrack the important recommendations made by 
the Committee.  With re gard to all the issues elaborated above, the Ministry of Rural 
Development without understanding the recommendations of the Committee, in a vague 
manner has furnished the status of setting up of State Helpline by States.    
  
On the issue of setting up of helpline by the Department of Posts, the Committee 
are unhappy to note the way Posts has tried to ignore the recommendation of the 
Committee.  Instead of taking urgent and immediate steps for setting up of helpline by 
Posts on the line of National/State he lplines set up by the Department of Rural 
Development, Posts has stated that phone numbers of nodal offices have been circulated 
for display at workplace.  The Committee understand that  setting up of helpline is 
something different from setting and display ing the number of nodal officers.  The 
Committee while expressing displeasure over the way the Ministry of Rural Development 
and the Department of Posts have shown insensitivity to the important suggestions, 
would like both the Ministry and Department to t ake concrete positive steps on the 
suggested lines so that the labourers can contact on toll free helplines with regard to their 
grievances about the payment of wages under MGNREGA , the issue being delay in 
payment of wages, ransom money demanded by the o fficials or any other matter 
concerned.    
 
 

 
 
VI.  Study of social audit conducted in various States and replicating the best of the 
models in other States 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 20) 
22. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
  It has emerged during the deliberations that State of Andhra Pradesh has set 
up an independent Directorate of Accounts for social audit whose 
effectiveness according to the Department of Rural Development is more. 
The Committee feel that there may be variations of conduct of social audit in 
various States which need to be studied and the best of the models to be 
replicated in other States. The desired action in this regard may be taken by 
the Department of Posts and Department of Rural Development.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
23. The Ministry of Rural Development and the Department of Posts in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP:  
 
Circles have been instructed to ensure that the postal officials are present 
during the social audits of MGNREGA” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of 
Schemes Rules, 2011 have been notified in the Gazette on 30th June 2011. 
These include social audit and have been finalized in consultation with the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India and Law Ministry, taking into account 
comments received from State Governments, Civil Society Organisations and 
public. These rules, inter-alia, provide as follows:- 
 
a. All elected members of Panch ayats and staff involved in implementing 
the schemes under the Act (including the staff of the Non – 
Governmental Organisations, Self Help Groups and disbursing 
agencies) shall be present at the Gram Sabha during social audit and 
respond to queries. 
 
b. The G ram Sabha shall provide a platform to all villagers to seek  and 
obtain further information and responses from all involved in 
implementation. It will also provide a platform to any person who has 
any contribution to make and relevant information to present.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 29) 

 
 
 
24. The Committee are anguish ed to note the way the Department of Posts and the 
Ministry of Rural Development have responded to their recommendations made in the 
report on such an important subject ‘Disbursement of wages to labourers under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act by Post Offices .’  On the 
specific recommendation of the Committee to study the variations of conduct of social 
audit in various States and replicating the best of the models in other States, the 
Ministry/Department have not responded to the specific issues.  In a vague an d 
insensitive manner the provisions with social audit made under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011 have been reproduced.  The 
Committee cannot but reiterate their recommendation and emphasize that the Ministry 
of Rural De velopment and Department of Posts should take the concrete action on the 
specific recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 VII. Linking of MGNREGA with UIDAI  
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 25) 
25. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Rural 
Development has joined hands with UIDAI and is introducing biometric 
signature. As per the plan a Unique Identity Number would be provided to all 
MGNREGA workers, and for this UIDAI has appointed  Department of Rural 
Development as registrar. The Committee feel that this is a step in the right 
direction and hence, should be implemented with right earnest. The 
Committee may be kept apprised about the status of its implementation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
26. The Ministry of Rural Development in the action taken note has stated as under:- 
 
“After discussions with UIDAI, it was originally proposed that Ministry of Rural 
Development will carry out residuary enrolment of MGNREGA beneficiaries 
to complement the national enrolment by UIDAI. Since the pace of enrolment 
by UIDAI is not as envisaged , enrolment by Ministry of Rural Development 
has not taken off.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 25) 
 

 
 
27. The Committee are unhappy to note that the initial proposal to carry out residuary 
enrolment of MGNREGA workers to comprehend the national enrolment by UIDAI for 
which the Ministry of Rural Development was appointed as Registrar has been dropped    
reason being the pace of enrolment by UIDAI not as envisage d.  The Committee feel that 
the proposal to carry out residuary enrolment of MGNREGA beneficiaries to complement 
the national enrolment by UIDAI merits consideration and the concerned Ministry should 
be requested to reconsider the proposal for which the Ministry of Rural Development was 
appointed as Registrar. 
 
VIII. Payment of Wages at workplace  
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 28) 
28. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee in their various reports have been recommending to find out 
ways to disburse wages to labourers at the workplace. The aforesaid proposal 
do not seem to be feasible to the Department, the reason being frequent 
change of workplace. The Committe e may like to observe that the aforesaid 
constraint can be addressed if the wages are paid in time. As such, the 
initiatives may be taken to disburse the wages timely and the Committee’s 
recommendation to make arrangements to disburse the wages at workplac e 
may be considered by the Department.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
29. The Ministry of Rural Development and the Department of Posts in the action taken 
notes have stated as under:- 
“Reply of DoP: 
 
Payment of wages at workplace is not feasible because of the fact that we are 
receiving wage bills and cheques only after completion of the work. In the 
mean time work place of the labourers gets changed. The paying officials in 
GDS BOs have also to keep the office opened from 3 -5 hours for providing 
various postal services to the visiting public.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 28) 
 
“Reply of MoRD: 
 
If post offices are able to make arrangements for payment of MGNREGA 
wages at the workplace, the Ministry of Rural Development would welcome 
it.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 28) 

 
 
 
 
30. The Committee have been recommending to find out way and means to disburse 
wages to labourers under MGNREGA at the workplace in their various reports.  The 
Department of Posts has repeatedly been stating that the prop osal is not feasible the 
reason being frequent change of workplace.  The Committee in the recent report had 
observed that the aforesaid concern can be addressed if the wages are paid in time.  The 
Committee find that whereas the Ministry of Rural Developme nt has welcomed the 
suggestion of the Committee, the Department of Posts has again reiterated that Posts is 
receiving bills and cheques only after completion of the work and in the meantime 
workplace of the labourers gets changed.  Posts has added another reason stating that 
the paying officials in GDS BOs have also to keep the office opened from 3 -5 hours for 
providing various postal services to the visiting public.  The Committee find that on the 
one hand the Committee have been given the impression that there is no delay in 
disbursement of wages under MGNREGA by Posts on the other hand the reasons put 
forth for not agreeing to the suggestion of the Committee to disburse wages at workplace 
as elaborated above clearly indicate the delay in disbursement of w ages.   The Committee 
are unable to comprehend the stand of the Department of Posts in this regard and would 
like to reiterate their recommendation to find out ways and means to disburse the wages 
under MGNREGA at the workplace.  The concrete initiative s on the suggested lines be 
taken and the Committee informed accordingly.       
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Wages disbursed through cash  
 
  The Committee note that the Payment of wages through accounts is the statutory 
requirement as per MGNREGA. In spite of that to the surprise of the Committee, the wages 
are being disbursed by cash in some of the States. The Committee further take note of t he 
fact that under Section 27(1) of MGNREGA some of the districts have been given exemption 
from payment of wages through accounts in areas experiencing left extremism in its worst 
form and also where Banking and Postal Branches are very few in number. The  districts 
given exemption by the Department of Rural Development include some of the districts in 
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra State as indicated by the Department of Rural Development. 
The scenario of disbursement of wages by cash as emerged during the c ourse of 
deliberations indicates that in other States too, the disbursement of wages is being made by 
cash. Only in few States 100 per cent of wages are being made through accounts. In 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and Lakshadweep  the wages 
disbursed through accounts are less than 50 per cent during the year 2009 -10. In 
Lakshadweep, the percentage disbursement of wages through accounts is zero. Worse is 
the situation in Tamil Nadu where only 0.14 per cent of wages are being disburs ed through 
accounts even when the Department of Rural Development has claimed that there is no 
extremism there and IT connectivity is very good. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that there is much scope of corruption in case the wages are disbursed by  cash. Moreover, 
the State Governments not complying with the statutory requirement is not 
understandable to the Committee. The issue needs to be taken up on an urgent basis with 
the respective State Governments at the highest level. The Committee strongly  recommend 
that their concern in this regard be brought into the knowledge of the Cabinet Secretary so 
that the issue is taken up urgently at the highest level with the various States particularly 
Tamil Nadu Government.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
With a view to ensuring timely payment, infusing transparency and enhancing the 
integrity of wage payment under  Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, Schedule II of Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA Act was amended to make wage disbursement to Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers 
through insti tutional accounts in Banks or Post Offices a statutory requirement. It is 
mandatory to make payment of wages to MGNREGA workers through their individual or 
joint accounts in Banks/Post Offices unless exempted on account of poor coverage of bank 
/post offic e network. The Ministry of Rural Development has exempted some districts in 
different states from this wherever requests for exemption supported by reasonable 
grounds were made to the Ministry. Apart from Tamil Nadu, the Ministry does not have 
reports of c ash payments from other States. The issue of wage disbursement in cash in 

 
 
Tamil Nadu in contravention of the provisions has been taken up strongly with the State 
Government by the Ministry.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
On the issue of wage earners not withdrawing wages within the stipulated time of 
three days, the Committee observe that perhaps labourers are not being properly informed 
about the deposit of their wages in their Post Office accounts. The Department of Post s 
needs to review their system and find out some mechanism to inform the labourers about 
depositing of their wages in their accounts on the same day. The display of information with 
regard to depositing of wages at the workplace can be one of the proposed mechanism in 
this regard. The Department should take the desired action as suggested and inform the 
Committee accordingly.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Reply of DoP: 
 
One copy of the wage list is made over to the presenter of the cheque. Thereafter, 
the representative of the State Government informs workers about the deposit and as also 
suggested by the Standing Committee action to display the information is taken by pasting 
information on the notice board of Post Office/ Gram Panchayat.  In addition fo llowing 
measures are also taken :-  
 
Munadi through Gram Panchayt authorities. 
Spreading information through Rozgar Sahayak/ Panchayat Sevak.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The State Governments have been advised by the Ministry of Rural Development to 
identify such Branch Post Offices and Sub Post Offices where cash limit and line limit are 
inadequate leading to delay in wage payments and take up the matter with concerned Chief 
Post Master General(CPMG). In addition to this, the Minister of Rural Development has also  
met the Minister of Communication & IT to discuss issues relating to speedy disbursement 
of MGNREGA wages through post offices. The State Governments have also been advised to 
place cash equivalent to one month average wage payment in advance with post of fices to 
address delay, if any, arising due to time taken between release of payment by State 
Government and actual receipt of funds by Post Offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
Appointment of Ombudsman  
  The Ministry of Rural Development on 7th September 2009 issued an order under 
Section 27(1) of MGNREGA regarding the establishment of the office of Ombudsman in 
various districts within three months of the date of order. Even when the stipulated 
timeline f or appointment of Ombudsman was given, the deliberations held by the 
Committee reveal that Ombudsman has not been appointed so far in all the districts. From 
the information furnished by the Department, the Committee note that only in 5 States viz. 
Punjab, Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram and Himachal Pradesh Ombudsman has been appointed 
in all the districts. Non-availability of suitable candidates as per the prescribed qualifications 
in the order has been cited as reason by the Department of Rural Development for non-
appointment of Ombudsman in all the districts. The Committee feel that qualification 
criteria need to be reviewed by the Government so as to ensure that the Ombudsman is 
appointed in all the districts which would definitely help in effective implementa tion of 
MGNREGA.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The Central Government had vide letter dated 7th September 2009 directed all state 
governments to appoint Ombudsman in districts for redressal of Grievance in a time bound 
manner. The Central Government is monitoring the appointment of Ombudsman by the 
State Governments. Details regarding appointing Ombudsman in all or majority of districts 
are enclosed. 16 states have appointed Ombudsman in all or majority of districts. Keeping 
in view the importance of dut ies and responsibilities attached with the post of 
Ombudsman, the Ministry of Rural Development is not in favour of relaxation of prescribed 
qualifications, as this would invite applications even from non -serious and unsuitable 
candidates. The concerned St ates have been re advertising with the aim to reach to well 
qualified candidates who missed out in the earlier rounds of selection. 
 
           The States where Ombudsmen have already been appointed in districts have been 
advised to send details of the red ressal cases handled by Ombudsmen with their comments 
on working of the Scheme to the Ministry of Rural Development. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee further note that guarantee scheme is the flagship scheme of the 
Central Government and all the outlay required for the scheme is being provided to the 
State Governments by the Central Government. Even then the Department of Rural 
Development is least bothered to find out the details of the redressal cases handled by 
Ombudsman. When specifically asked, the Committee have been apprised that 
Ombudsman is supposed to send a monthly report to the Chief Secretary and Secretary of 
State Nodal Department recommending appropriate action. The Committee are of the firm 

 
 
view that the Department of Rural Development should monitor the functioning of the 
various mechanisms established under the Central Act i.e. MGNREGA. The Department of 
Rural Deve lopment cannot be contended with formulating the scheme and issuing 
guidelines. The concerns of the Committee should adequately be conveyed to the 
Department of Rural Development so that the desired action is taken on their part.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The Central Government had vide letter dated 7th September 2009 directed all state 
governments to appoint Ombudsman in districts for redressal of Grievance in a time bound 
manner. The Central Government is monitoring the appointment of Ombudsman by  the 
State Governments. Details regarding appointing Ombudsman in all or majority of districts 
are enclosed. 16 states have appointed Ombudsman in all or majority of districts. Keeping 
in view the importance of duties and responsibilities attached with the  post of 
Ombudsman, the Ministry of Rural Development is not in favour of relaxation of prescribed 
qualifications, as this would invite applications even from non -serious and unsuitable 
candidates. The concerned States have been re advertising with the aim  to reach to well 
qualified candidates who missed out in the earlier rounds of selection. 
 
The States where Ombudsmen have already been appointed in districts have been 
advised to send details of the redressal cases handled by Ombudsmen with their comments  
on working of the Scheme to the Ministry of Rural Development.       
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
Monitoring and Vigilance Committees  
  Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA provides setting up of a Local Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committee composing of the members of the locality or village where the work 
is undertaken to monitor the progress and quality of work while it is under progress. The  
Committee observe that setting up of Monitoring Committee at the village level is the most 
effective monitoring mechanism. There is an urgent need to monitor and study the working 
of these Committees. Besides, the Committee during the course of deliberati ons have been 
informed that State level Monitoring Committee meets twice a year and District level 
Monitoring Committee meets on a quarterly basis. To make the meetings of these 
Committees really effective, the representatives of Posts and Banks and other related State 
Governments and local Government officials along with local MLAs and MPs should also be 
invited at the sittings of the Committees. The desired specific guidelines in this regard 
should be formulated and circulated to the State Governments for  compliance. Besides, the 
outcome of the sittings of these Committee should be constantly monitored by the Union 
Department of Rural Development and the Department of Posts. The structured mechanism 
to review the functioning of the various levels of monito ring Committees need to be 
formulated.  
 

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
The Committee has been reconstituted in the year 2010 by MORD and the Chief 
Postmaster General of the Circle concerned is a member of the State level Vigilance & 
Monitoring Committee. Senior Superintendent/ Superintendent of the Post Offices in the 
district is the member of district level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee. With the consent 
of Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Posts has agreed to make the postal 
Circles and Divisions a part of the State/District Vigilance & Monitoring Committees under 
the aegis of the Ministry of Rural Development to monitor the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) at State and district levels are 
expected to review the implementation of the programmes of Ministry of Rural 
Development, wherein Members of Parliament and other elected representatives are given 
crucial role in the implementation process. In order to facilitate t hese Committees to 
function more effectively, the guidelines were revised in the year 2010. Under the revised 
guidelines, the Chief PostMaster General of the Circle in the State is Member of the State 
level V&MC. Senior Superintendents/Superintendent in th e Post Department of the district 
and the Lead Bank Officer in the district are Members of the district level V&MC. 
Instructions have been issued to also invite the Convener of the State level Bankers 
Committee for the meeting of the State level V&MC. The Meetings of V&MC at State and 
district level are to be held every quarter. Any gross violation noticed by the Committee, are 
to be conveyed to the Ministry of Rural Development. The guidelines already stipulate that 
one Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) r epresenting the State and exercising the option 
to be associated with the district level Committee of that district on fist come basis, would 
be designated as Co-Chairman.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No . 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
  The Committee note that District and State level Monitoring Committees have been 
set up whereby the local Member of Parliament is Chairperson and if there are more 
Members of Parliament they are called co -Chairpersons. The Committee in this regard 
would like to recommend that the similar status of co -Chairperson should be provided to 
the Rajya Sabha M.P. also. The Department of Posts should follow the Department of Rural 
Development in this regard.  
 
  

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
The Committee has been reconstituted in the year 2010 by MORD and the Chief 
Postmaster General of the Circle concerned is a member of the State level Vigilance & 
Monitoring Committee. Senior Superintendent/ Superintendent of the Post Offices in the 
district is the member of district level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee. With the consent 
of Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Posts has agreed to make the postal 
Circles and Divisions a part of the State/District Vigilance & Monitoring Committees un der 
the aegis of the Ministry of Rural Development to monitor the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (V&MCs) at State and district levels are 
expected to review the implementation of the programmes of Mini stry of Rural 
Development, wherein Members of Parliament and other elected representatives are given 
crucial role in the implementation process. In order to facilitate these Committees to 
function more effectively, the guidelines were revised in the year 2 010. Under the revised 
guidelines, the Chief PostMaster General of the Circle in the State is Member of the State 
level V&MC. Senior Superintendents/Superintendent in the Post Department of the district 
and the Lead Bank Officer in the district are Members  of the district level V&MC. 
Instructions have been issued to also invite the Convener of the State level Bankers 
Committee for the meeting of the State level V&MC. The Meetings of V&MC at State and 
district level are to be held every quarter. Any gross violation noticed by the Committee, are 
to be conveyed to the Ministry of Rural Development. The guidelines already stipulate that 
one Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) representing the State and exercising the option 
to be associated with the district leve l Committee of that district on first come basis, would 
be designated as Co-Chairman.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
Social Audit  
 
Section 17(2) of MGNREGA provides that the Gram Sabha shall conduct regular 
social audit of all the projects taken up within the Gram Panchayat. As per the notification 
of the Department of Rural Development social audit shall be held at least once in ever y six 
months. The details of the number of social audits held indicates that the Guideline to hold 
two sittings in a year is not being complied with. Not only that all the districts in various 
States have not started social audit. The Committee observe tha t the provision of social 
audit is an important monitoring provision which provides the opportunity to the 
beneficiaries to inspect the accounts. It is a mechanism where all the details of the projects 
are scrutinized by the assembled public. Moreover, hol ding of two sittings in a year is the 
statutory requirement. As such the State Governments should ensure that the stipulated 

 
 
number of social audits are held in every Gram Panchayat. Besides, the Committee would 
also like to recommend that the officials of  the Department of Posts and the Banks which 
are the wage disbursing authority under MGNREGA are also mandated to be present at the 
social audit of MGNREGA so that there is direct interaction between the public and the 
respective officials and the grievances of the public are addressed on the spot. Not only that 
this mechanism would further help to find solutions to the problems being faced in 
implementation of the programme and very good suggestions would emerge for the 
effective implementation of MGNREGA.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
 
Circles have been instructed to ensure that the postal officials are present during the 
social audits of MGNREGA. 
 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes 
Rules, 2011 have been notified in the Gazette on 30th June 2011. These include social audit 
and have been finalized in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General of India and 
Law Ministry, taking into account comments received from State Governmen ts, Civil Society 
Organisations and public. These rules, inter-alia, provide as follows:- 
 
a. All elected members of Panchayats and staff involved in implementing the 
schemes under the Act (including the staff of the Non – Governmental 
Organisations, Self Hel p Groups and disbursing agencies) shall be present at 
the Gram Sabha during social audit and respond to queries. 
b. The Gram Sabha shall provide a platform to all villagers to seek and obtain 
further information and responses from all involved in implementati on. It will 
also provide a platform to any person who has any contribution to make and 
relevant information to present.  
  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
Structured mechanism for inspection by the Senior Officers  
 
The Committee take note of the structured mechanism for inspection by the senior 
officers of Posts. In this regard, the Committee may like to recommend to the Department 
to have a system of analyzing the inspection reports of the officers with regard to 
disbursement of wages to labourers under MGNREGA by Posts. The suggested system 
would help the Department in analyzing the ground reality with regard to disbursement of 

 
 
wages and taking the desired corrective measures for the efficient system of disbursement  
of wages by Posts.  
 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Detailed inspection questionnaire has been prescribed to check the work of 
MGNREGA wage disbursal in post offices during their mandatory annual inspections. The 
questionnaire includes questions on ti me taken to disburse the wages after receipt of wage 
bills and the funds, record management, and timely submission of reports. The inspecting 
authorities are also required to check a specified number of passbooks to ensure that 
amount intended for the acco unt holders has actually been enetered in the passbooks and 
disbursed the concerned wage earner only. The inspection reports of inspectorial officers 
are being examined by next higher level officer and corrective action is being taken on 
actionable Para. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
The obligation on the part of State Governments as per MoU entered between the State 
Government and Department of Posts  
 
  The Committee observe that a MoU has been entered between State Governments 
and the Department of Posts whereby the obligation of th e Department of Posts and State 
Governments and MGNREGA authority has been explained. The Department of Posts during 
the course of deliberations has enumerated the details whereby MGNREGA authorities do 
not comply with their obligations as enshrined in MoU  which include State Governments 
not depositing the amount of rolling fund with Post Office, non -availability of the wage list 
relating to the works performed under MGNREGA, non-intimation of requirement of cash in 
advance, non -depositing of the amount wit h the Head Post Office in advance. The 
Committee while taking note of the non -compliance of the obligations on the part of the 
State Governments/MGNREGA authorities would like the Department of Rural 
Development to take up the issue with the various State Governments so that the labourers 
can get the timely wages.  
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
The State Governments are being advised by the Ministry of Rural Development 
from time to time to coordinate with postal authorities for fulfillment of mutual 
responsibilities and obligations in various aspects relating to disbursal of MGNREGA wages 

 
 
through post offices for which States have also entered into MOUs with the postal 
authorities. They have been advised inter -alia, to identify such Branch Post Offices and Sub 
Post Offices where cash limit and line limit are inadequate leading to delay in wage 
payments and take up the matter with concerned Chief Post Master General (CPMG). The 
State Governments have also been advised to place cash equivalent to one month average 
wage payment in advance with post offices to address delay, if any, arising due to tim e 
taken between release of payment by State Governments and actual receipt of funds by 
post offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
  The Department of Rural Development on their part have also raised some of the 
bottlenecks identified by them regarding disbursement of wages by Posts. During the 
course of deliberations, one of the concerns identified is limited outreach of Posts and 
Banks. The Committee are constrained to note that when aforesaid constraint was 
specifically brought to the knowledge of the Department of Posts, they seem contended 
with the existing status of outreach of Post Offices whereby Posts has claimed that there is 
no area in the country which is not covered with the Post Office and their delivery staff. The 
Committee again caution the Department over their contentment on the various issues. 
Providing financial services to every nook and corner of the country is the c hallenge before 
the country and Posts’ contention that there is no scope for further extension of Post 
Offices is not appreciable particularly when only 25 per cent of the villages in the country as 
per the Government’s own data are covered by Banks/Post O ffices. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the financial services through Posts should be made available to each and 
every person of society by taking the suitable measures.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In order to strengthen the network it is prop osed to open 11460 post offices in 12th 
Five Year Plan. This includes opening of post offices in all 8042 Gram Panchayat villages in 
Integrated Action Plan districts which do not have post offices as of now. The Circles have 
been instructed to open SB acco unts of all BPL households with the post offices in order to 
provide financial services to such households. POSB services are provided in all villages of 
the country through a network of more than 1,52,000 Post Offices. Every village of the 
country is connected with one post office through which POSB services are being provided. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 

 
 
Inadequate Manpower  
 
  The Committee note from the information furnished by the Department of Posts 
that 31903 Posts which include Group ‘A’ service 86 posts, Postal Superintendent Service 
Group ‘B’ 2404 posts and Group ‘C’ 29413 posts are lying vacant. With regard to the 
vacancies of Gramin Dak Sewaks 32862 posts are lying vacant. The Committee have further 
been apprised during the course of deliberations that the Department was facing problems 
in filling the vacancies due to optimization policy of the Government whereby direct 
recruitment vacancies could be filled up to the extent of 1/3rd of the direct recruitment 
vacancies arising in the year subject to a further ceiling that does not exceed 1 per cent of 
the total sanctioned strength of the Department. The aforesaid restriction h as been lifted 
w.e.f. 1 April, 2009 and the Department is making efforts to fill up the vacancies. In this 
direction 12,000 vacancies were filled up during the previous year and during the current 
year another 7,000 vacancies are planned to be filled up. T he Committee may like to 
recommend to the Department to take the desired initiatives to fill up the vacancies in a 
time bound manner so that Posts can further increase their area of activity particularly 
under MGNREGA and the wages to the labourers are disbursed effectively.  
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
The department has 31903 vacant Posts, 8378 posts are to be filled up by direct 
recruitment and remaining 23525 posts are to be filled up by promotion according to the 
provisions in the recruitment rules.  Upto March, 2011 22153 posts in various grades have 
been filled up. 
 
a. Action is being taken by the Department to fill up the vacant posts by direct 
recruitment as well as by promotion on a regular basis. The Heads of Postal 
Circles have been directe d to take necessary action to fill up the vacant posts 
by expediting the process. also, wherever such examinations are prescribed, 
the Departmental Examinations are held regularly to fill up promotional 
posts. 
b. The filling up of the posts which fall vacant due to promotions, retirement, 
resignation, death or leave of the incumbents during the year, is an ongoing 
process. Till the time, the vacant posts are filled up on regular or adhoc basis, 
the work is managed by redistribution and combination of duties, 
rationalization of procedures etc. In addition to this, Short Duty Staff is also 
engaged in the Post Offices and paid substitutes for delivery of postal articles. 
c. The vacancies meant to be filled up by direct recruitment are also being filled 
up in accordan ce with the policies of the Government. It is further intimated 
that since 2009 vacancies in various Groups are being filled up. Vacancies for 
the year 2011 in various cadres will be filled up as per the calendar of 
examination. 
d. The vacant posts of Multi Tasking Staff which could not be filled up earlier are 
being filled up as per the new Recruitment Rules notified in January, 2011. 
e. It may, therefore, be seen that department is taking necessary steps to fill up 
the vacancies whenever arising as per the existing Recruitment Rules. 

 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
Helping the Labourers in opening of MGNREGA accounts  
 
  The Committee find that services of Gram Rozgar Sevak/ Gram Panchayat 
Secretary/Members of the village Organization/SHGs/NGOs and other social workers are 
being used to help the labourers in completing the formalities to open their accounts as 
well as filling up of withdrawal for ms etc. The initiatives are in the right direction and need 
to be continued so that illiterate labourers can be assisted in opening the accounts and 
withdrawing money from their Posts accounts.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Postal officials in rural post offices have also been instructed to extend all help to 
labourers while opening their accounts and while withdrawing their money. The postal 
officials help MGNREGA labourers in filling up account opening and withdrawal forms etc.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
Training to employees of Posts in handling the task of disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA  
 
  While taking note of the initiatives taken by the Department to train the employees 
of Posts in handling MGNREGA accounts, the Committee may here like to emphasize that 
illiterate labourers need a different approach from the respective officers/staff of Posts. A s 
such, the training curriculum should include ways to sensitize the officers/staff of Posts 
about the type of clients they are dealing with while disbursing the wages under MGNREGA. 
The right approach on the part of the officers/staff would certainly incr ease the satisfaction 
level of the labourers and thereby would help Posts in extending their place under 
MGNREGA throughout the country.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 

 
 
An extensive training programme named ‘Rural Entrepreneurship Prograame’ has 
been for mulated for training 2,50,000 (approximate) Gramin Dak Sewaks who are largely 
responsible for disbursement  of wages under MGNREGA during 12th plan. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
  The Committee may further like to emphasize that MGNREGA has given lot of 
opportunities to Posts to extend their saving account network throughout the country. 
There is an urgent need to capture the opportunity by taking the benefit of vast coverage of 
Posts throughout the country. The Posts need to act proactively to take benefit of the 
opportunity provided to them.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Circles have been instructed to open SB accounts of all the BPL households at 
the post offices. Our GDS staff are motivating the people to open more and more number 
of accounts with post offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
Contradiction between the data as furnished by the Department of Rural Development 
and the Department of Posts with regard to number of accounts and amount disbursed 
under MGNREGA  
 
  The input provided by both the Departments i.e. Department of Posts and 
Department of Rural Development indicates contradiction on various aspects, particularly 
on the number of accounts and amount disbursed through Posts. During the year 2008 -09 
there is a difference of 10 lakh in the number of accounts and  Rs.289.94 crore in the 
amount disbursed. During the year 2009 -10 such gap is much wider. In the number of 
accounts there is gap of 13 lakh and in respect of amount disbursed, the gap is Rs. 1026.25 
crore. During the year 2010 -11 although the Department of Rural Development has 
furnished the data one month beyond the data furnished by the Department of Posts such 
gap is 29 lakh in respect of number of accounts and Rs. 1221.99 crore in respect of the 
amount disbursed. The representative of the Department of Rural Development during the 
course of deliberations agreed that there is discrepancy in the data. However, the 
representative of Posts tried to justify the discrepancy by stating that there is a time l ag 
between actual disbursement of wages through Post Offices and Banks and the loading of 
the figures on the website. The Committee observe that the aforesaid reasoning of Posts 
can be accepted in case of the year 2010 -11. Such a huge gape in the data furn ished by the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts is not understandable in case of the years 
2008-09 and 2009 -10 which have been over long back. The Committee feel that huge gaps 
in the data of the two Departments raises question mark about the system  of maintaining 
as well as monitoring of accounts under MGNREGA, one of the biggest centrally sponsored 
scheme of the Union Government. While expressing strong displeasure over the matter, the 
Committee desire explanation from both the Departments i.e. the  Department of Rural 
Development and the Department of Posts.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
 
The data available with Department of Posts (DoP) was compiled from the reports 
received from the Postal Circles which indicates actual number of  MGNREGA accounts and 
amount disbursed from these accounts. Circles have reconfirmed the data provided earlier. 
It is further submitted that all transactions including those involving transfer of money from 
State Governments to Head Offices (HOs), are chec ked at HO level by Savings Bank Control 
Organisation (SBCO). 
 

 
 
 The details of number of accounts and amounts disbursed under MGNREGA during 
the last three years are as under: 
 
      Year No. of accounts Amount disbursed 
 
2008-09 2.92 crores Rs. 3,863 crores 
 
2009-10 4.25 crores Rs. 7,900 crores 
 
2010-11 4.90 crores Rs.9,179 crores  
 
  
 Discrepancy in data available with MoRD and DoP can be removed if State 
Governments transfer data online to post offices. MGNREGA software (NREGASOFT) was 
installed in three Head Post Offices (Ajmer HO, Doranda HO and Raipur GPO) on pilot basis.  
MGNREGA data with respect to these HPOs has already been entered into the software but 
it could not be operationalized in real time as the concerned State Governments have no t 
been able to supply their data in the soft form.  The matter has been taken up with MoRD 
to instruct the State Governments for supply of wage lists in soft form. 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
The data regarding MGNREGA accounts with post offices and MGNREGA wages 
disbursed through post office accounts with the Ministry of Rural Development is based on 
Monthly Progress Report (MPR) and MIS reports entered/furnished by the State 
Governments.  It is not possible for the Ministry of Rural Development to physically verify 
this data with the data available with the Department of Posts. The Ministry of Rural 
Development has to rely on data furnished by the States. Unless the Department of Posts 
and the State Governments use the same platform for MIS reporting and transactions , 
there are bound to be discrepancies and mismatch in the data among both sources. The 
Ministry of Rural Development has already offered the MGNREGA software for sharing with 
the Department of Posts to shift to a single data source.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee further note that as per the Operational Guidelines 2008 there is an 
elaborate provision for audit and review of accounts maintained under MGNREGA at 
various levels by Local Fund Auditors, Chartered Accountants, District Programme 
Coordinator and Gram Sabhas. From the discrepancy of the data as mentioned above it 

 
 
seems that all the provisions made in the Operational Guidelines are not being strictly 
complied with. Not only that the representative of the Department of Rural Development 
do not seem to be serious with the discrepancy in the data as pointed out during the course 
of deliberations. He tried to argue that such discrepancy cannot be eliminated unless online 
real time entry system is implemented. From the status of computerization and t he 
connectivity scenario, the analysis of which has been done in the later part of the report, 
the Committee find that it would take years to have online real time entry of the accounts 
throughout the country. The Committee observe that the country cannot wait and sit 
silently till online system is operational particularly when the discrepancy in the data is very 
large. The Committee are of the firm opinion that there is disconnect between the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts with regard to the mai ntenance of MGNREGA 
wage accounts. While expressing unhappiness over the way the wage accounts are being 
maintained, the Committee strongly recommend that the audit of accounts as per the 
prescribed procedure should be undertaken at various levels. Not onl y that the data with 
regard to the wages disbursed under MGNREGA by the Rural Development and Posts 
should be reconciled by proper coordination between the said two Departments and there 
should be transparency in the system. All the desired initiatives sho uld be taken to address 
the issue and the Committee informed accordingly.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As far as Department of Posts is concerned it has an elaborate provision for audit of 
all accounts. MGNREGA accounts are treated as SB accounts for procedural purposes. All 
transactions relating to these accounts are checked by Savings Bank Control Organiz ation 
(SBCO). In addition, there is a provision for annual audit by P&T audit and half yearly 
inspections by administrative/ accounts officers.   
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
The data regarding MGNREGA accounts with post offices and MGNREGA wages 
disbursed through post office accounts with the Ministry of Rural Development is based on 
Monthly Progress Report (MPR) and MIS reports entered/furnished by the State 
Governments.  It is not possible for the Ministry of Rural Development to physically verify 
this data with the  data available with the Department of Posts. The Ministry of Rural 
Development has to rely on data furnished by the States. Unless the Department of Posts 
and the State Governments use the same platform for MIS reporting and transactions, 
there are bound to be discrepancies and mismatch in the data among both sources. The 
Ministry of Rural Development has already offered the MGNREGA software for sharing with 
the Department of Posts to shift to a single data source.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
Delay in payment of wages under MGNREGA  
 
  Section 3(3) of the MGNREG Act provides for disbursement of daily wages on 
weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which the work was 
done. Besides, as per Para 7.2 of Annexure II of MoU, payments are to be completed withi n 
3 days from the date of receipt of wage list and availability of funds. Besides, the flow chart 
indicating the specific time limit for each of the activity has been suggested to the States by 
the Department of Rural Department to ensure payment of wages within a fortnight. In 
spite of the statutory requirement and the specified time limit at each level as suggested, 
there have been cases of delay in payment of wages. Whereas CAG Performance Audit 
Report number 11 of 2008 undertaken in 17 States has pointe d out delay in payment of 
wages in 213 GPs, to the surprise of the Committee, the Department of Rural Development 
has received only 40 complaints in this regard. Even when as per the Department of Rural 
Development one of the bottlenecks in timely disbursement of wages is delay in payment of 
wages through Post Office even after timely issuance of payment advice to sub -Post Office, 
the Department of Posts do not seem to be serious on the issue of delay in disbursement of 
wages under MGNREGA. At one point Pos ts claimed that no specific complaint of delay has 
been received. At another point during the course of examination, the Department while 
acknowledging the delay has stated that there are cases where wage earners could not 
withdraw the amount within the stipulated timeframe of three days.  
 
 With regard to the onus of delay, the Department of Posts has tried to shift the 
major burden to the State Governments. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid 
scenario that efforts are not being made by Posts to know  the ground reality with regard to 
the disbursement of wages. The Committee observe that the ground reality in this regard is 
much worse. There are cases of delay in payment of wages. There is an urgent need on the 
part of the Department of Rural Developme nt and Department of Posts to find out the 
actual scenario and take all the desired initiatives so that the labourers who are poorest of 
the poor in the country get timely wages to meet their day to day requirements.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As soon as post offices receive wage bills and funds are made available by the State 
Government, disbursement of the wages starts. In some exceptional cases where cash is 
not readily available due to law and order problem or inability of Banks to provide cash , it 
may be delayed for a few days. However wages of the wage earners get credited in their 
respective accounts immediately and these accounts start earning interests. 
 
The mechanism of mandatory inspections and visits serves the purpose of finding 
ground reality regarding time taken in disbursement of wages to the labourers under 
MGNREGA through Post Offices. Payments of wages start from the next day of receipt of 
wage list if funds are made available. As stipulated in MOU, payments are completed in 3 
days if wage earner attends post office for payment. It has been noticed that there are 
cases where wage earners do not withdraw the amount within 3 days. In most of these 

 
 
cases, delay in payment is due to non -appearance of wage earner on the dates of payment 
made by post offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
Average time taken for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA  
 
 The Committee note that as per the reply given by the Department of Posts, the 
average time taken in disbursement of wages to one labourer in Post Office is six minutes. 
When the issue of averag e time taken for disbursement of wages was addressed to the 
Department of Rural Development, the representative during the course of deliberations 
responded that the delay with regard to wages can be captured through MIS data and 
assured the Committee that  the status of average time in disbursement of wages would be 
submitted. When the question was specifically raised through post evidence question, the 
Department instead of furnishing the details about the average time taken in disbursement 
of wages has fu rnished the status of delay with regard to disbursement of wages. Whereas 
in the earlier replies furnished by the Department of Rural Development, it has been stated 
that 40 complaints relating to delay in payment of wages have been received in the 
Department, the post evidence replies states that in 86 per cent of the cases wages have 
been paid within the stipulated time which means that in 14 per cent cases there is delay in 
disbursement of wages. Not only that in 1.61 per cent of the cases, the delay has  been 
reported to be beyond 90 days. The sum total of number of accounts in Post Offices for the 
three years i.e. 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11 (upto November) is 11.78 crore as per the 
data furnished by the Department of Rural Development. Even if the numb er of Bank 
accounts is not taken into consideration, and it is presumed that in one MGNREGA account 
payment has only been made once in each year, in 1.6492 crore cases (14 per cent of the 
11.78 crore accounts) there has been delay. The said data clearly in dicates that the 
situation is alarming. The ground situation in this regard may be further worse. What is 
more disappointing to the Committee is the lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts. The Committee at the vari ous stages of 
examination of the subject have been furnished various data with regard to delay in 
disbursement of wages under MGNREGA. The initial information furnished by both the 
Departments indicated a very satisfactory position. However, when the issue  was dug 
further by the Committee, the aforesaid data which indicates the delay in as much as 14 per 
cent of the cases has been furnished by the Department of Rural Development.  
 
 While expressing serious concern over the ground situation in this regard, the 
Committee strongly recommend to identify the districts, blocks, villages where the number 
of delay cases are much more and identify the reasons for the delay so that the corrective 

 
 
action can be taken. The action on the suggested line should be taken a nd the Committee 
apprised accordingly.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to share the data which 
indicates the delay in as much as 14 percent of the cases relating to payments through pos t 
offices so that corrective action may be taken in this regard. As per our reports, some delay 
in payment by Post Offices occurs only in difficult areas. MoRD has also been requested to 
intimate the basis on which delay is worked out which may be with ref erence to the date of 
completion of work or it may be with reference to receipt of wage bills and availability of 
cash at post office.  DoP works out delay with regard to the receipt of wage bill and 
availability of cash.  The desired information from MoRD  is still awaited.  However, data 
available on MoRD website has been examined by some Circles. In case of Haryana, delay 
was reported by MoRD to have occurred in post Offices of Ambala, Hisar, Jind, Kaithal and 
panchkula districts. However, Haryana Circle has reported that no account has been opened 
in the Panchayats of Ambala, Hisar, Jind and Panchkula districts. In case of Kaithal district 
Circle has reported that there has been no case of delayed payment. In case of other Circles 
too, the delay has been found in some cases only. 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
The total number of accounts in post offices indicated by Ministry of Rural 
Development as on 31st March of a  financial  year is the cumulative number of accounts on 
that date and include accounts opened in previ ous years also.  As on 31st March 2011, 4.36 
crore MGNREGA accounts were reported to be opened.  This includes all post office 
accounts opened till 31st March 2011. Delay in disbursal of wage payment is a result of 
delays that occur at different stages of processes involving various agencies. In order to 
ensure timely payment, State Governments have been advised  by the Ministry of Rural 
Development  to make use  of Information Communication and Technology enabled models 
like Business Correspondent, Rural ATM, handheld devices, smart cards, bio-metrics, mobile 
banking etc, for easy wage payments to MGNREGA workers. To strengthen the institutional 
outreach for MGNREGA wage disbursement, it has also been decided that State 
Governments will roll out the Busines s Correspondent Model to make wage payment 
through Banks with Bio -metric authentication at village level on competitive bid basis from 
Banks by inviting Expression of Interest (EOI)/Request for Qualification (RFQ).  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
Payment of compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA  
 
  The information furnished by the Department of Rural Development indicates that 
only in Jharkhand compensation to 249 persons in Khunti and Murhu blocks has so far been 
made whereas the labourers as per the Act are entitled to receive payment of 
compensation as per the provisions made under Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). 
What is more disappointing is the fact that the Department of Rural Development on its 
own has never tried to find out the status of compliance of the aforesaid provision by the 
various State Governments. It was only when the issue was raised by the Standing 
Committee on Information Technology during the course of deliberations that Ministry of 
Rural Development agreed to seek the clarification from all States in this regard. The 
Committee would like the Department of Posts to follow the Department of Rural 
Development in this regard and the response received from the State Governments should 
be furnished to the Committee. Besides, efforts should be made to ensure that all the 
labourers where the delay is there are duly compensated as per the provisions made in the 
Act.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
Department of Posts is making all efforts for timely payment of wages. All the circles 
have already been asked to identi fy the cases of delay and take corrective action at the 
earliest. The Rural Development Department has been requested to share specific cases of 
delay so that corrective action can be taken in such cases. As desired by the Committee, the 
Department of Post s will continue to maintain close coordination with the concerned state 
Governments to ensure that no unreasonable delay takes place in respect of payment of 
wages to the MGNREGA workers.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The Ministry of Rural Development administers sever al schemes/programmes 
including Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) for rural 
areas. Information, Education and Communication activities by the Ministry of Rural 
Development for all programmes of the Ministry are done in a holi stic manner both in 
electronic and print media out of the budget allocation for each year for generating 
awareness across the country for effective implementation of these programmes. 
 
As per para 30 of Schedule II of the Act, in case of delay in payment ,  the labourers 
are entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the provisions of the payment of 
Wages Act 1936. Section 4 of the Act further provides that States are to make arrangements 
for the proper implementation of the Scheme.  Ministry has, fr om time to time, issued 
instructions to the States for timely payment of wages to the workers as per the provisions 
of the Act. Wherever delays in payment occur, the workers need to claim   compensation 
from the State Government as per the provisions of th e Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and 
the State Governments are obliged to pay compensation.  

 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
  The Committee from the status of payment of compensation to labourers observe 
that perhaps labourers are not aware of their statutory rights. There is an urgent need to 
take the initiative to make the labourers aware of their rights as envisaged under 
MGNREGA through various mechanisms which may include print and electronic media, 
Gram Sabha meetings, display of information at Panchayat Headquarters etc. The 
Department of Posts in coordination with the Department  of Rural Development should 
take all the initiatives for spread of awareness amongst labourers about their rights under 
MGNREGA so that they can put pressure on the Posts and Banks for timely payment of 
wages.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to intimate to Department of 
Posts, their initiatives for spreading  of awareness amongst labourers about their rights 
under MGNREGA. If any specific suggestions/proposals are received from Ministry of Rur al 
Development, it will be considered by Department of Posts. 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The Ministry of Rural Development administers several schemes/programmes 
including Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) for rural 
areas. Information, Education and Communication activities by the Ministry of Rural 
Development for all programmes of the Ministry are done in a holistic manner both in 
electronic and print media out of the budget allocation for each year for generating 
awareness across the country for effective implementation of these programmes. 
 
As per para 30 of Schedule II of the Act, in case of delay in payment , the labourers 
are entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the provisions of the payment of 
Wages Act 1936. Section 4 of the Act further provides that States are to make arrangements 
for the proper implementation of the Scheme.  Ministry has, from time to time, issued 
instructions to the States for timely payment of wages to the workers as per the provisions 
of the Act.  Wherever delays in payment occur, the workers need to claim   compensation 
from the State Government as per the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and 
the State Governments are obliged to pay compensation.  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
Corruption and role of middleman in disbursement of wages  
 
  The Committee find that as per the records of the Department of Rural 
Development, a total 244 cases relating to corruption in disbursement of wages have so far 
been reported. With regard to the number of corruption cases in Posts, as per the 
Department of  Posts, 7 cases of loss and fraud related to MGNREGA accounts have been 
found and in four such cases FIRs have been lodged. The Committee are surprised to note 
that with the aforesaid specific cases of corruption as reported during examination, the 
Department of Posts when specifically asked about the role of middleman, ransom money 
received by officials and the labourers getting wages lesser than the amount declared has 
chosen to be ignorant of the matter. The Committee are unhappy over the way the 
Department has responded to such a serious question raised by the Committee during the 
course of deliberations.  
 
The Committee further feel that the number of corruption cases as reported is just 
the tip of iceberg and the real situation in this regard may be mo re serious. There may be a 
number of cases of role of middleman, ransom money demanded and the labourers getting 
wages lesser than the amount declared. Besides, Benami wage system is prevailing in the 
country. The Committee find that some sort of guarantee  of employment has been 
envisaged through MGNREGA which if implemented in a proper way can help to eradicate 
poverty in the country. Moreover, money in the hands of the poor persons can increase 
their purchasing power which can boost the economy of the cou ntry. There is an urgent 
need to pay serious attention by all the stakeholders which include the Ministries 
concerned, State Governments, Banks, Post Offices and Civil Societies. The Department of 
Posts and Rural Development should take all the desired ini tiatives so that the guarantee 
scheme is implemented in a proper way thereby benefitting the last person of the society in 
the country.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
 
The Department is having efficient internal mechanism to deal with all types of 
complaints. When a complaint is received, the same is sent for detailed enquiry after 
acknowledging the receipt to the complainant. Complainants are invariably contacted as 
part of the enquiry, which is followed by interrogation of concerned offic ials and going 
through the relevant documents by the field officers. Appropriate action is then taken to 

 
 
address the grievance of the complainant and suitable action is taken against erring 
officials, if any. 
 
Department is not aware of any specific compla int of the role of middleman and the 
ransom money received by officials for disbursement of wages. The Rural Development 
Department has already been requested to share specific instances of such complaint but 
no reply has been received so far. MORD has bee n again requested to share serious 
complaint of role of middleman and corruption cases so that corrective action may be taken 
in this regard. 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
Ministry of Rural Development has taken multipronged measures for ensuring that 
the rights of the workers under MGNREGA Act are protected and integrity of the process of 
MGNREGA administration is preserved. Complaints received in the Ministry are forwarded 
to concerned State Government seeking action taken report and comments thereon. For 
investigation into complaints of serious nature National Level Monitors are deputed by the 
Ministry and their reports are analysed and findings are forwarded to the concerned State 
Government for taking corrective measures. Grievance redressal through the Ombudsmen 
to be appointed by the State Governments under MGNREGA has also been established for 
this purpose. The Ministry has been repeatedly reminding State Governments to ensure 
that they establish all suitable mechanisms for redressal of grievances and disposal of 
complaints in accordance with the relevant provisions of MGNREG Act.   
 
State Governments are regularly reminded about their duty under the Act to have 
serious complaints investigated and action taken to ensure that in cases of mis -
appropriation and embezz lement of funds disciplinary action should be initiated under 
Indian Penal Code and Prevention of Corruption Act, besides recovering the amount 
involved from the persons concerned in accordance with law. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
Toll Free Helpline Number for redressal of grievances  
 
The Committee are satisfied to note that National Toll Free Helpline Number 
1800110707 to enable any person to make the complaint or query has been set up by the 
Ministry of Rural Development and a total of 708 complaints have so far been entered on 
the National Helpline. The Committee would like the Department of Rural Development to 
give publicity to the aforesaid helpline so that more and more persons make use of the 
National Helpline, to address their grievances.  
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
  As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/Union Territories 
have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance redressal. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
  With regard to the Helpline by the State Governments, the Committee note that 24 
States/UTs have set the Helpline as reported by the State Governm ents. The Committee 
emphasize that the remaining States should be further motivated to set up the Helplines.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/Union Territories 
have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance redressal 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 
 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
  On the issue of setting up of Helpline by the Department of Posts, the Committee 
are unhappy to note the casual attitude of the Department. When the issue was specifically 
raised, the Department in an uninterested way has stated that there is no such pla n to 
establish a Helpline. The Committee strongly recommend that on the lines of National 
Helpline and State Helpline, the Department of Posts should immediately set up a Helpline 
at the National level as well as at Circle/local level whereby the labourers  can report with 
regard to their grievances about the payment of wages through Posts accounts, the issue 
being delay in payment of wages, ransom demanded by the officials or any other matter 
connected with the disbursement of wages by Posts.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
Phone numbers of nodal officers have been circulated for display at work place. 
Labourers can report their grievances to nodal officers.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
As per the latest information available with the Ministry 24 States/ Union Territories 
have so far established help lines for MGNREGA grievance redressal.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
  It has emerged during the deliberations that State of Andhra Pradesh has set up an 
independent Directorate of Accounts for social audit whose effectiveness according to the 
Department of Rural Development is more. The Committee feel that there may be 
variations of conduct of social audit in various States which need to be studied and the best 
of the models to be replicated in other States. The desired action in this regard may be 
taken by the Department of Posts and Department of Rural Development.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP:  
Circles have been instructed to ensure that the postal officials are present during the 
social audits of MGNREGA. 
 

 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes 
Rules, 2011 have been notified in the Gazette on 30th June 2011. These include social audit 
and have been finalized in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General of India and 
Law Ministry, taking into account comments received from State Governments, Civil Soc iety 
Organisations and public. These rules, inter-alia, provide as follows:- 
 
a. All elected members of Panchayats and staff involved in implementing the 
schemes under the Act (including the staff of the Non – Governmental 
Organisations, Self Help Groups and disbursing agencies) shall be present at 
the Gram Sabha during social audit and respond to queries. 
b. The Gram Sabha shall provide a platform to all villagers to seek  and obtain 
further information and responses from all involved in implementation. It will 
also provide a platform to any person who has any contribution to make and 
relevant information to present.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
Technological Interventions, usage of ICT Devices and Integration of MGNREGA MIS with 
Postal Department MIS  
 
  The Committee during the course of deliberations with the representatives of the 
Department of Posts and Department of Rural Development have been apprised that the 
payment system not connected on a real time basis with the MGNREGA ICT system was the 
major deficiency resulting into discrepancy in the data being maintained by both the 
Departments. Besides, the Department of Rural Development has acknowledged that 
integration of MGNREGA MIS with the Postal Department MIS is proposed for tracking fund 
flow and  wages crediting into accounts of wage beneficiaries. Not only that 
computerization and the proposed ICT induction in rural Post Offices is considered a 
panacea to address the various problems which include limited outreach of financial 
services in the country, complicated and lengthy procedures for disbursement of wages and 
above all delay in disbursement of wages to labourers etc.  
 
Even when such a great importance has been given to the computerization of Post 
Offices, the progress in the task of compute rization does not seem to be very optimistic. As 
per the data furnished by Posts out of 25538 Departmental Post Offices, 12604 
Departmental Post Offices could be computerized so far. What is more disappointing is that 
out of the computerized 12604 Departme ntal Post Offices 9483 Post Offices could be 
provided broadband/dial -up connectivity. So far as the issue of computerization of Extra 
Departmental Post Offices is concerned, the Department’s proposal to provide ICT device to 

 
 
Gramin Dak Sewaks, Branch Post Master is still on the proposal stage. Integration of 
MGNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS which would provide better coordination 
between the two Departments and address to various issues as highlighted above is 
possible when all the Post Offices are co mputerized. The information furnished by Posts 
indicates that data entry for the Post Offices in account jurisdiction of Ajmer HO 
(Rajasthan), Doranda HO (Jharkhand) and Raipur GPO (Chhattisgarh) could only be 
completed on NREGASoft. The system in these Post Offices could not be integrated with the 
system of State Governments for want of submission of wage list in electronic form from 
the concerned State Government Offices. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid 
scenario that computerization of Post Offi ces and the various technological interventions 
suggested by both the Departments are still on initial stage. It would take years together 
when all the Post Offices would actually be computerized. The Committee here may like to 
emphasize to speed up the pr ocess of computerization of Post Offices so as to make the 
system of disbursement of wages effective.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has already offered the MGNREGA software for 
sharing with the Department of Posts for shifting to a single platform and data source. 
 
Reply of DoP: 
 
In all 24015 Departmental post offices have been computerized.  The rest of 1279 
Departmental post offices would be computerized considering the space availability in 
these post offices. The Department of Posts has undertaken an end to end IT Modernisation 
Project (India Post 2012) to equip itself with requisite modern tools and technologies.  A 
part of the larger initiative ( India Post 2012) is the Rural Information and Communi cation 
Technology (ICT) solution which shall enable Department of Post to connect various Extra 
Departmental Post Offices. The rural post offices will be provided with Rural ICT devices 
with required applications for performing Postal, Banking, Insurance a nd MGNREGS and 
Retail operations. The Rural ICT will enable electronic networking of 129497 rural post 
offices.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
Linking of MGNREGA with UIDAI  
 
  The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Rural Development has 
joined hands with UIDAI and is introducing biometric signature. As per the p lan a Unique 
Identity Number would be provided to all MGNREGA workers, and for this UIDAI has 
appointed Department of Rural Development as registrar. The Committee feel that this is a 
step in the right direction and hence, should be implemented with right earnest. The 
Committee may be kept apprised about the status of its implementation.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
After discussions with UIDAI, it was originally proposed that Ministry of Rural 
Development will carry out residuary enrolment of MGNREGA beneficiaries to complement 
the national enrolment by UIDAI. Since the pace of enrolment by UIDAI is not as envisaged , 
enrolment by Ministry of Rural Development has not taken off. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts  O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
Payment of Wages at workplace  
 
  The Committee in their various reports have been recommending to find out ways to 
disburse wages to labourers at the workplace. The aforesaid proposal do not seem to be 
feasible to the Department, the reason being frequent change of workplace. The 
Committee may like to observe that the aforesaid constraint can be addressed if the wages 
are paid in time. As such, the initiatives may be taken to disburse the wages timely and the 
Committee’s recommendation to make arrangements to disburse the wages at workplace 
may be considered by the Department.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Reply of DoP: 
 
Payment of wages at workplace is not feasible because of the fact that we are 
receiving wage bills and cheques only after completion of the work. In the mean time work 
place of the labourers gets changed. The paying officials in GDS BOs have also to k eep the 
office opened from 3-5 hours for providing various postal services to the visiting public. 

 
 
 
Reply of MoRD: 
 
If post offices are able to make arrangements for payment of MGNREGA wages at 
the workplace, the Ministry of Rural Development would welcome it. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
  The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending to make Divisional 
Superintendent of Postal Department as a nodal officer for the purpose of disbursement of 
wages under MGNREGA and display the phone number of the nodal officer on the display 
board erected at the workplace. The Committee have been apprised that Circles have been 
asked to request the State Governments to arrange for display of the phone number of the 
postal nodal officers at the workplace in MGNREGA. The Committee in this regard  may like 
to emphasize that there is an urgent need to coordinate with the local bodies so that the 
information about the nodal officer for the purpose of disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA is displayed at the work site. Besides, as suggested by the Commi ttee in this 
report, the toll free numbers for grievance redressal should be identified and the 
information displayed at the work site after duly coordinating with the local bodies.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Reply of DoP: 
Details of nodal officers has been supplied to State Governments.  
 
Reply of MoRD: 
If post offices are able to make arrangements for payment of MGNREGA wages at 
the workplace, the Ministry of Rural Development would welcome it. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The share of Posts in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 
  The Committee note that there are around 6.5 lakh villages in the country, while the 
number of Bank Branches is 72165 and the number of Post Offices is 1.55 lakh. The Banks 
with even half of the Branc hes of Posts are able to capture almost 60 per cent of the 
MGNREGA accounts in the country. The share of Posts is marginal in some of the big States. 
In Uttar Pradesh, the share of Posts is just 2 per cent and in Kerala it is 5 per cent. The State-
wise position further indicates that the share of Posts in some of the difficult States is quite 
dismal, whereas Posts has claimed that there is no area in the country which is not covered 
by Post Offices and their delivery staff. The aforesaid position clearly in dicates that Posts 
have failed to leverage their access to every nook and corner of the country.  
  The Committee further find from the deliberations that whereas the Department of 
Rural Development has indicated the specific reasons for preference of Bank s over Post 
Offices, the Posts seem contended with the prevailing situation and find their system very 
effective and systematic. Even when a study by Dreze and Khera undertaken in four States 
has found that payment in Banks was better than Post Offices and  the complaints of the 
clients were less, Posts during the course of deliberations seemed ignorant of the aforesaid 
study. Not only that  Posts do not seem interested to undertake a study to find out the 
satisfaction level of labourers in the near future when suggested by the Committee.  
  From the aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude that the comparative share of 
Posts and Banks is the conclusive evidence with regard to choice of Banks over Posts by the 
various State Governments. As such, there is no  point in simply arguing that it is the 
prerogative of State Governments to choose Banks or Posts for the purpose of 
disbursement of wages. The State Governments’ apparent choice for Banks is due to their 
efficiency, better connectivity and their expertise in handling accounts and finance as stated 
by the Department of Rural Development. The Committee strongly emphasize that the 
Department of Posts need to act promptly and take the desired initiatives so as to compete 
with Banks on the issue of disbursement  of wages under MGNREGA otherwise it would lose 
its place in the country. The concrete initiatives in this regard should be taken and the 
Committee informed accordingly. Besides a study to know the satisfaction level should be 
undertaken expeditiously by P osts which would help to know the ground reality and in 
addressing the various problems.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Department of Posts is having same operating procedure throughout the country for 
dealing with MGNREGA accounts. In some states post offices have large number of 

 
 
accounts whereas in some other states Post Offices have less number of accounts. The 
choice of  banks or post offices as the medium of wage payments under MGNREGA in a 
particular State rests with the State Government concerned.  
 
The Department has not undertaken any specific study to find out the satisfaction 
level of labourers with regard to the t ask of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA but 
the mechanism of mandatory inspections and visits serves the purpose.  The supervisory 
officers such as mail overseers, Inspectors of Post Offices/Assistant Superintendents of Post 
Offices, Superintendents and  Sr. Supdts. Of Post Offices, Directors of Postal Services, Post 
Masters General, Chief Postmasters General while visiting and inspecting Post offices and 
Postal Divisions contact the MGNREGA wage earners on a random basis and enquire about 
the effectivene ss and efficiency of the wage payments system. These issues are also 
discussed in periodical coordination meetings with State Govts and remedial measures are 
taken whenever any deficiency is noticed in the system. In addition, Department has 
devised a proforma to be filled in by Rojgar Sahayak / Gram Pradhan to find the feedback of 
wage earners.  Further, M/s IMRB International who are already engaged for consumers’ 
satisfaction survey, is being advised to survey satisfaction level for NREGS beneficiaries. 
  
In order to further widen and deepen an already unmatched reach of this network 
India Post has embarked upon an ambitious programme of ICT induction in all its post 
offices. The programme involves computerizing and digitally connecting all the post offic es 
including those in rural areas. The Rural ICT segment of this programme will bring in 
efficiencies in the way business is transacted. It will add value to our existing services, make 
the service delivery more efficient and will provide us with opportuni ty to initiate new 
services to meet the needs of our rural customers. The computerization of rural Post Offices 
will enable India Post to deliver much -needed social security schemes including MGNREGA 
even more efficiently. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
Business Correspondent Model  
 
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed by the 
Department of Rural Development that  in some States Business Correspondent Model is 
being implemented on a pilot basis. As per the RBI guidelines, the Banks appoint agencies 
like Self -Help Groups which can become Business Correspondent for the purpose of 
disbursement of wages under MGNREGA t hrough hand held devices (mobile ATM) using 
biometrics or/and the smart cards. The Committee have also been apprised that Post 
Offices can also become Business Correspondent Models for the Banks.  
 
So far as the Post Office becoming Business Correspondent Model for the Banks is 
concerned, the Committee again note the contradiction between the position explained by 
the representatives of the Department of Rural Development and Posts. Whereas the 
Secretary, Posts acknowledged that they do not want to become B usiness Correspondent, 

 
 
the representative of the Department of Rural Development apprised the Committee that 
there is one district where Banks are having the Business Correspondent Model for Post 
Offices. While appreciating the stand of the Department of P osts for not being interested in 
becoming Business Correspondent for Banks, the Committee may like to emphasize to use 
the services of Gramin Dak Sewaks for the purpose of disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA. So far as the contradiction between the stand o f the Department of Posts and 
the actual position whereby the representative of the Department of Rural Development 
has stated that in one district Banks are having Post Offices as Business Correspondent, the 
Committee would like the Department of Posts to clarify the position in this regard.  
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
DoP has already clarified its position that it does not want to become Business 
Correspondent of banks. However Rural Development has been requested to provide the 
details of the district where according to them Banks are having Post Offices as Business 
Correspondent for payment of wages. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
Support for payment of wages to MGNREGA workers through Post Offices  
 
  The Committee note that in addition to incurring administrative maintenance 
expenses on MGNREGA accounts, the Department of Posts has to also incur administrative 
expenses to meet the legal obligations under MGNREGA for making timely payment to 
wage earners which include making special arrangements for conveyance of cash, security 
arrangements for cash during its conveyance as well as its storage, providing additional 
manpower to ensure that all the procedural requirements are timely met so that the 
payment to wage earners is not delayed. The Committee are perturbed to learn that for the 
year 2010 -11, unlike 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, no plan support has been provided to 
Department of Posts for carrying out MGNREGA work. Besides, Ministry of Finance who had 
earlier conveyed the approval of Union Finance Minister on the EFC Memo for 
remuneration of Rs. 100 crore to be paid to the Department of Posts on account of 
operational and administrative cost for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA, has said 
that this entire f und of Rs. 100 crore would come from the administrative expenses part of 
the budget of Ministry of Rural Development under MGNREGA.  
 
In this connection, a meeting was held in July 2010 under the Chairmanship of 
Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, and i t was decided that for payment of service 
charges to Post Offices, Ministry of Rural Development would be sending a proposal 
separately to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, which is still under 
process. The Committee are of the firm opini on that since the Department has to incur 
additional expenditure for prompt disbursal of wages, apart from the cost of opening and 
servicing the MGNREGS account, the decision on providing remuneration to Department of 

 
 
Posts on account of operational and ad ministrative costs for disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA should be positive and be taken immediately.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
In order to meet the administrative expenditure while disbursing MGNREGA wages by the 
Department of Posts, a Plan schem e ‘Support for payment of wages to MGNREGS workers 
through post offices’ was introduced by the Planning Commission during the financial year 
2008-09. An amount of Rs. 80 crore was approved by EFC for the 2008 -09 Annual Plan 
under the aforesaid scheme.  A p rovision for Rs. 100 crores was made at BE stage for this 
plan scheme under the Annual Plan for 2009 -10. Memo for consideration of EFC was 
approved by Ministry of Finance. The Finance Minister conveyed his approval with the 
observation that the entire fund  of Rs. 100 crore would come from the administrative 
expenses part of budget of Ministry of Rural Development under MGNREGA. MoRD 
however expressed its inability o set aside this amount from the administrative expenses 
part of MGNREGA and referred the matter to the Prime Minister’s Office. 
  
Details of administrative expenses incurred year -wise have again been intimated to 
MoRD by DoP and the matter is under consideration of MoRD. 
 
Reply of MORD: The matter is being examined in the Ministry of Rural development.  
  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
5/2011-CP dated 13/12/2011) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
8 August, 2012_______ Chairman 
17 Shravana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology 
 
  

 
 
 Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th June, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1 645 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Rao Inderjit Singh– Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  
12. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
13. Shri Salim Ansari 
14. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb 
15. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
16. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
17. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
18. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****      *****      *****      ***** 
 
 
2. At the outset, the C hairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the  Draft 
Action Taken Report on  the subject ‘Disbursement  of wages to the labourers  under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act by Post Offices’. After 
deliberations, the draft Report  was adopted by the Committee without any modification.  
The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the Report to the 
House on a date convenient to him. 
 
*****      *****      *****      ***** 
 
3.  *****                   *****                   *****                    *****. 
 
4. *****                 *****                  *****                    *****. 
 
3. *****                 *****                  *****                    *****. 
 
*****      *****      *****      ***** 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
 
**** Matter not related to the Report. 
  

 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1@,5, 7, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 27, 30, 31 and 32  
 Total 15 
 Percentage 45.45 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the replies 
of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 20, 24, 25, 28 and 29    
 Total 15 
 Percentage 45.45 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature  
 
 Para Nos.:-  4, 26 and 33  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 9.10 
 
@Recommendation No. 1 was just the introductory recommendation.   