 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants               
(2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
40 


 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-
13)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-17 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
18-29 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
30-33 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
34-43 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
44-52 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 13th December, 2012………. 
 
53-54 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Thirty-second Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
55 
  
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
 3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
10. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
11. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
12. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13. Shri Tapas Paul 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Committee Officer 
    
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (201 2-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fortieth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for Grants (2012 -
13)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 2 May , 201 2. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty -second Report on 16 
October, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
13th December, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and conveni ence, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
17 December, 2012                                                                               Standing Committee on 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                               Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the  
Committee contained in their Thirty -second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands 
for Grants (2012-13)‟ relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting . 
  
2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha  on 
2nd May, 2012.  It contained 33 Recommendations/Observations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 9, 13, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29, 31, 
32 & 33. 
 
 Total 13 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:- 18 & 26.  
 Total 02 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:-5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, 19, 25 & 30.  
 Total 09 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:- 4, 6, 11, 14, 16, 17, 20, 27 & 28.  
 Total 09 
 Chapter V 
 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observ ations 
contained in Chapter - I and Final Action Taken Replies to the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations.  

 
 
 
 
A. Rationalization and Restructuring of Plan Schemes 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 5) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that the Ministry has undertaken an exercise to club schemes 
having commonalities t o reduce the number of the total schemes. It has also informed 
that comprehensive rationalization and restructuring of the Plan schemes of the Ministry 
has been carried out based on Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB). Small 
schemes/programmes with similar objectiv es and activities spread across different 
media units have been merged together under umbrella schemes. New sub -schemes 
required for further strengthening of different activities have also been clubbed under 
these comprehensive schemes. As a result of this  exercise, the number of schemes 
has been reduced from 65 in the Eleventh Plan to 25 in the Twelfth Plan. It includes five 
on-going schemes – three in the Information sector and two in the Films sector as on -
going schemes. The Committee appreciate the init iative taken by the Ministry to 
rationalize and restructure the schemes of the Ministry. Coming to the status of 
approval of the schemes during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee observe that a four 
stage appraisal cum approval process is involved for getting  formal approval of the 
schemes. The information furnished by the Ministry indicates that even on stage I the 
action has not been completed. The proposals have only been submitted to Planning 
Commission for in-principle approval. Not only that in the repli es it has been stated that 
the Ministry has started evaluation of the Schemes.  
 
The Committee are constrained to note that now when the Twelfth Plan has already 
commenced, the Ministry propose to undertake evaluation of some of the schemes of 
the Eleventh  Plan. The Committee are of the firm view that the evaluation process 
should have been completed before the restructuring of the Planned Schemes that are 
proposed to be implemented during the Twelfth Plan. The reasons for delay of the 
evaluation as furnish ed by the Ministry are not justifiable. The Ministry while justifying 
the evaluation time has stated that the nature of the schemes to be evaluated is such 
that unless a phase is completed evaluation cannot commence. The Committee fail to 
understand how the phase of a particular scheme which was not complete a few months 
back can suddenly now be completed and the scheme become mature for evaluation. 
The Committee deplore the way the restructuring of planned schemes has been done 
without evaluating the vario us on going schemes of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee 
fail to understand how the Ministry has substantiated undertaking Zero Based Exercise 
in this scenario. The Committee apprehend that with the aforesaid process of evaluation 
and the stage of approval of the schemes, the Ministry may again lose the precious 
period of the Twelfth Plan in getting approvals. Nevertheless, the Committee now exhort 
the Ministry to take all the initiatives to speed up the approvals for the planned schemes 
so that the execution commence without any further delay.” 
 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“There are two issues which need to be elaborated here: (i) Restructuring of schemes 
based upon Zero based budgeting (ZBB) principle and (ii) Evaluat ion of those schemes 
of 11th Plan which are to be continued into the 12th Plan.  
 

 
 
ZBB principle demands that every activity within the organization must be analyzed in 
terms of its need along with its cost, so that the organization should aim at delivering  its 
activities at minimal cost.  The best time for adoption of ZBB principle is the beginning 
of the Five Year Plan and accordingly it was done, with a view to minimizing the cost of 
delivering various activities of the Ministry. 
 
Second issue is regardin g evaluation of the on -going schemes.  The schemes to be 
evaluated under this category refer to those schemes which were taken up for 
implementation during the 11 th Plan and are to be continued in the 12 th Plan.  As per 
the Finance Ministry‟s guidelines (O .M. No. 1(3)/PF.II/2011 dated 23.04.2012), these 
schemes need to be evaluated before 31.12.2012 to ensure their continuance during 
12th Plan.  Going by these guidelines, the Ministry has ordered evaluation of on -going 
schemes of Information Sector, Film Se ctor and Broadcasting Sector to be completed 
well in advance of December, 2012.  However, it does not mean that no other scheme 
has been evaluated during 11 th Plan.  The Ministry has undertaken couple of policies 
related studies and carried out evaluation of two schemes of Film Sector. i.e. „Export 
Promotion through Film Festivals‟ and „Participation in Film Markets in India and 
Abroad‟ during 11 th Plan; the findings of which were taken into consideration by the 
Ministry during restructuring of the schemes.” 
 
 
8. The Committee note that following the Ministry of Finance guidelines, the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has ordered evaluation of on -going schemes 
of Information Sector, Film Sector and Broadcasting Sector to  be completed well in 
advance of December, 2012.  The Committee are however, dismay ed to note that the 
Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry is silent on getting the approvals for the 
Plan Schemes during the Twelfth Plan.  The Committee are of the view that early 
approval of the  Plan Schemes will have direct impact on the performance of the 
Ministry with regard to implementation of the Plan Schemes during the Twelfth Plan.  
As indicated by the Ministry during the examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13), 
that out of four stage s process for getting formal approval of the Schemes not even 
Stage-I has been completed.  The Committee reiterate that the Ministry should take all 
the initiatives to speed up the approval for the Plan Schemes so that execution 
commences without any further delay so as to avoid March rush.  
 
 
B. Decline in the growth of revenue earned by DD & AIR  and Financial Status of      
 Prasar Bharati 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial Nos. 7, 8 & 10) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that All In dia Radio and Doordarshan have not been able to earn 
revenue as per the projections made during each year of the Eleventh Plan.  Moreover, 

 
 
the growth in their revenue is very slow.  Although there is some growth in the revenue 
earned by All India Radio and  Doordarshan during each year of the Eleventh Plan, 
under the head „Miscellaneous PB‟, the revenue is declining over the years.  During the 
year 2008-09, the revenue generated was  ` 165.32 crore which declined to ` 104.17 
crore during the year 2010 -11.  Du ring the year 2011 -12, there is some improvement 
whereby ` 105.59 crore have been generated upto February, 2012.  The Committee 
find that the revenue under „Miscellaneous PB‟ mainly includes collection of Audition 
fee, Vani Certificate, Inplant Training, Licence fee from Staff Quarters, Electricity, Water 
& Transport charges, Interest on Fixed Deposits/LTC/TA advance, Sale of 
obsolete/unserviceable  equipment/stores, Sale of CDs, Cassettes, DVDs of archives of 
both the Directorates, sale of proceeds of old News papers, etc.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the details of the item -wise declining trend of revenue.  
Besides, the Committee may also like to recommend to evaluate the revenue trend 
under each of the segment so as to find out the secto rs where the revenue is 
continuously declining followed by corrective action on the part of the Ministry and 
Doordarshan/All India Radio.” 
. (Rec. Sl. No. 7) 
 
10. The Committee had further recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee further feel that the Minist ry need to explore the feasibility to generate 
revenue from various areas.  One such area is commercial use of the rich archives of 
All India Radio and Doordarshan.  The extent of revenue that can be generated through 
these archives is evident from the fac t that the footage for one minute is provided by 
Doordarshan at the rate of Rs. 6000 per minute to people making documentaries for 
telecast on any channels.   The Committee have been informed that 100 DVD titles 
have been handpicked from the Archive of Doo rdarshan and are available for viewing 
to the public at large.  The Committee are of the view that All India Radio and 
Doordarshan archives are the precious resource and have great commercial value.  
There is an urgent need to explore the ways to earn reve nue nationally and 
internationally from these treasures on the part of the Ministry as well as All India Radio 
and Doordarshan.  The Committee recommend that the details of the archives which 
can be made commercially available should be put on the website of Doordarshan/All 
India Radio/Ministry and publicized through various mechanisms which would definitely 
help in generating more revenue from this precious resource.   
 
The Committee observe that the majority of the population in the country watch 
Doordarshan channels and the listeners of AIR are spread throughout the country.  In 
spite of that the revenue of DD and AIR through advertisement do not stand in 
comparison to the private channels.  The Committee find that AIR and DD need to 
project themselves to the public.  Moreover, they have to devise their own mechanisms 
for TRP ratings and publicize the ratings for various programmes generated through 
their own mechanisms.  The aforesaid proposed initiatives can definitely result into 
improving the advertisement revenue for AIR and DD.  
  
The Committee strongly recommend that all the aforesaid initiatives should be taken 
urgently by AIR and DD to make these organizations self-sufficient.  Besides, more 
such areas from where revenue can be generated should be identified by these 
organizations.” 
(Rec. Sl. No. 8) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Commercial revenue earned by Doordarshan are lesser than the projections made 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan, the details of which have be en given in the 
earlier part of the Report.  Not only that the growth of the revenue earned by 
Doordarshan is very slow during these years.  The Committee during the course of 
deliberations of Demands for Grants of this year have been apprised that IEBR of  Rs. 
5000 crore at the rate of Rs. 1000 crore for each of the annual plans has been 
assumed for the Twelfth Plan.  In this direction, Rs. 400 crore out of IEBR have been 
earmarked during the year 2012 -13 for planned projects of Prasar Bharati.  The share 
of Doordarshan in this regard is Rs. 250 crore.  The Committee are surprised to find 
that on the one hand, specific provision has been made and exclusive outlay out of 
IEBR has been earmarked for planned schemes.  On the other hand, the Ministry has 
submitted in the written replies that Prasar Bharati may not be in a position to afford the 
expenditure for planned schemes for IEBR. 
 
The Committee have further been apprised that as per the recommendations of the 
GoM, the Government shall meet expenditure on th e following four components (i) 
Salary & Salary related establishment expenses, (ii) expenses on Augmentation & 
Replacement of Capital Assets, and the expenditure on the remaining items i.e. (iii) 
Other Administrative Expenses, and (iv) Software & Programm e related expenses.  In 
addition, the Prasar Bharati has to supplement IEBR in all the aforesaid four categories 
and remain in focus for budget crisis and paucity of funds.  Pending decision of the 
Government on the aforesaid recommendations of GoM, a spec ific projection out of 
IEBR for planned schemes as elaborated above have been met for the first time. 
  
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid details that Prasar Bharati which include 
Doordarshan and AIR have great challenges in the coming years in reg ard to 
generating resources for the activities.  The Committee as such strongly recommend 
that DD should explore all the possibilities of revenue generation so as to meet the 
targets of projections made for planned schemes out of IEBR.  Besides the 
Doordarshan has to prepare for meeting the devised parameters of sharing the 
expenditure as per the formula suggested by GoM.  
 
The Committee observe huge gaps between the total IEBR of Prasar Bharati and the 
expenditure met out of IEBR during each year of the El eventh Plan.  During 2010 -11, 
the expenditure met is Rs. 1112.78 crore out of Rs. 2939.73 crore of IEBR.  Similarly, 
during the year 2011-12, the expenditure met after February, 2012 is Rs. 9575.40 crore 
out of total IEBR of Rs. 277.0 crore.  The Committee  have been apprised that as per 
the provisions made under The Prasar Bharati Act, the residual funds out of internal 
revenue of Prasar Bharati are kept in IEBR kitty and used for meeting its requirement 
on account of special maintenance of buildings and ca pital assets and to bridge the 
budget gap.  In this connection, the Committee would like to be apprised about the total 
IEBR kitty of Prasar Bharati.  The Committee would also like to be apprised as to how 
the IEBR savings are maintained meaning thereby wh ether the amount is kept in 
accounts of Banks etc.  In that case, the amount generated through interest may also to 
be communicated to the Committee so as to understand the concept of IEBR kitty. 
 
(Rec. Sl. No. 10) 

 
 
 
 
 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“Prasar Bharati has assured that they are taking urgent action on the 
Committee‟s recommended initiatives for revenue generation and would 
identify the other areas of potential resources for revenue generation.” 
 
(Reply to Rec Sl. Nos 7 & 8) 
 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have further stated as under:- 
 
“Prasar Bharati has informed that it generated an average net revenue 
ranging between Rs. 1000 and Rs. 1200 crore per year as seen during each 
year of the 11 th Plan period and the same was being utilized mainly to bridge 
the gap between the DBS and the actual demand of Prasar Bharati under 
Non-Plan heads including Salary components.  In view of its limited 
resources, Prasar Bharati has informed that it may not be fe asible for Prasar 
Bharati to set aside substantial amounts from IEBR for Plan schemes as 
proposed by the Ministry for dual funding.” 
 
(Reply to Rec Sl. No. 10) 
 
14. The Committee after finding that the growth of revenue in the case of All  India 
Radio and Doordarshan very slow during the Eleventh Plan had felt the need to explore 
the feasibility to generate revenue from various areas so as to make them self -
sufficient.  The underlying need to earn revenue could be further gauged from the fact 
that IEBR of Rs. 5000 Crore at the rate of Rs. 1000 crore for each of the annual plan has 
been assumed for the Twelfth Plan and during the year 2012 -13, Rs. 400 crore out of 
IEBR have been earmarked for the Plan schemes.  Even the GoM had recommended 
that the Prasar Bharati has to supplement IEBR on four components, such as, (i) Salary 
& Salary related establishment expenses, (ii) expenses on Augmentation & 
Replacement of Capital Assets, and the expenditure on the remaining items i.e. (iii) 
Other Administrative Expenses, and (iv) Software & Programme related expenses .  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that no concrete plan has been formulated by Prasar 
Bharati to identify the other areas of potential resources for revenue generation.  The 
Committee note that even if Pras ar Bharati is a ‘Public Broadcaster’, it has been 
entrusted with the task of generating its own revenue so as to meet both Plan and Non -
Plan expenditure as recommended by GoM.  The Committee are of the view that Prasar 
Bharati has wide audiences/viewership s especially in rural areas of the country and 
therefore should generate programmes and broadcast contents that can compete with 
those telecast by private channels.  The Committee are perturbed to note that Prasar 
Bharati instead of trying to increase its own IEBR has expressed its inability to set 

 
 
aside amounts for IEBR for Plan Schemes as proposed by the Ministry for dual funding. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that Prasar Bharati 
should take all initiatives to make it se lf-sufficient and meet the targets of projections 
made for Plan Schemes out of IEBR.  The Committee would like the Ministry and Prasar 
Bharati to prepare a roadmap for the same and expedite identifying the areas of 
revenue generations and apprise of the progress made in this regard.  
  
 
C. Comprehensive audit of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 12) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been apprised that C GA office has conducted a 
comprehensive audit of Prasar Bharati on 05.06.2009.  The scope of the audit 
was comprehensive which included general accounting issues, financial 
issues and issues pertaining to Doordarshan communicated by Vigilance 
Wing. The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of the 
aforesaid audit and the corrective action taken thereon.  The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the system of internal/external audit of 
Prasar Bharati.  The Committee are surprised to note the reply of the Ministry 
when the issue of assessment regarding  the AIR and DD was raised during 
the course of examination of Demands for Grants.  The Ministry instead of 
taking initiatives has come to the conclusion that such assessment is not 
necessary in both the Directorates since Prasar Bharati is largely depende nt 
on Government grants.  The aforesaid response of Prasar Bharati clearly 
indicates the visible dependence of Prasar Bharati on the Government grants.  
The Committee may like to remind the Ministry about the recommendations of 
GoM the details of which hav e been given above.  The Committee hope that 
the aforesaid recommendation of GoM would motivate Prasar Bharati to take 
all the desired initiatives so as to move to the direction of self -sufficiency.  
Besides, the assessment of financial health of AIR and D D should be 
undertaken so as to find out the grey areas followed by the corrective actions 
taken by both AIR and DD.” 
 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
 
“Ministry in its audit had found serious lacunae in the working of P rasar Bharati. 
Financial and auditing procedures like reconciliation of receipts with bank statements, 
proper implementation of investment policies , an established system of pre -check and 
post check of payments, proper regulation of cash balances, bank bal ances and due 
adherence to guidelines of financial propriety appeared practically non existent in 
Prasar Bharati. The reports also  found various anomalies in the bidding procedures 
adopted during the telecast of Cricket series on Doordarshan,  the ineffic ient 
contractual management system, the improper maintenance of records like log books,  
telecast certificates relating to commercial advertisements aired and the deficient 
revenue generation mechanisms. Prasar Bharati was requested by the Ministry to 
furnish comments. 

 
 
 
Prasar Bharati has  informed that they initially envisaged conducting special audit of all 
the 600 DDOs (approx.) by outsourcing Chartered Accountants Firms across the 
country. However, considering the huge amount of expenditure involved as a lso the 
volume of work, it was decided to get only 49 DDOs located in Delhi, audited and based 
on the outcome of which, the rest of the DDOs  be either audited if required or it be 
ensured that the findings/defects noticed in 49 DDOs as pointed out in Speci al Audit 
Report do not recur in other DDOs not covered under Special Audit.   
 
With regard to assessment of the financial health of both the Directorates, GoM on 
Prasar Bharati in its 5 th meeting held on 23.06.2011 has recommended that during the 
next five  years from 2011 -12 to 2015 -16,Government Non -Plan support would be 
extended for meeting 100% expenses on account of salary and salary related expenses 
and Augmentation/ Replacement of Capital Assets . All the other items of operating 
expenses shall be born e by Prasar Bharati from out of its internal revenue earnings. 
The matter would be reviewed after five years, if required.  
 
The above recommendations are under consideration of the Government.”  
 
 
17. The Committee take serious note of the fact that Ministry in its audit  had found 
serious lacunae in the working of Prasar Bharati and due adherence to guidelines of 
financial propriety appeared practically non-existent in Prasar Bharati.  Anomalies have 
also been found in the bidding  procedures adopted during the telecast of cricket series 
on Doordarshan.   The Committee are surprised to note that no serious efforts have 
been  made either by the Ministry or the Prasar Bharati to rectify the prevailing 
irregularities in the Prasar Bharati.  The Committee are of the view that the above 
observations warrant a serious review of the functioning of Prasar Bharati.  Even the 
initial target of conducting special audit of all the  600 DDOs (approx) by outsourcing 
Chartered Accountants Firms across  the country has been abrogated and now decided 
that only 49 DDOs located in Delhi would be audited.  The Committee are not convinced 
by the assertion that it was due to huge amount of expenditure and the volume of work 
that only 49 DDOs would be audited and based on the outc ome of which the rest of the 
DDOs be either audited if required or it be ensured that the findings/defects noticed do 
not recur in other DDOs not covered under Special Audit.  The Committee are of the 
view that a thorough review of the Prasar Bharati requi re conducting special audit of 
the 600 DDOs (approx) and corrective actions taken on the finding based on the audit 
report for each DDOs. The Committee strongly fe el that in the light of the  serious 
lacunae in the working of Prasar Bharati as observed by t he Ministry in its audit report, 
the need to review the working of Prasar Bharati  has become all the more important.  
The Committee do not agree with the view of the Ministry that assessment of AIR and 
DD are not required as Prasar Bharati is largely dependent on Government grants.  

 
 
 
 The Committee are also of the view that the recommendation of the GoM  to meet 
100% expenses on account of salary and salary related expenses  and 
augmentation/replacement of capital assets for the next five years from Governmen t 
Non-Plan support and meeting of all other operating expenses by Prasar Bharati from 
its internal revenue earnings should also be given a positive consideration by the 
Government.  The concern of the Committee may be forwarded to Prasar Bharati for 
further necessary action  at their end  and all further progress in this regard may be 
furnished to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
D. Finalization of Recruitment Rules 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 15) 
 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that out of the total sanctioned strength of 48022, the existing staff 
of AIR and DD is 33800, the gap being of 14222 posts.  The vacancies are in all the 
Wings.  However, the critically affected areas are Programme Wing and NSD/News.  In 
the Progr amme Wing, out of the total sanctioned strength of 10679, the existing 
strength is just 6108 just leaving the gap of 4571.  Similarly, in NSD/News out of 
sanctioned strength of 379, the existing strength is 255, the vacancies being 146.  The 
Committee have consistently been exhorting the Ministry to fill up the critical vacancies 
in DD and AIR.  The Committee during the course of the Study visits to various parts of 
the country have been apprised about the difficulties being encountered by various 
Regional Stations due to staff shortages.  In spite of that the situation has not been 
addressed at the right earnest.  The Ministry/Prasar Bharati have not been able to keep 
their promises made before the Committee to handle the situation.   
 
  On the issue of set ting up of Recruitment Board for Prasar Bharati, the then CEO of 
Prasar Bharati during the course of examination of Prasar Bharati Broadcasting 
(Corporation) of India Amendment Bill, 2010 had assured the Committee that the task 
of finalization of Recruitme nt Board and service conditions would definitely be finished 
by 31 March, 2011.  Now, when full one year has elapsed since then, the issues have 
still not been settled resulting in further delay in filling up these vacancies.  With regard 
to latest positio n, the Committee have now been informed that the notification with 
regard to setting up of Recruitment Board is under inter -Ministerial consultation.  The 
Committee understand during the course of deliberations that still there are some 
issues to be resolv ed between the Ministry/Department of Expenditure and the DoPT.  
Not only that the Ministry/Prasar Bharati is grappling with the issue of undertaking 
recruitment process for such a large number of vacancies particularly when UPSC and 
SSC have both refused to select for a non-Governmental organization.  
  
The Committee while deploring the situation whereby the finalization of recruitment 
rules and setting up of Recruitment Board are further being delayed leaving the 
situation of Prasar Bharati and AIR from worse to worst scenario.  The Committee fail to 
understand how DD and AIR can work effectively without filling the critical vancancies.  

 
 
The Committee again exhort the Department to settle the issues with various Ministries 
and fast track the recruitment ru les and setting up of recruitment board so that the 
process of filling up the vacancies can start.  The concerns of the Committee in this 
regard should adequately be conveyed to the respective Ministries.  In the meanwhile 
the Ministry should also finalize the strategy to fill the vacancies on a fast track basis so 
that the recruitment process commences immediately when the Recruitment Board and 
Recruitment Rules are in place so as to enable Prasar Bharati to fill up the vacancies 
within the shortest possible timeframe.”   
 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  The Prasar 
Bharati has identified 3254 posts as essential category of posts requiring filling up on  
immediate basis.   Based on the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GOM), the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting proposed to seek Cabinet approval for filling 
up these posts. These posts will be filled following notification of Recruitment 
Regulations (RRs) for the employees of Prasar Bharati and functioning of the Prasar 
Bharati Recruitment Board.   
 
The progress in this regard is as follows: 
 
The Prasar Bharati is in the process of incorporating the suggestions of the DOP&T in 
the draft RRs. The  original proposal of draft RRs is at present under active 
consideration of the Department of Expenditure (DOE). 
 
Regarding the proposal of draft notification for creation of Prasar Bharati Recruitment 
Board (PBRB), the DOE has raised a query which has bee n communicated to the 
Prasar Bharat Secretariat for response.  The Prasar Bharati have informed of revising 
the proposal of PBRB and have proposed for undertaking recruitment of Groups „B‟ and 
„C‟ through the Staff Selection Commission.  The Ministry is in  the process of taking up 
the revised proposal with the DOE.”  
 
  
20. The Committee note that vacancies exist in all the Wings of the Prasar Bharati, 
critically affected areas being programme Wing and an NSD/News and numerous 
difficulties are being encountered by various Regional Stations due to staff shortage. At 
the heart of the problem is that the Recruitment Rules and Recruitment Board are still 
not set up in the Prasar Bharati, inspite of the continuous recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Prasar Bhar ati has now identified 3254 posts as essential category 
requiring filing up on immediate basis.  However, pending notifications of Recruitment 
Regulations and Recruitment Board, the Committee are of the view that the aforesaid 
vacancies may not be able to be filled up on immediate basis.  The Committee are of the 
view that huge vacancies against the sanctioned strength in AIR and Doordarshan has 
created shortage of staff due to which various Regional stations are encountering 
various difficulties.  The Comm ittee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
fast track finalisation of Recruitment Rules and Recruitment Board so that filling up the 

 
 
vacancies can start. Department of Expenditure may also be requested to accord early 
approval of the draft RRs and the revised proposal for PBRB may also be taken up with 
the Department of Expenditure at the earliest.  
 
 
E. Implementation of Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2011 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 19) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2011 for introduction of Digital Addressable system (DAS) has recently been enacted. 
As per the Act, the Ministry has notified the dates for switching over  to digital 
addressable system from analogue cable services by December 2014. The Committee 
understand that following the passing of the above legislation making digitization 
mandatory, there is an ongoing demand for set top boxes in future and there will be 
large scale demand for set top boxes to meet the requirement. However, the 
Committee find that the Ministry has not done any survey on the availability of set top 
boxes to ascertain the domestic preparedness and self sufficiency in the manufacturing 
of set top boxes. The Committee had also deliberated on the issue while examining the 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
(Ministry of Communication & Information Technology also under the purview of this 
Committee) and the Committee were apprised that in order to encourage the domestic 
manufacturing of set top boxes and to protect the interests of local manufactures, the 
Government has introduced 5 % tariff on import of set top boxes. During the 
deliberations certain  crucial Research & Development(R&D) issues relating to the 
technology also emerged and the Committee were apprised that it would take some 
time for the country to become fully self reliant with regard to indigenous production of 
set top boxes.  The Committee further observe that even if the Indian industry is able to 
produce the desired number of set top boxes by the stipulated timeline for switching 
over to digitization as per the provisions of the aforesaid act, the Government 
intervention would be required to ensure 100 per cent indigenization of set top boxes. In 
this direction, the Government may consider hiking of the import duty from 5 to 10 per 
cent. In the light of above, the Committee may like to emphasize that the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting should coordinate with the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology on the issue of extension of the proposed deadline after having 
detailed strategy with regard to manufacturing of the required number of Set Top Boxes 
through indigeno us production and also finalizing the policy issue with regard to 
providing competitive edge to our own country manufactured Set Top Boxes.” 
 
22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had moved a proposal on fiscal 
incentives/duty concessions in case of broadcasting industry to facilitate time bound 
transition of analogue cable system to digital addressable system (DAS) of cable 
services and the matter was taken up by CoS in its meeting  held on 10 th February, 
2012.  The Ministry in its note for the CoS had inter -alia proposed reduction of basic 
customs duty on the major items in digital addressable system distribution i.e. digital 
headend equipment and STBs to zero level to give a boost to conversion of broadcast 
distribution network to digital addressable system.  The items on which custom duty 

 
 
exemption has been sought including STBs are not manufactured in India and zero 
customs duties on these items would reduce the burden on the cons umer.  Moreover, 
even the local industry which needed to import certain key inputs in the manufacturing  
of these items would also benefit from import of duty exemption. In the meeting of CoS 
dated 10 th February, 2012, it was recommended, inter -alia, that c onsultations with 
domestic industry by Department of Information Technology and Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting may be taken to ensure that the equipment required for switch over 
to DAS is available through indigenous manufacturer.  The proposal o f the Ministry for 
fiscal incentives to broadcasting industry was not supported and it was also 
recommended that the Ministry may finalize the quality parameters through Bureau of 
Indian Standards to ensure that quality products are made available by domes tic 
industry.  The timeline for implementation of DAS in the first four phases in the four 
metros of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata has been extended to 31.10.2012.  The 
transition to DAS which requires an STB as a prerequisite would on a conservative 
estimate require 68 million STBs.  The sheer volume of the requirement of STBs would 
make it imperative to import the numbers for implementation of DAS within the timelines 
fixed and in this regard reduction of basic customs duty to zero level for STBs and other 
equipment related to digital addressable broadcast was proposed as a one -time 
measure to boost the pace of digitalization leading to complete switch over by 
December, 2014 to DAS regime.  Thus the Ministry has considered this aspect from the 
policy angle and the same was considered by the CoS in its meeting of 10.2.2012.” 
 
23. The Committee note that the Government has made digitization of Cable Network 
mandatory and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has notified the dates for 
switching ov er to digital addressable system from analogue cable services by 
December, 2014. It emerged during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology that it would 
take sometime for the cou ntry to become fully self reliant with regard to indigenous 
production of Set Top Boxes and in order to encourage the domestic manufacturing of 
Set Top Boxes and to protect local manufactures, Government has introduced 5% tariff 
in import of set top boxes.   In this regard, the Committee had also recommended to 
consider hiking of the import duty from 5% to 10%.  The Committee observe from the 
reply furnished by the Ministry that no coordination had been made between the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasti ng and Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology to  provide competitive edge to domestic industry for 
manufacturing of Set Top Boxes.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting instead 
of protecting and promoting the domestic industry by incr easing the custom duty had 
proposed reduction of basic customs duty to zero level to give a boost for conversion 
to digital addressable system and to reduce the burden on the consumers.  The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry has initiated the digitization process without 
ascertaining the preparedness of domestic industry to provide set top boxes.  The 
entire effort for meeting the requirement of 68 million set top boxes which is a 
conservative estimate for digitization of cable networks in the cou ntry by December 

 
 
2014 seems to be completely dependent on the import of Set Top Boxes.  The 
Committee clearly express their displeasure to know the half hearted efforts made by 
the Ministry to protect the domestic manufactures of Set Top Boxes.  The Commit tee 
are of the view that effort should be made by the Government so as to attain not only 
self-sufficiency in manufacturing of set top boxes but also as an exporter of Set Top 
Boxes to other countries.  To meet the aforesaid objective, support of Governmen t is 
required to protect and promote domestic industry.  Meeting the deadline of 
digitization, which is December, 2014 should not be seen  as the only  objective of 
digitization, but overall growth of the cable industry as whole which include protection 
of d omestic industry and consumer interest should also be an inevitable part of the 
process.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation that Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting should coordinate with the Department of Electronics 
and Information Technology with regard to having detailed strategy in the matter of 
manufacturing of Set Top Boxes through indigenous production and also finalise policy 
issue for providing competitive edge to our own country in manufacturing Set Top 
Boxes. 
 
F. Emergence of Cross Media Holdings 
  
(Recommendation Serial No. 20) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that the Ministry had sponsored a study by Administrative Staff 
College of India, Hyderabad which has established existe nce of Cross Media 
Ownership/cross media monopoly in various segments of the Country. The extensive 
study has recommended that Cross Media Ownership Rules for Broadcasting, Print and 
the News Media must be put in place. It has also suggested that prior to Setting up of 
Media rules, periodic market analysis should be conducted to ascertain the structure of 
ownership and the level of competition. The ASCI Report had also stated that the equity 
ownership on restriction in number of channels owned as provided i n the Draft 
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill are inadequate and needs to be modified. The 
Committee are surprised to note that though the above Study had established the 
existence of cross media holdings, the Ministry, apart from timely uploading the Study 
Report for seeking comments from various Stakeholders, has neither taken any 
concrete action in accordance with suggestion/recommendation of the ASCI study nor 
set any specific deadline to finalize/formulate the rules on Cross Media. The Secretary 
instead of giving his considered view dealt with the issue of monopoly in the context of 
DTH. The Committee may like to put on record that some of the stakeholders who 
deposed before the Committee in the context of examination of The Cable TV 
(Regulation) Network Second Amendment Bill, 2011 brought before the Committee the 
emergence and growing trend of cross media holdings in the country. The Committee 
may like to emphasize that the issue merits urgent attention and need to be addressed 
before it emerges as a threat to our democratic structure. The Ministry, therefore, 

 
 
should formulate their stand on the issue of cross media ownership in coordination with 
TRAI after taking into account all related aspects and the prevalent international 
practice followed by the suitable legislation/guidelines in this regard.” 
 
 
25 The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has indentified the issue of cross media ownerships  as an important and 
crucial issue affecting fair competition in the Indian media landscape , particularly in the 
context of several changes and convergence of technologies. TRAI has earlier looked 
into the issue of media ownership and made its recommendations on 25.2.2009. These 
recommendations were examined in the Ministr y and, as recommended by TRAI the 
Ministry sponsored a study through Administrative Staff of India (ASCI) in July, 2009. 
The study dealt with the nature and extent of cross media ownership, existing 
regulatory framework, relevant market and international e xperience. The Ministry has 
placed   study of ASCI in the public domain for seeking stakeholder views/comments.  
 
Since several changes have taken place over the last three years in the media sector 
as also keeping in view the technological advancements, developments in convergence 
and changes in media consumption pattern, the Ministry felt that a stage has come to 
address issues of cross media restrictions afresh. Accordingly a reference to TRAI was 
sent on 16.5.2012 to look into the issue of cross holding  and make appropriate 
recommendations on the following issues:- 
 
i) In the present emerging scenario more and more broadcasting companies 
owning television channels are venturing into various distribution platforms, namely 
cable TV distribution, DTH, and IPTV etc. Similarly many companies owning distribution 
platforms are also entering into television broadcasting. This type of vertical integration 
can seriously affect competition and promote monopolistic practices. Therefore, there is 
a need to address such v ertical integration. TRAI may suggest measures that can be 
put in place to address vertical integration in order to ensure fair growth of the 
broadcasting sector. 
  
ii) In another scenario companies have controls/ownerships across print, TV and 
Radio leading t o horizontal integration. At present there is no restriction for a 
company to have ownership across Radio, Television and Print mediums. Such a 
situation may prevent plurality of news and views and, in turn, may have several 
implications including ensuring quality services at reasonable prices. TRAI may also 
look at this issue and suggest appropriate measures in this regard.  The 
recommendations of TRAI on the above issues are awaited.” 
 
26. The Committee note that an extensive study conducted by Administrat ive Staff 
College of India, Hyderabad in 2009 had recommended that Cross Media Ownership 
Rules for Broadcasting, Print and the News Media must be put in place.  The 
Committee are glad to know that taking into account of the several changes that have 
taken place over the last three years in the media sector, a reference was made by the 
Ministry on 16.05.2012 to TRAI to look into the issue of Cross holding and make 
appropriate recommendations.  From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee observe t hat there are two types of cross media holdings, i.e. vertical 

 
 
integration, which is, Broadcasting companies owning television channels venturing 
into various distribution platforms, namely cable TV distribution, DTH and IPTV etc. 
and companies owning distribution platform entering into television broadcasting, and 
horizontal integration, which is, companies having controls/ownerships across print, 
TV and Radio.  The Committee note that both type of integrations could seriously 
affect competition, promote m onopolistic practices and may prevent plurality of news 
and views.  The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need to frame rules 
for cross media ownership to regulate both vertical and horizontal integration, so that, 
monopolistic practice whi ch may prevent plurality of news and views and ensuring 
quality services at reasonable prices that would have serious consequences for a 
democratic country like India may be prevented. The Committee, reiterate the ir earlier 
recommendation to formulate Ministry’s stand on the issue in coordination with TRAI 
by taking into account prevailing i nternational practices and desire that the matter be 
pursued vigorously. 
 
G. Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) 
 
(Recommendation Serial No.25) 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity is the nodal multi media advertising 
central agency to execute publicity campaigns through advertisements etc. on behalf of 
various Ministries/Departments of Government of India, Autonomous Bodies and Public 
Sector Undertakings. 
  
The Committee note with concern that some Ministries/Departments have been issuing 
display advertisements directly in violation of Clause -3 of the Advertisement Policy of 
the Government, which provides that all Central Govt. Ministries/ Departments/ 
Attached & Subordinate Offices/ Field Offices shall route their advertisements, including 
display advertisements, through DAVP. More so even when Ministries are violating the 
guidelines of Clause 3 including financial guidelines, there are no penal provisions and 
hence the Ministry is not in a position to invoke them. The immediate fall out of such 
violation by the Ministries/Departments has resulted in small, medium and regional 
language newspa pers not getting their due share. Many regional newspapers have 
been alleging favoritism by DAVP. The Committee are given to understand that even 
when the Ministry has time and again taken up the issue with the 
Ministries/Departments to route their adverti sements through DAVP only, the Ministries 
/Departments continue to violate the provisions of Clause -3. Further the Secretary 
during the deliberations informed the Committee that the payment situation has been 
put up online, as it is the major source of cor ruption. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should incorporate some penal provision in the above advertisement policy so 
as to discourage this trend.” 
 
 

 
 
 
28. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“The matter regarding violation of Clause 3 of the advertisement policy has been taken 
up by this Ministry seriously.  Such violations have been brought to the notice of 
Cabinet Secretary, who in turn has written to all defaulting Ministries to route their 
advertisements through DAVP.  As such, it is expected that there may not be many 
cases of violations in future.”  
 
29. Having noted with concern that some Ministries/Departments have been issuing 
display advertisements directly in violation of Clause -3 of the advertisement policy of 
Government, which provided that all central Government Ministries/  
Departments/attached and s ubordinate offices/field office s should route their 
advertisements, including display advertisements, through DAVP, the Committee had 
desired that the Ministry sho uld incorporate some penal provision in the above 
advertisement policy so as to discourage this trend.  The Committee are however 
constrained to note that no penal provision has been incorporated in the Advertisement 
Policy for violating Clause -3. The Comm ittee are of the view that display 
advertisements of the Central Government Ministries/Departments etc., are important 
source of revenue for small, medium and regional language newspapers and hence 
strict adherence to Clause-3 of the Government Advertisement Policy will go a long way 
in the functioning of these newspapers .  The Committee are not convinced by the reply 
given by the Ministry that since Cabinet Secretary has written to all defaulting 
Ministries to route their advertisements through DAVP, it is expected that there may not 
be many cases of violation in future.  The Committee are of the view that this trend can 
be checked effectively only by incorporating penal provisions in the advertisement 
policy and therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendat ion for providing penal provision 
for violating Clause -3. The Committee would await conclusive action taken by the 
Government in this regard.  
 
H. Film and Television Institute of India, Pune 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 30) 
 
30. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that PG diploma courses in various disciplines of film and 
television, awarded by the institute do not enable the students to take up higher studies 
and research. Therefore, the possibility of getting equivalent status  for its PG Diplomas 
from the Ministry of HRD/ Association of Indian Universities as in the case of National 
School of Drama is being explored by the institute by taking up the issue with HRD and 
the Association of Indian Universities. The Committee desire  that the issues relating to 

 
 
upgrading the status of FTII and its courses should be sorted out expeditiously. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the definite plan of the Ministry for 
accomplishment of the above   proposal. 
 
Further, the Committee during their study visit to Pune in the year September, 2008 had 
observed that the intake of foreign students had been less than the prescribed number 
of seats. The Committee had been informed that better co -ordination with different 
Embassies, ICCR and other Film schools were being resorted to increase the number 
of foreign students in FTII. The Committee would like to know whether the above 
measures have helped in increasing the intake of foreign students alongwith the current 
status of foreign students enrolled in FTII as on date. ” 
 
31. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“It is the endeavour of the institute to have a global academic interaction with important 
films schools of the world. Students from many countries keep vi siting FTII for short 
duration courses as well as three year PG diploma courses. Presently, there are seven 
foreign students studying in FTII. One seat each in all the four basic courses in film in 
FTII is reserved for foreign students who are admitted thr ough ICCR. These include 
students from Sri Lanka, Poland, Bangladesh, Azerbaijan, France and Switzerland. In 
recent years, students from Kuwait, USA, France, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Nepal and 
Canada have also studied in FTII.  FTII is also making serious efforts to have more 
academic exchanges with institutions abroad.”    
 
 32. Observing that PG diploma courses in various discipline of film and television 
awarded by the Institute do not enable the students to take up higher studies and 
research, the Committee had desired that the issues relating to upgrading the status of 
FTII and its courses should be sorted out expeditiously.  The Committee are, however, 
disheartened to note that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the issues raised by the 
Committee relating to upgrading the status of FTII and its courses.  The Committee are 
of the view that India being one of the highest  producers of films in the world and 
keeping the diversity of the country in mind, there is an urgent need to establish FTII as 
an i nstitute of national importance  where students can take up higher studies and 
research. The Committee expect that Government replies to their recommendations are 
comprehensive and complete. They, therefore, await follow -up action by the 
Government in regar d recognition of degree/diploma awarded by FTII by taking up the 
matter with Ministry of Human Resource Development and Association of Universities.  
 
 
 
***

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Grants for 2012-13  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 1) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has proposed 
the Demands for Grants for the year 2012 -13 amounting to ` 2737.36 crore which comprises 
of ` 905 crore as the Plan outlay an d Rs. 1832.36 crore as the Non-Plan outlay. The Eleventh 
Plan has come to an end and the Twelfth Plan has commenced w.e.f. 1 April, 2012. The 
financial performance of the Ministry particularly under the Plan schemes during the Eleventh 
Plan has not been ve ry satisfactory. The allocations provided at Budget Estimates were 
reduced at Revised Estimates stage due to overall trend of utilisation. Even the reduced 
allocations could not be utilized fully resulting into under spending of the scarce resources 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan.  
 
The extent of the variation can be gauged from the data furnished by the Department. The 
Department was allocated ` 3686 crore at BE stage against the projections of ` 7812.12 crore 
if the overall allocations during the E leventh Plan as a whole are taken into consideration. The 
BE allocations were then reduced to ` 3143.70 crore at RE stage. The utilisation is to the tune 
of ` 2579.21 crore thus resulting into under spending of ` 564.49 Crore. The under spending 
is more during the years 2008 -09 and 2010-11 crore when 66.99 per cent and 74.74 per cent 
of the outlay respectively could be utilised.  
 
 The Committee have consistently been raising the issue of under spending in their 
reports. Inspite of that the trend continued resulting into blocking of the national resources. 
The Ministry has cited the delay in approval of the schemes, long procurement procedures, 
and systemic problems in Prasar Bharati as the reasons for under spending during the 
Eleventh Plan. Said reasons ha ve continuously been repeated by the Ministry, whenever the 
question of under spending has been raised by the Committee. The Secretary during the 
course of oral evidence while acknowledging the problem of under spending in the Ministry 
has cited the proble ms concerning Prasar Bharati as a major reason for under spending 
particularly when large allocation of the Ministry relates to Prasar Bharati. The Secretary was 
hopeful that once the recommendations of GoM are accepted by the Cabinet, it would 
rationalize a great deal of things. The Committee hope that the problems relating to Prasar 
Bharati are addressed and ways are found during the Twelfth Plan resulting into effective 
implementation of various programmes which would ensure cent per cent utilisation of the 
outlay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The actual expenditure during 2011 -12 was Rs.762.83 crore, indicating a utilization of 
97% of RE.  As regards, Prasar Bharati, the utilisation of funds was 100 % of RE, which is 
encouraging. 
 
 The main reason for und er utilization of plan outlay during 11 th Plan was the delay in 
approval of schemes.  However, during 12 th Plan, detailed time lines have been fixed for all 
new schemes to ensure their early approval.  In the meantime, evaluation of on -going 

 
 
schemes is bei ng undertaken which is required as per Finance Ministry‟s guidelines.  
Secretary (I&B) is reviewing the progress in every weekly meeting with Senior Officers.     
 
  
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 4/31/2012-PC dated 26.06.2012] 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 2) 
 
 The Committee have dealt with repeated problem of delay in approval of the schemes, 
lesser procurement procedures and systemic problems in Prasar Bharati in detail in the later 
part of the report. The Committee may like to emphasize for periodic close moni toring of the 
implementation as well as the expenditure position under the three sectors viz. Broadcasting, 
Film and Information Sector. Besides, the Committee would like the Ministry to identify the 
grey areas, make the implementation of its schemes more effective and step up the monitoring 
mechanism so as to ensure optimum utilization of funds. Moreover the Ministry should make 
serious efforts to identify the weakness in the system and streamline the planning process so 
as to ensure effective utilization of Plan outlay i.e. ` 1305 crore during the year 2012 -13. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the specific steps taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The following steps have been initiated: 
 
(i)  Proposals for seeking in-principle approval of all new schemes have been submitted to 
Planning Commission.   
 
(ii) As 12 th Plan outlay is yet to be fixed by Planning Commission, to ensure timely 
utilization of funds in the current year, Ministry has drawn up time bound action  plan to get the 
schemes appraised and approved on the basis of Annual Plan 2012 -13 outlay.  The approval 
of the schemes is likely to be completed soon.   
 
(iii) Ministry has initiated the process of getting the on -going schemes evaluated as per the 
Finance Ministry‟s guidelines to ensure their continuance during the 12th Plan period.  
 
(iv) A system of weekly monitoring mechanism has been adopted at the level of Secretary.  
This is expected to ensure timely implementation of various key activities within t he time lines 
fixed by the Ministry.  
 
 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 4/31/2012-PC dated 26.06.2012[ 
 
 
Utilisation of Outlays under the Non Plan Head  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 3) 
 
 
  The Committee observe that during the year 2011 -12, out of the proposed al location of 
Rs. 2026.11 crore under the non -Plan head for the three Sectors i.e Film, Information and 
Broadcasting, the BE was Rs. 1782.71 crore, which was increased to ` 1818.13 at the RE 
stage and the Actual Expenditure was Rs. 1813.31 i.e. 99.74 per cen t of the RE allocation. 
The Committee also observe that the proposed allocation of the Ministry for the year 2012 -13 

 
 
under non-Plan head is Rs 1832 crore which is more than double of the Plan Outlay of Rs. 
905 crore. Justifying the increase, the Secretary has stated that many of the spending of 
Prasar Bharati is evaluated in terms of creating infrastructure. Further, for many programmes 
of Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP) in Song and Drama Division a lot of expenditure takes 
place through non -Plan budget and the outputs are not tangible. While appreciating the facts 
enumerated by the Secretary, the Committee would like the Ministry to give the details of the 
activities under non -Plan head for which the allocations during 2012 -13 have almost been 
double. Besides, the Committee would like to emphasize for rationalization of expenditure 
under the non-Plan head as per the General Financial Rules. Besides, the Ministry should try 
to contain its expenditure in non -Plan head so as to have a proper balance betwee n the Plan 
and non-Plan head. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the financial year 2012 -13, the Non -Plan budget of the Ministry has been fixed 
at Rs.1832.39 crore under Revenue Section, which is slightly higher (Rs.49.68 crore) i.e. 
2.79% increase over the   Budget Estimates 2011 -12 of Rs.1782.71 crore but only Rs.14.26 
crore i.e. 0.78% increase over Revised Estimates of 2011 -12.  However, allocation during 
2012-13 has increased marginally under the Major Head Secretariat Social Services for (i) 
Rent, Rates and Taxes  from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh due to anticipation in increase in 
Service charges slabs in respect of Soochna Bhawan and for (ii) Directorate of Field Publicity  
from 8 lakh to 23 lakh under the head of Wages because of increase in the number of 
contractual staff such as Programmer, Assistant Programmer and 7  Data Entry Operators at 
Headquarter and  22 Data Entry Operators at Regional Offices.  Further, a new object head 
“Grants-in-aid-Salaries” (No.36) has been introduced from the Financial year  2012-13 by 
Ministry of Finance. This has resulted in reduced allocation under object head “Grants -in-aid-
General” (No.31) and increase under the head “Grants for Creation of Capital Assets”  (No.35) 
and Grants-in-aid-Salaries(No.36)  in respect of SRFTI, Kolkata.  However, overall budget for 
SRFTI, Kolkata remains at the same level i.e. Rs. 7.00 crore under Non -Plan for the financial 
year 2011 -12 and 2012 -13.  Similar is the case with IIMC where total budget has been 
retained at BE 2011 -12 level in this ye ar and there have been re -adjustments because of 
introduction of new object head Grants -in-aid-Salaries(No.36).  This applies to other grantee 
bodies also under this Ministry namely Prasar Bharati, Press Council of India, Film & 
Television Institute of Ind ia, Pune and Childrens Film Society.    Further as advised by the 
Standing Committee, concerted efforts are being made by the Ministry to rationalize the Non -
Plan expenditure in accordance with GFR. A comparative statement as under reflects that the 
ministry has fully exhausted the allocations under Non-Plan during the last two years: 
 
 
 (Rs. in crore) 
2010-2011 2011-12 
BE RE Actual 
expenditure 
BE RE Actual 
expenditure 
1754.18 1768.06 1757.05 1782.64 1818.06 1814.35 
 
 
 
Streamlining the procurement procedures 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 9) 
 
 The long procurement process has repeatedly been cited as one of the reasons for 
under spending of Plan Outlay during each year of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee find that 

 
 
to address the issue the period of procureme nt process has been reduced from 52 weeks to 
26 weeks. Besides, AIR and DD have prescribed timelines for each of the activity. The 
Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry in streamlining the procurement 
process as well as fixing timeline for each of the stage of the procurement. The Committee in 
this regard may like to emphasize that now there is a need to ensure that the timelines are 
strictly adhered to. To achieve this objective, the Ministry needs to fix accountability for delay 
at each of the stage so as to ensure that the procurement takes place within the prescribed 26 
weeks by adhering to the activity wise timeline. The Committee may further like to emphasize 
that there is an urgent need to make the system of procurement e -enabled so as to ensure 
transparency as well as accountability. Besides, monitoring of the timelines for procurement 
need to be done in an effective manner. The Ministry should formulate some structured 
mechanism in this regard. Urgent initiatives in this regard sh ould be taken by the Ministry and 
the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
 The Committee further observe that whereas the Ministry has reduced the procurement 
time from 52 weeks to 26 weeks the information furnished with regard to timeline under each 
of the a ctivity separately for AIR and DD indicates that in case of DD the total time comes to 
28 weeks. The Committee may like the Ministry to clarify the position. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Although, the timeline drawn by both the directorates differs by 2 week s more for DD, 
Prasar Bharati would ensure adherence of the timeline of 26 weeks drawn out for procurement 
process by both the Directorates uniformly. Procurement Committee with DG as Chairperson, 
E-in-C, ADG (Purchase), ADG(System Design), ADG(Fin)/IFA an d DDG (Purchase) as 
members is already in place to expedite the procurement process. Provision of 2 weeks 
additional time has been kept in case some information/clarifications are required to be 
collected from the Firms/OEMs. 
 
 Provisions for “e -governance” has been kept by AIR in the 12 th Plan proposals, e -
procurement of AIR and Doordarshan is proposed to be part of this. However, present NIT  
along with tender specifications, quantities of equipment to be procured, standard tender 
documents, amendments, c larifications, techno -commercial bid opening date and contact 
details of concerned officer etc., for procurement of equipment are uploaded on Doordarshan‟s 
website as well as the public portals namely: tenders.gov.in and eprocure.gov.in/cppp. 
 
 The schedul e of pre bid conference, details of the queries raised by the prospective 
bidders and clarifications given by DD officials after the prebid conference are also displayed 
on DG:DD website. 
 
 After award of the contract, details of the purchase order (A/T) a longwith its number, 
Name of the firm, Descriptions of the items  and amount of the order is also clearly displayed 
on the DG:DD website. 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. 502/2/2012-B(D) dated 31.07.2012] 
 
 
Outstanding dues from Doordarshan Kendras and National Channels 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 13) 
 
 The Committee find from the information made available by the Ministry that ` 330.09 
crore are outstanding from producers of various Doordarshan Kendras and National Channels 

 
 
for the sponsored programmes/serials during the year 2010 -11.  Similarly, a total outstanding 
of ` 166.38 crore is due from agencies during the year 2010-11.  With regard to the year 2011-
12, the data has not been compiled so far as by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati.  The C ommittee 
express serious concern over the huge outstanding amount during one year i.e. 2010-11.  
 
The Committee exhort the Ministry/Doordarshan to take urgent initiatives to recover the 
amount from the various producers and agencies.  The Committee would a lso like to be 
apprised about the details of the amount outstanding during the previous years and the action 
taken against the producers and agencies for not making timely payment.  The Committee 
may also like to be apprised whether at any time any of the producers/agencies has been 
blacklisted by Doordarshan for not paying the outstanding dues.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prasar Bharati has informed that in written reply to point No. 69 on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of Ministry of Information and Broadcas ting, Doordarshan had informed their 
outstanding dues as under :- 
 
S.No. Year Outstanding (` In Crores) 
Remarks 
1. 2010-11 ` 330.95 - 
2. 2011-12 ` 166.38 Provisional (up to 
29-02-12) 
 Total ` 497.33  
 
Hence, the final figure of 2010-11 was only Rs. 330.95 Crores.  
 
It has been indicated that Doordarshan did a total business (accrued) of Rs. 1494.46 
Crore with producers and agencies during 2011 -12.  With the outstanding dues of Rs. 330.95 
Crore for 2010-11, the total of Rs. 1825.41 Crore (including business accrued during the year) 
was, therefore, recoverable from producers/agencies during 2011 -12. Doordarshan has 
realized Rs. 1081.66 Crore as commercial revenue.  The outstanding amount is now Rs. 
743.75 Crore as on 31.03.2012.  This includes Rs. 574.55 crores pending with 86 defaulting 
producers/agencies, against whom Doordarshan has initiated arbitration/legal proceedings. 
  
Hence, an amount of Rs. 169.20 Crore (Rs.  743.75 – Rs.574.55 Crore) is currently 
outstanding as on 31.03.2012 with producers and ag encies. ` 51.40 Crore has been received 
from the defaulting producers/agencies as award/interim award during arbitration /legal 
proceedings. 
 
Further, Doordarshan has informed that Rs. 363.06 Crore (provisional) has also been 
realized from producers and agencies during the current year 2012-13 (up to 31-07-2012)  
  
It may be clarified that full revenue of total business (accrued) during a financial year 
cannot be realized within that year because Doordarshan provides the credit facility to 
accredited agenci es for 60 -75 days as per the industry norms and Prasar Bharati Policy. 
Doordarshan charges interest @ ` 14.5% p.a. (simple interest) on the component that remains 
outstanding after the expiry of credit period. 
 
Therefore, there can never be a NIL balance a gainst an agency/producers doing rolling 
business with Doordarshan. There will always be a possibility of rolling outstanding amount of 
more than ` 200/- Crores depending upon the business accrued, in that particular period. 

 
 
  
As regards, the steps taken t o recover the outstanding dues in case of defaulting 
agencies, Doordarshan takes the following  steps to recover the dues:- 
 
Regular reminders are issued to defaulting agencies. 
Their Bank Guarantees are encashed. 
Their accreditation /registration are canc elled or frozen which reduces their creditability 
 in the media market. 
 Legal notices are issued. 
Arbitration/court proceedings are initiated. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No.103/1/2012-BC-I dated 29.8.2012[ 
 
 
 
Expansion of FM Radio 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 21) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Cabinet at their meeting held on 7 th July, 
2011 has approved the policy guidelines on expansion of FM Broadcasting Services through 
private agencies (Phase III). The Committee also find  that permission for FM Channels is 
going to be awarded through ascending e -Auction as followed by Department of 
Telecommunications for the auction of 3G and BWA Spectrum, mutates -mutandis as 
recommended by Group of Ministers (GoM) as licensing Methodology  for FM Phase III. The 
salient features of the policy include inter -alia increase in FDI+FII limit from 20 per cent to 26 
per cent, permission to carry out news bulletins of All India Radio in unaltered form, special 
incentive or North East (NE) Region and  Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) and Island territories etc. 
The Ministry has informed that e -Auction is going to be held in batches over a period of 3 
years with the approval of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the first batch of e-
Auction is likely  to be held in December, 2012. The Committee observe that the Ministry has 
constituted two Committees (i) Inter Ministerial Committee and (ii) Application Review 
Committee to guide and supervise the process of e -Auction. The Committee are of the view 
that the above decision is certainly a step forward in the direction of fast expansion of FM 
Radio Services in the country as it will give further boost to the FM Services movement. The 
Committee desire that the above two Committees meet on a regular basis and constantly 
review the e -Auction process so that licenses are issues/granted in fair and transparent 
manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Office Memorandum regarding Constitution of Committee(Inter -Ministerial Committee 
(IMC)) for the conduct of e -auction for award of license of FM channels under FM Radio 
(Phase-III) Expansion issued on 11.11.2011. Four meetings of the IMC, under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of I&B have already been held on 15.2.2012, 
19.3.2012, 7.5.2012 and 11.6.2012. 
 
(ii) Office Memorandum regarding Constitution of Committee (Application Review Committee) 
for short listing of bidders for e -auction for award of License of FM Channels under FM Radio 
(Phase-III) Expansion has been issued on 11.11.2011. The work of this  Committee will start 
only after receipt of applications from bidders. 

 
 
 (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No.803/18/2012-FM dated 27th June, 2012) 
 
 
Community Radio Stations 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 22) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Gove rnment of India had approved the policy in 2002 
for grant of licenses for setting up of Community Radio Stations to well established 
educational institutions including IITs/IIMs. As on date, 130 CRSs are operational in the 
Country. The Ministry has informe d that 1026 applications have been received since 2002 
when the first policy of CRS was brought out. Our of 363 permissions issued so far 165 Grant 
of permission agreement (GOPA) have been signed and 268 applications are under the 
consideration for grant of permission at various stages. The Committee note with concern that 
our of the 268 applications, as many as 110 applications are pending with various Ministries 
such as Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, Wireless Planning & Coordination wing of Department of Telecommunications 
and Indian Council of Agricultural Research. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting being the sole authority responsible for spread of Commu nity 
Radio Movement should co -ordinate with the concerned Ministries / agencies for early 
clearance of pending applications so that community radio services spread fast in the country 
reaching out to large population. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry is holding monthly co -ordination meetings with all concerned 
Ministries/Departments to expedite the clearances and overcome communication gaps. So far, 
20 co-ordination meetings have been held and clearances received from concerned Ministries 
are detailed below: 
 
Ministry/Department MHA WPC Wing MOD MHRD ICAR 
 
No. of 
clearances/comment
s received 
 
295 
 
302 
 
331 
 
46 
 
15 
 
(Ministry of I & B, O.M.  No. 403/104/2011-CRS, Dated: 13-07-2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 23) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry had constituted a Working Group to suggest a 
mechanism to provide State funding to CRS. The Working Group had suggested that a corpus 
fund might be set up called Community Radio Support Fund of India (CRSFI) to assist 
organizations in setting up CRS in In dia. However, setting up of the corpus fund could not 
materialize due to Ministry of Finance Guidelines not allowing creation of fund either out of 
revenue or out of Government borrowing. As such, the Community Radio Movement 
continued to face financial constraints resulting in their slow growth. The Committee are happy 
to learn that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, a Planned Scheme of “Supporting Community 
Movement in India” has been conceived to provide grants to CRS in the rage of 1 lakh to 
15lakh depending on the purpose for which the grant is sought. Under this scheme a provision 
has been made to award grants for infrastructure/equipment to scale the growth of new 

 
 
community radio stations especially in remote and rural areas that have little access to  media 
as well as stations managed by disadvantaged and marginalized communities. The 
Committee are of the strong view that lack of financial support being a major hurdle in way of 
Community Radio expansion, the above Scheme will definitely bring good reli ef and 
encourage those applicants who refrained from applying due to financial considerations. Since 
the plan is yet to receive in -principle approval of the Planning Commission, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to take up the matter urgently with the Plan ning Commission for its early 
clearance. Apart from taking up the issue of adequate funds for the Scheme during the Twelfth 
Plan with Planning Commission, efforts should also be made for full utilization of Rs.5 crore 
allocated for the year 2012-13. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has already sent a note for in -principle approval of the Planning Commission. 
The EFC Memo has also been prepared and will be circulated to concerned Ministries 
immediately after in-principle approval of Planning Commission.  
 
(Ministry of I & B, O.M.  No. 403/104/2011-CRS, Dated: 13-07-2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 24) 
 
 The Committee observes that RNI has a mandate to perform various statutory functions 
which include maintenance and compilation of particulars of newspaper s/periodicals, ensuring 
that newspapers/periodicals are published in accordance with the provisions of PRB Act, 
verification of circulation claims etc.  However, the Committee observes that as against the 
budgetary provision of Rs.17.00 lakhs for the year 2011-12, RNI could utilize only Rs.4.00 
lakhs i.e., 23.53%.  While deploring the under utilization, the Committee would like the ministry 
to apprise the Committee, how far the above shortfall has affected the activities and 
achievements of RNI during 2011-12. 
 
 The Members during the course of oral evidence have observed that in the list of books 
maintained by RNI, there are hardly any books in the Regional languages.  From this, the 
Committee is inclined to conclude that either there are not many publicati ons coming out in 
Regional languages or it is a lapse in the part of RNI not to have listed these publications.  The 
Committee while emphasizing on promotion of publications in Regional Languages 
recommend the Ministry/RNI to look into the matter and make necessary actions so that 
Regional Newspapers/publications get due publicity. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that in order to provide prompt, efficient and 
transparent service to the newspapers and ensuring effective implementation of the PRB Act 
and evolving and enforcing a strict circulation check, two new Regional Offices at Guwahati in 
North Eastern Region and Bhopal in Central Regional have been opened during Eleventh Plan 
period 2007-12.  While appreciating the above initiative, the Committee desi re that more and 
more number of such institutes are set up through out the county. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the 11 th Plan two new Regional Offices have been set up under the Plan 
Scheme „Strengthening of RNI‟ – one at Guwahati, Assam and another a t Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh with an approved outlay of Rs.88.06 lakhs.  However, no staff component was 
approved and Officers from other media units were entrusted with additional responsibility for 
running these offices with the support of outsourced staff.  In 2011-12, the officer entrusted 

 
 
with the additional charges of Guwahati Office did not join and hence RNI could not utilize the 
amount allocated for this office. An amount of Rs.13.00 lakhs was surrendered on this 
account.  However, RNI managed the acti vities of North-eastern states from the Headquarter 
itself without affecting the activities of RNI. 
 
 Regarding books, it is clarified that as the subject matter comes under the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and hence the list of books are not mai ntained by RNI.  RNI 
maintains the list of registered and verified titles of newspapers/magazines which includes 
titles in regional languages also. 
 
 As for the advice by the Committee for opening more offices, the same will be 
considered keeping in view the volume of work in different regions. 
 
(Ministry of I&B I.D. No.10/21/2011-MUC dated 27.7.2012) 
 
 
Decline of Indian Films Internationally  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 29) 
 
 On an analysis of documents provided by the Ministry, the Committee observes that  
India is the largest producer of films in the world, producing film sin 26 languages. It produces 
more than 1000 films per year in different languages. However, as per two evaluation studies 
conducted under the aegis of the Ministry, the share of major ma rkets for the Indian films 
worldwide has been declining over the years due to factors such as decline in quantum of film 
selection in leading international film festivals, commercial viability being the driver of Indian 
film sector and promotion of Indian cinema in a fragmented manner. The Committee also feels 
that over the years, no attempt has been made in promoting Indian cinema internationally and 
the presence of Indian cinema in international film festivals such as Cannes or Locarno Film 
Festival is in significant.  The intervention of the Ministry in areas of promotion of films 
internationally through its schemes such as „Export Promotion Through Film Festivals‟, 
„Participation in Film Markets in India and Abroad‟ has not been upto the desired level.  T he 
Committee observe that the Ministry has taken some initiatives in partnership with the Ministry 
of Tourism with a view to providing a platform to Indian filmmakers to promote and carry out 
their business activities effectively. The Committee recommend t hat during the 12 th Plan, a 
concerted effort should be made to ensure that promotion of India cinema abroad is carried 
out in a more structured and vociferous manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 For the 12th Plan a comprehensive Scheme has been worked out titled “Development of 
Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content”. The scheme envisages participation in 
film festivals in India and abroad, participation in international film markets, organization of film 
festivals which include children and docume ntary film festivals, production of documentary, 
children films and feature films in various regional languages. It is expected that this scheme 
will give the required impetus for production of good quality films and their promotion in 
various internationa l film festivals. From the later part of the 11 th Plan, our participation in 
international film markets has been streamlined by assigning the task to NFDC. The India 
Pavilions being set up during various international film festivals would be organized in a  
focused manner with a view to providing an ideal platform for young and upcoming film 
makers to interact with film producers and filmmakers from other countries and to network with 
prospective buyers to market their products. 
 

 
 
[Ministry of I&B OM No. 306/2/2012-F(F) dated 12.06.201] 
 
Global Film School 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 31) 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that thought the scheme of Global Film School 
had been conceptualized in the early part of the 11 th Plan, yet, the Ministry could not ge t in-
Principle approval for the scheme.  The Committee find that the scheme has now been 
subsumed to e a part of the common programme of the scheme of infrastructure development 
programme relating to the film sector. The urgent need for a film school stand ard cannot be 
under estimated in the context of decline of Indian Films internationally as enumerated in the 
preceding para. The Committee desire that subsuming of the scheme in the broader scheme 
of infrastructure development should not dilute its thrust and purpose and every effort should 
be made to upgrade and modernize the FTII during the current financial year so as to enable 
the institute to meet the standards of global film school.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The proposals for upgradation / modernisa tion of FTII which was envisaged under 
Global Film School, have since been worked out and have been included as part of a 
comprehensive plan for development of infrastructure of the media units under Films Wing of 
the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting  during the 12 th Plan. Feasibility Report to the 
Planning Commission in this regard has been sent and action is being taken for evaluation by 
the appraisal body and approval by the competent authority. All efforts would be made to 
execute the project on time.  
 
[Ministry of I&B OM No. 306/2/2012-F(F) dated 12.06.2012] 
 
 
Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 32) 
 
 The Committee observed that Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute was 
established in 1995 and regis tered as a society on 18 th August, 1995 under the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 1961. It is an autonomous society funded by Ministry of Information 
& Broadcasting with a Governing Council, Standing Finance Committee and an Academic 
Council. Named after the acclaimed film Director, SRFTI is a premier institute of India for film 
training. The Committee find that the actual expenditure of the institute has been less as 
compared to RE during the first three years of the 11 th Plan. However, during 2010 -11 and 
2011-12, the actual expenditure has picked up and the institute has been able to absorb 90 
per cent of funds allocated.  There is a need to give the institute more impetus so as to enable 
it to fulfill its mandate in a more forceful manner.  
 
 The Committee are given to understand that a draft legislation on „National Institute of 
Film and Television‟ covering both FTII and SRFTI is under the consideration of the Ministry to 
declare the film and TV institutes as institutes of national importance.  T he Governing Body of 
the proposed institute would be a board of Governors headed by a Chairman.  The Board of 
Governors would have  eminent personalities in the field of film, television and allied studies 
apart from officials from Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and the concerned State 
Governments as its members, a senate is proposed for taking all decisions on academic 
issues, the institute will provide undergraduate and post -graduate courses and hold 

 
 
examinations, the institute will be empowered t o grant degrees, diplomas, certificates which 
shall be equivalent to such degrees, diplomas granted by any other Universities and there will 
be the apex policy decision making body of the Institutes.  The draft Bill is in the process of 
being circulated to  various Ministries for their comments. The Committee further note that 
since its inception in 1995, the institute has not been subjected to any review and a 
comprehensive study is likely to be undertaken during this year.  In view of the fact that the 
institute is being considered to be declared as institute of national importance, the Committee 
recommend that a comprehensive review of the institute should be undertaken this year itself 
and the findings of the comprehensive review should also be incorporated in the aforesaid Act.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To give the institute more impetus so as to enable it to fulfill its mandate in an effective 
manner, creation of additional infrastructure and introduction of modern technology are being 
envisaged during the 12th Plan.   
 
 In order to declare the Film and Television Institutes under Ministry of I&B, institute of 
national importance, a draft Bill has been worked out and circulated to various Ministries for 
comments. This is being expedited with the concer ned Ministries so that the draft Bill is 
finalized and submitted for the approval of the Cabinet before being introduced in the 
Parliament.  
 
 A review of SRFTI is being done during the current year. As suggested, the findings of 
the review, wherever feasible, would be incorporated in the aforesaid draft Bill.   
 
[Ministry of I&B OM No. 306/2/2012-F(F) dated 12.06.2012] 
 
 
Children’s Film Society of India  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 33) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Children‟s Film Society of India estab lished in May, 
1995 under the aegis of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government of India, is 
primarily engaged in the task of production, exhibition and promotion of children‟s films and it 
is registered under the Societies Registration Act, XXI of 1860 with the main objective of 
providing children and young and „value based‟ entertainment through the medium of films. 
The Committee find that an allocation of Rs. 10 crore has been made for production of 
children films under the proposed plan sc heme of Production of Films and Documentaries in 
various languages.  The Committee are constrained to note that even when the CFSI has 
taken up the matter with Film Institutes such as SRFTI and FTII to impress upon students to 
produce diploma films on chil dren‟s subjects, no proposals are forthcoming.  The Committee 
strongly feel that when the slum children of India could participate and get international 
acclaim in an international film like Slumdog Millionaire, there is no dearth of creativity and 
talent in India.  There is a need to explore the talents within the country in the field of creative 
writing and good scripts and channelise these to produce good films with humane touch and 
social values.  Even the films focusing on teen issues can also be encou raged.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the CFSI in coordination with Film Institutes should encourage 
and motivate students by giving wide publicity to the concept/ idea and also appropriately 
funding the project on the diploma films on children‟s subjects.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 CFSI would continue to explore talents by approaching the institutes to encourage their 
students to develop scripts on children ‟s subjects so that diploma films can be made on 
children subjects.  The institutes, on their part, would continue to encourage and motivate their 
students to develop projects on children‟s subjects.  The Ministry has taken up this with both 
FTII and SRFTI as well as CFSI.   
  
[Ministry of I&B OM No. 306/2/2012-F(F) dated 12.06.2012] 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THIS COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Policy for Introduction of Mobile Television  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 18) 
 
  The Committee observe that the draft Policy o f Mobile Television has been put on hold 
due to non-availability of adequate spectrum in the VHF band V(585 -698 MHz) and in view of 
this the Ministry may have to examine the feasibility of introducing mobile TV services. The 
Ministry has informed that they  had initially projected requirement of spectrum for 
Doordarshan 585-646 MHz and mobile TV 96-646 MHz in UHF Band V. It was then brought to 
notice by WPC of Department of Telecommunications that frequency Band 625 -675 MHz i.e 
total 50 MHz has already been decided to be allocated to Defence. The allocation of 
Frequency Band to Defence has disturbed the continuity of spectrum in the entire band i.e. 
585-646 MHz. The Committee fail to understand as to when the Ministry had already 
communicated WPC about their projection requirement of spectrum for DD (585 -646 MHz) 
and mobile TV 96 MHz beyond 646 MHz (646 -742 MHZ), and at what point the decision was 
allowed to be taken to allocate frequency band 625 -675 MHz, a total of 50 MHz to Defence 
with 588-695 MHz though i t had been originally been allocated to Ministry of Information and 
broadcasting for Broadcasting and Mobile Television purposes. The Committee are extremely 
disappointed to note that Ministry has not handled the issue of spectrum allocation with 
concerned authorities timely and with requisite attention which has led to such a stalemate in 
the issue. As the Empowered Group of Ministers on vacation of spectrum has now given a 
decision to restrict the requirement of spectrum for various broadcasting services within 585-
646 MHz, the Committee at this point has no choice but to advise the Ministry to review the 
spectrum availability and take up the matter suitably with the concerned authorities so that the 
launching of mobile television is not put into cold stor age and the country does not lag behind 
in this area. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has been in dialogue with Department of Telecom (DoT)  for spectrum 
requirement for various broadcasting services in the UHF Band V as the frequency band 700 
MHz i.e 698-806 MHz has been earmarked for International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) 
services by World Radio Conference (WRC -07).  The Ministry has projected the following 
spectrum requirement to DoT in the UHF Band V for various broadcasting services  
 
(a) Doordarshan     
 
 As part of digitalization of its terrestrial networks , DD is planning to set up 630 digital 
transmitters which comprise 230 HPTs and 400 LPTs.  Under the 11 th Plan, Doordarshan has 
already taken up projects for establishment of 40 digit al transmitters (SDTV) and 4 High 
Definition digital transmitters. Doordarshan‟s long term plan is to have a multiplex of five 

 
 
transmitters– two for SDTV Channels, two for HDTV Channels and one for mobile TV service - 
at each of the 630 locations to provid e a competitive platform. Keeping in view the long term 
perspective of digitalization process of Doordarshan, the total spectrum requirement of 
Doordarshan for the digitalization of its terrestrial network will be met in Band -IV (470 -582 
MHz) and eight channels in Band-V (582-646 MHz). DD has also frequency assignment in 700 
MHz band, viz., two carriers (745 MHz and 795 MHz each with a band width of 20 MHz )i.e 40 
MHz for Mobile video link and Channel 54(734 -742 MHz) for Digital Terrestrial Transmitters 
(DTT) at four metro cities. 
 
(b) Mobile TV Services   
 
 TRAI, in its recommendations on “Issues relating to Mobile Television Service” dated 
23.1.2008   had identified UHF Band V (585 -806 MHz) for Mobile TV services by private 
operators thorough terrestrial m ode. It also recommended that private players may be 
assigned at least one slot of 8 MHz each for mobile TV operation.  It is estimated that at least 
96 MHz (4 licensees/license area x 8 MHz x 3 Consecutive Regions = 96 MHz) of  spectrum 
will be required fo r 4 operators to start mobile TV services. This requirement was also 
projected to the DoT.   
 
(c)  Other broadcasting Services 
 
  TRAI had, in 2005, recommended that terrestrial television broadcasting in India 
should be thrown open to private players as w ell.  Though the policy for private TV 
broadcasting has not been formulated till now, the Ministry has requested DoT to earmark 
adequate frequency in the UHF Band V for this purpose as well   so that there should not be 
any shortage of spectrum when the po licy is formulated in future as f requency band 585 -806 
MHz, according to NFAP -2008, is predominantly for broadcasting services, including Mobile 
TV. 
 
   TRAI, in its recommendation on “ spectrum management and licensing framework” 
dated 11.2.2010 has recomm ended that 585 -698 MHz may be earmarked for digital 
broadcasting services, including Mobile TV and that 698 -806 MHz be earmarked for IMT 
Applications. Keeping this in view, in the draft India Remarks for NFAP -2011, the WPC has 
proposed to bifurcate UHF Band V (585-806 MHz) i.e IND 37 (585-698 MHZ) and IND 38(698-
806 MHz).  The Ministry has opposed the proposed bifurcation and sent a dissent note to 
Chairman, NFAP Review Committee requesting him not to bifurcate IND 37 of NFAP 2008 as 
the proposed division of band 585-806 MHz would adversely affect the requirement spectrum 
for present and future development of TV broadcasting.  According to NFAP -2011, the band 
585-698 MHz has been allocated to Digital Broadcasting Services including Mobile TV and 
698-806 MHz has been allocated to IMT and Broad Wireless Access (BWA). 
 
 Subsequently , in order to discuss requirement of spectrum in the UHF Band V for the 
broadcasting sector, including Doordarshan, a meeting was held at the level of Secretary 
(DoT) and Secretary (I&B) on 5.5.2011 where in the Ministry has reiterated its  earlier stand on 
the requirement of spectrum for broadcasting services in the band 585 -806 MHz. I t was 
decided to set up a committee comprising Wireless Adviser, E -in-C (Doordarshan), and Joint 

 
 
Secretary (Broadcasting) to examine the actual requirement of spectrum for DD and other 
broadcasting services, including mobile TV,  in the UHF band V. The Committee has met two 
times and deliberated spectrum requirement of DD as well as other broadcasting se rvices, 
including Mobile TV in UHF Band V. In the meetings, like in earlier occasion, the Ministry‟s has 
projected its requirement of spectrum for DD (585 -646 MHz) and Mobile TV (96 MHz beyond 
646 MHz ) in UHF Band V.  It was then brought to the notice of the Ministry by WPC that it has 
been already been decided to allocate frequency band 625 -675 MHz i.e a total of 50 MHz to 
defence within 585-696 MHz though it is allocated to broadcasting services.  This allocation to 
defence disturbs the entire band as re quirement spectrum for DD and Mobile TV is to be met 
within 585-698MHz, as recommended by TRAI as also as per NFAP 2011.  
 
 During the discussions, it was considered that in case defence is to be considered it 
should be relocated towards one end of 585 -698 MHz i.e beyond 646 MHz so that 
broadcasting spectrum remain contiguous. Accordingly, re -location of defense to 646 -698 
MHz (a total of 52 MHz) came up in the meeting. Although the band 585 -698 MHz has been 
earmarked for broadcasting services, in view of the allocation to defence 625-675 MHz, a view 
emerged in the meeting that WPC will take up with Defence for re -location of their allocation 
beyond 646 MHz  so that the Ministry of I&B can rationalize its spectrum requirement for 
various broadcasting service , including DD‟s requirement within 585 -646 MHz. Accordingly, 
the Ministry has communicated to WPC that the Ministry would plan for spectrum requirement 
for broadcasting services within 585 -646 MHz in the UHF Band V (585 -698 MHz) subject to 
the condition t hat defence may be asked to re -locate their spectrum towards the tail end of 
585-698 MHz i.e beyond 646MHz.  Empowered Group of Ministers on vacation of spectrum 
has subsequently taken note of the Ministry‟s above stand that the requirement of spectrum 
for various broadcasting services within 585 -646 MHz. Thus, keeping in view of the DD‟s 
requirement for spectrum for its digitalization programme, there would be no spectrum 
available in the band585-646 MHz for Mobile TV services.  
 
 
Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 26) 
 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that there has been near 100% utilization of RE 
funds by DAVP during the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee hope that the same trend will 
continue during the Twelfth Pla n. The Committee are, however unhappy to note that total 
outstanding dues to DAVP from various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India is 
approximately 63 crores.  The Committee have been informed that the Ministries/Departments 
pay their outstanding in the first quarter of the next financial year. Fresh outstanding also arise 
in the last quarter of the financial year, when the Letter of Authority issued by the 
Departments/Ministries lapses on 31 st March.  The Committee observe that the existing 
system of recovery of dues from Ministries/Departments is not prudent enough heading to 
huge amount of outstanding dues.  Therefore, the Committee desire that DAVP should evolve 
a system whereby the Ministries/Departments may be asked to settle their dues w ithin one 
month from the date of issue of letter of Indent. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Release of advertisements by DAVP is a continuous process which goes on throughout 
the year.  Normally the payments for each advertisement released by DAVP are received from 
the client Ministries before issue of advertisement.  However utilization of this authorized 
amount depends upon the receipt of bills from the newspapers which usually takes one to two 
months.  In this process, it is natural that the bill for the adve rtisements released in March is 
received during the month of April/May which results in the lapse of authorized amount.  
However, DAVP will try to settle the payments as early as possible and ensure that the 
outstanding payments at any given time are kept to the bare minimum.  
 
(Ministry of I&B I.D. No.10/21/2011-MUC dated 27.7.2012) 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Rationalization and Restructuring of Plan Schemes 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 5) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry has undertaken an exercise to club 
schemes having commonalities to reduce the number of the total schemes. It has also 
informed that comprehensive ration alization and restructuring of the Plan schemes of the 
Ministry has been carried out based on Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB). Small 
schemes/programmes with similar objectives and activities spread across different media 
units have been merged together under umbrella schemes. New sub-schemes required for 
further strengthening of different activities have also been clubbed under these 
comprehensive schemes. As a result of this exercise, the number of schemes has been 
reduced from 65 in the Eleventh Plan to 25 in the Twelfth Plan. It includes five on -going 
schemes – three in the Information sector and two in the Films sector as on -going 
schemes. The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry to rationalize and 
restructure the schemes of the Ministry.  Coming to the status of approval of the schemes 
during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee observe that a four stage appraisal cum approval 
process is involved for getting formal approval of the schemes. The information furnished 
by the Ministry indicates tha t even on stage I the action has not been completed. The 
proposals have only been submitted to Planning Commission for in -principle approval. Not 
only that in the replies it has been stated that the Ministry has started evaluation of the 
Schemes.  
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that now when the Twelfth Plan has already 
commenced, the Ministry propose to undertake evaluation of some of the schemes of the 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee are of the firm view that the evaluation process should have 
been completed before the restructuring of the Planned Schemes that are proposed to be 
implemented during the Twelfth Plan. The reasons for delay of the evaluation as furnished 
by the Ministry are not justifiable. The Ministry while justifying the evaluation ti me has 
stated that the nature of the schemes to be evaluated is such that unless a phase is 
completed evaluation cannot commence. The Committee fail to understand how the phase 
of a particular scheme which was not complete a few months back can suddenly no w be 
completed and the scheme become mature for evaluation. The Committee deplore the 
way the restructuring of planned schemes has been done without evaluating the various 
on going schemes of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee fail to understand how the Ministry 
has substantiated undertaking Zero Based Exercise in this scenario. The Committee 
apprehend that with the aforesaid process of evaluation and the stage of approval of the 
schemes, the Ministry may again lose the precious period of the Twelfth Plan in getting 

40 
 
approvals. Nevertheless, the Committee now exhort the Ministry to take all the initiatives to 
speed up the approvals for the planned schemes so that the execution comm ence without 
any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  There are two issues which need to be elaborated here: (i) Restructuring of 
schemes based upon Zero based budgeting (ZBB) principle and (ii) Evaluation of those 
schemes of 11th Plan which are to be continued into the 12th Plan.  
  
  ZBB principle demands that every activity wi thin the organization must be analyzed 
in terms of its need along with its cost, so that the organization should aim at delivering its 
activities at minimal cost.  The best time for adoption of ZBB principle is the beginning of 
the Five Year Plan and accor dingly it was done, with a view to minimizing the cost of 
delivering various activities of the Ministry. 
 
  Second issue is regarding evaluation of the on -going schemes.  The schemes to be 
evaluated under this category refer to those schemes which were tak en up for 
implementation during the 11th Plan and are to be continued in the 12th Plan.  As per the 
Finance Ministry‟s guidelines (O.M. No. 1(3)/PF.II/2011 dated 23.04.2012), these schemes 
need to be evaluated before 31.12.2012 to ensure their continuance during 12th Plan.  
Going by these guidelines, the Ministry has ordered evaluation of on -going schemes of 
Information Sector, Film Sector and Broadcasting Sector to be completed well in advance 
of December, 2012.  However, it does not mean that no other sch eme has been evaluated 
during 11th Plan.  The Ministry has undertaken couple of policies related studies and 
carried out evaluation of two schemes of Film Sector. i.e. „Export Promotion through Film 
Festivals‟ and „Participation in Film Markets in India an d Abroad‟ during 11th Plan; the 
findings of which were taken into consideration by the Ministry during restructuring of the 
schemes. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Decline in the growth of revenue earned by DD & AIR 
 
(Recommendation Serial Nos. 7 & 8) 
 
 The Committee find that All India Radio and Doordarshan have not been able to 
earn revenue as per the projections made during each year of the Eleventh Plan.  
Moreover, the growth in their revenue is very slow.  Although there i s some growth in the 
revenue earned by All India Radio and Doordarshan during each year of the Eleventh 
Plan, under the head „Miscellaneous PB‟, the revenue is declining over the years.  During 
the year 2008 -09, the revenue generated was ` 165.32 crore whi ch declined to ` 104.17 
crore during the year 2010 -11.  During the year 2011 -12, there is some improvement 
whereby ` 105.59 crore have been generated upto February, 2012.  The Committee find 
that the revenue under „Miscellaneous PB‟ mainly includes collect ion of Audition fee, Vani 
Certificate, Inplant Training, Licence fee from Staff Quarters, Electricity, Water & Transport 
charges, Interest on Fixed Deposits/LTC/TA advance, Sale of obsolete/unserviceable  
equipment/stores, Sale of CDs, Cassettes, DVDs of a rchives of both the Directorates, sale 

41 
 
of proceeds of old News papers, etc.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
details of the item -wise declining trend of revenue.  Besides, the Committee may also like 
to recommend to evaluate the revenue t rend under each of the segment so as to find out 
the sectors where the revenue is continuously declining followed by corrective action on 
the part of the Ministry and Doordarshan/All India Radio. 
 (Rec. Sl. No. 7) 
  
 
 The Committee further feel that the Mi nistry need to explore the feasibility to 
generate revenue from various areas.  One such area is commercial use of the rich 
archives of All India Radio and Doordarshan.  The extent of revenue that can be generated 
through these archives is evident from the  fact that the footage for one minute is provided 
by Doordarshan at the rate of ` 6000 per minute to people making documentaries for 
telecast on any channels.   The Committee have been informed that 100 DVD titles have 
been handpicked from the Archive of D oordarshan and are available for viewing to the 
public at large.  The Committee are of the view that All India Radio and Doordarshan 
archives are the precious resource and have great commercial value.  There is an urgent 
need to explore the ways to earn re venue nationally and internationally from these 
treasures on the part of the Ministry as well as All India Radio and Doordarshan.  The 
Committee recommend that the details of the archives which can be made commercially 
available should be put on the websit e of Doordarshan/All India Radio/Ministry and 
publicized through various mechanisms which would definitely help in generating more 
revenue from this precious resource.   
 
 The Committee observe that the majority of the population in the country watch 
Doordarshan channels and the listeners of AIR are spread throughout the country.  In spite 
of that the revenue of DD and AIR through advertisement do not stand in comparison to 
the private channels.  The Committee find that AIR and DD need to project themselves  to 
the public.  Moreover, they have to devise their own mechanisms for TRP ratings and 
publicize the ratings for various programmes generated through their own mechanisms.  
The aforesaid proposed initiatives can definitely result into improving the advert isement 
revenue for AIR and DD.  
  
 The Committee strongly recommend that all the aforesaid initiatives should be taken 
urgently by AIR and DD to make these organizations    self -sufficient.  Besides, more such 
areas from where revenue can be generated should be identified by these organizations. 
 (Rec. Sl.  No. 8) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has assured that they are taking urgent action on the Committee‟s 
recommended initiatives for revenue generation and would identify the other areas of 
potential resources for revenue generation. 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. Nos. 7&8) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I) 
 

42 
 
Financial Status of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10) 
 
 The Commercial revenue earned by Doordarshan are lesse r than the projections 
made during each year of the Eleventh Plan, the details of which have been given in the 
earlier part of the Report.  Not only that the growth of the revenue earned by Doordarshan 
is very slow during these years.  The Committee during  the course of deliberations of 
Demands for Grants of this year have been apprised that IEBR of  ` 5000 crore at the rate 
of ` 1000 crore for each of the annual plans has been assumed for the Twelfth Plan.  In 
this direction, ` 400 crore out of IEBR have be en earmarked during the year 2012 -13 for 
planned projects of Prasar Bharati.  The share of Doordarshan in this regard is ` 250 
crore.  The Committee are surprised to find that on the one hand, specific provision has 
been made and exclusive outlay out of IE BR has been earmarked for planned schemes.  
On the other hand, the Ministry has submitted in the written replies that Prasar Bharati may 
not be in a position to afford the expenditure for planned schemes for IEBR. 
 
  The Committee have further been apprise d that as per the recommendations of the 
GoM, the Government shall meet expenditure on the following four components (i) Salary 
& Salary related establishment expenses, (ii) expenses on Augmentation & Replacement 
of Capital Assets, and the expenditure on t he remaining items i.e. (iii) Other Administrative 
Expenses, and (iv) Software & Programme related expenses.  In addition, the Prasar 
Bharati has to supplement IEBR in all the aforesaid four categories and remain in focus for 
budget crisis and paucity of f unds.  Pending decision of the Government on the aforesaid 
recommendations of GoM, a specific projection out of IEBR for planned schemes as 
elaborated above have been met for the first time. 
  
 The Committee conclude from the aforesaid details that Prasar Bharati which 
include Doordarshan and AIR have great challenges in the coming years in regard to 
generating resources for the activities.  The Committee as such strongly recommend that 
DD should explore all the possibilities of revenue generation so as to meet the targets of 
projections made for planned schemes out of IEBR.  Besides the Doordarshan has to 
prepare for meeting the devised parameters of sharing the expenditure as per the formula 
suggested by GoM.  
 
 The Committee observe huge gaps between the total IEBR of Prasar Bharati and 
the expenditure met out of IEBR during each year of the Eleventh Plan.  During 2010 -11, 
the expenditure met is ` 1112.78 crore out of ` 2939.73 crore of IEBR.  Similarly, during 
the year 2011-12, the expenditure met after F ebruary, 2012 is ` 9575.40 crore out of total 
IEBR of ` 277.0 crore.  The Committee have been apprised that as per the provisions 
made under The Prasar Bharati Act, the residual funds out of internal revenue of Prasar 
Bharati are kept in IEBR kitty and use d for meeting its requirement on account of special 
maintenance of buildings and capital assets and to bridge the budget gap.  In this 
connection, the Committee would like to be apprised about the total IEBR kitty of Prasar 
Bharati.  The Committee would al so like to be apprised as to how the IEBR savings are 
maintained meaning thereby whether the amount is kept in accounts of Banks etc.  In that 
case, the amount generated through interest may also to be communicated to the 
Committee so as to understand the concept of IEBR kitty. 
 

43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has informed that it generated an average net revenue ranging 
between Rs. 1000 and Rs. 1200 crore per year as seen during each year of the 11th Plan 
period and the same was being utilized ma inly to bridge the gap between the DBS and the 
actual demand of Prasar Bharati under Non -Plan heads including Salary components.  In 
view of its limited resources, Prasar Bharati has informed that it may not be feasible for 
Prasar Bharati to set aside subs tantial amounts from IEBR for Plan schemes as proposed 
by the Ministry for dual funding. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Comprehensive audit of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 12) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that CGA office has conducted a 
comprehensive audit of Prasar Bharati on 05.06.2009.  The scope of the audit was 
comprehensive which included general accounting issues, financial issues and issues 
pertaining to Doordarshan communicated by Vigilance Wing. T he Committee would like to 
be apprised of the findings of the aforesaid audit and the corrective action taken thereon.  
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the system of internal/external audit of 
Prasar Bharati.  The Committee are surprised to  note the reply of the Ministry when the 
issue of assessment regarding the AIR and DD was raised during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants.  The Ministry instead of taking initiatives has come to 
the conclusion that such assessment is not nece ssary in both the Directorates since 
Prasar Bharati is largely dependent on Government grants.  The aforesaid response of 
Prasar Bharati clearly indicates the visible dependence of Prasar Bharati on the 
Government grants.  The Committee may like to remind the Ministry about the 
recommendations of GoM the details of which have been given above.  The Committee 
hope that the aforesaid recommendation of GoM would motivate Prasar Bharati to take all 
the desired initiatives so as to move to the direction of self -sufficiency.  Besides, the 
assessment of financial health of AIR and DD should be undertaken so as to find out the 
grey areas followed by the corrective actions taken by both AIR and DD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry in its audit had found serious la cunae in the working of Prasar Bharati. 
Financial and auditing procedures like reconciliation of receipts with bank statements, 
proper implementation of investment policies, an established system of pre-check and post 
check of payments, proper regulation of cash balances, bank balances and due adherence 
to guidelines of financial propriety appeared practically non existent in Prasar Bharati. The 
reports also  found various anomalies in the bidding procedures adopted during the 
telecast of Cricket series on Doordarshan,  the inefficient contractual management system, 
the improper maintenance of records like log books,  telecast certificates relating to 
commercial advertisements aired and the deficient revenue generation mechanisms. 
Prasar Bharati was requeste d by the Ministry to furnish comments.  Prasar Bharati has  

44 
 
informed that  they initially envisaged conducting special audit of all the 600 DDOs 
(approx.) by outsourcing Chartered Accountants Firms across the country. However, 
considering the huge amount of expenditure involved as also the volume of work, it was 
decided to get only 49 DDOs located in Delhi, audited and based on the outcome of which, 
the rest of the DDOs  be either audited if required or it be ensured that the findings/defects 
noticed in 49 DDOs as pointed out in Special Audit Report do not recur in other DDOs not 
covered under Special Audit.   
 
 With regard to assessment of the financial health of both the Directorates, GoM on 
Prasar Bharati in its 5th meeting held on 23.06.2011 has recommended that during the next 
five years from 2011 -12 to 2015-16,Government Non-Plan support would be extended for 
meeting 100% expenses on account of salary and salary related expenses and 
Augmentation/ Replacement of Capital Assets . All the other items of operat ing expenses 
shall be borne by Prasar Bharati from out of its internal revenue earnings. The matter 
would be reviewed after five years, if required.  
 
The above recommendations are under consideration of the Government.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter I) 
 
Finalization of Recruitment Rules 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 15) 
 
 The Committee find that out of the total sanctioned strength of 48022, the existing 
staff of AIR and DD is 33800, the gap being of 14222 posts.  The vacancies a re in all the 
Wings.  However, the critically affected areas are Programme Wing and NSD/News.  In the 
Programme Wing, out of the total sanctioned strength of 10679, the existing strength is just 
6108 just leaving the gap of 4571.  Similarly, in NSD/News ou t of sanctioned strength of 
379, the existing strength is 255, the vacancies being 146.  The Committee have 
consistently been exhorting the Ministry to fill up the critical vacancies in DD and AIR.  The 
Committee during the course of the Study visits to va rious parts of the country have been 
apprised about the difficulties being encountered by various Regional Stations due to staff 
shortages.  In spite of that the situation has not been addressed at the right earnest.  The 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati have not b een able to keep their promises made before the 
Committee to handle the situation.   
 
 On the issue of setting up of Recruitment Board for Prasar Bharati, the then CEO of 
Prasar Bharati during the course of examination of Prasar Bharati Broadcasting 
(Corporation) of India Amendment Bill, 2010 had assured the Committee that the task of 
finalization of Recruitment Board and service conditions would definitely be finished by 31 
March, 2011.  Now, when full one year has elapsed since then, the issues have still  not 
been settled resulting in further delay in filling up these vacancies.  With regard to latest 
position, the Committee have now been informed that the notification with regard to setting 
up of Recruitment Board is under inter -Ministerial consultation.  The Committee 
understand during the course of deliberations that still there are some issues to be 
resolved between the Ministry/Department of Expenditure and the DoPT.  Not only that the 

45 
 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati is grappling with the issue of undertaking recruitment process for 
such a large number of vacancies particularly when UPSC and SSC have both refused to 
select for a non-Governmental organization.  
  
 The Committee while deploring the situation whereby the finalization of recruitment 
rules and setting up of Recruitment Board are further being delayed leaving the situation of 
Prasar Bharati and AIR from worse to worst scenario.  The Committee fail to understand 
how DD and AIR can work effectively without filling the critical vancancies.  The Committee 
again exhort the Department to settle the issues with various Ministries and fast track the 
recruitment rules and setting up of recruitment board so that the process of filling up the 
vacancies can start.  The concerns of the Committee in this regard shou ld adequately be 
conveyed to the respective Ministries.  In the meanwhile the Ministry should also finalize 
the strategy to fill the vacancies on a fast track basis so that the recruitment process 
commences immediately when the Recruitment Board and Recrui tment Rules are in place 
so as to enable Prasar Bharati to fill up the vacancies within the shortest possible 
timeframe.   
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
The Prasar Bharati has identified 3254 posts as essential category of posts requiring filling 
up on immediate basis.   Based on the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GOM), the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting proposed to seek Cabinet approval for filling up 
these posts.  These po sts will be filled following notification of Recruitment Regulations 
(RRs) for the employees of Prasar Bharati and functioning of the Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board.   
 
The progress in this regard is as follows: 
 
i) The Prasar Bharati is in the process of i ncorporating the suggestions of the DOP&T 
in the draft RRs.  The original proposal of draft RRs is at present under active 
consideration of the Department of Expenditure (DOE). 
 
ii) Regarding the proposal of draft notification for creation of Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board (PBRB), the DOE has raised a query which has been communicated to 
the Prasar Bharat Secretariat for response.  The Prasar Bharati have informed of revising 
the proposal of PBRB and have proposed for undertaking recruitment of Groups „B‟ and „C‟ 
through the Staff Selection Commission.  The Ministry is in the process of taking up the 
revised proposal with the DOE.    
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
 
Implementation of Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2011 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 19) 
 
 The Committee find that the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2011 for introduction of Digital Addressable system (DAS) has recently been enacted. 
As per the Act, the Ministry has n otified the dates for switching over to digital addressable 
system from analogue cable services by December 2014. The Committee understand that 
following the passing of the above legislation making digitization mandatory, there is an 
ongoing demand for set  top boxes in future and there will be large scale demand for set 
top boxes to meet the requirement. However, the Committee find that the Ministry has not 
done any survey on the availability of set top boxes to ascertain the domestic 
preparedness and self sufficiency in the manufacturing of set top boxes. The Committee 
had also deliberated on the issue while examining the Demands for Grants of the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology (Ministry of Communication & 
Information Technology also u nder the purview of this Committee) and the Committee 
were apprised that in order to encourage the domestic manufacturing of set top boxes and 
to protect the interests of local manufactures, the Government has introduced 5 % tariff on 
import of set top box es. During the deliberations certain crucial Research & 
Development(R&D) issues relating to the technology also emerged and the Committee 
were apprised that it would take some time for the country to become fully self reliant with 
regard to indigenous prod uction of set top boxes.  The Committee further observe that 
even if the Indian industry is able to produce the desired number of set top boxes by the 
stipulated timeline for switching over to digitization as per the provisions of the aforesaid 
act, the Go vernment intervention would be required to ensure 100 per cent indigenization 
of set top boxes. In this direction, the Government may consider hiking of the import duty 
from 5 to 10 per cent. In the light of above, the Committee may like to emphasize that the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should coordinate with the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology on the issue of extension of the proposed deadline 
after having detailed strategy with regard to manufacturing of the required numb er of Set 
Top Boxes through indigenous production and also finalizing the policy issue with regard to 
providing competitive edge to our own country manufactured Set Top Boxes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had move d a proposal on fiscal 
incentives/duty concessions in case of broadcasting industry to facilitate time bound 
transition of analogue cable system to digital addressable system (DAS) of cable services 
and the matter was taken up by CoS in its meeting held on  10th February, 2012.  The 
Ministry in its note for the CoS had inter -alia proposed reduction of basic customs duty on 
the major items in digital addressable system distribution i.e. digital headend equipment 
and STBs to zero level to give a boost to conve rsion of broadcast distribution network to 
digital addressable system.  The items on which custom duty exemption has been sought 
including STBs are not manufactured in India and zero customs duties on these items 
would reduce the burden on the consumer.  M oreover, even the local industry which 
needed to import certain key inputs in the manufacturing of these items would also benefit 
from import of duty exemption. In the meeting of CoS dated 10th February, 2012, it was 
recommended, inter -alia, that consultat ions with domestic industry by Department of 

47 
 
Information Technology and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting may be taken to 
ensure that the equipment required for switch over to DAS is available through indigenous 
manufacturer.  The proposal of the Mi nistry for fiscal incentives to broadcasting industry 
was not supported and it was also recommended that the Ministry may finalize the quality 
parameters through Bureau of Indian Standards to ensure that quality products are made 
available by domestic indu stry.  The timeline for implementation of DAS in the first four 
phases in the four metros of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata has been extended to 
31.10.2012.  The transition to DAS which requires an STB as a prerequisite would on a 
conservative estimate require 68 million STBs.  The sheer volume of the requirement of 
STBs would make it imperative to import the numbers for implementation of DAS within the 
timelines fixed and in this regard reduction of basic customs duty to zero level for STBs 
and other equipment related to digital addressable broadcast was proposed as a one -time 
measure to boost the pace of digitalization leading to complete switch over by December, 
2014 to DAS regime.  Thus the Ministry has considered this aspect from the policy angle 
and the same was considered by the CoS in its meeting of 10.2.2012. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 25) 
 
 The Directorate of Advertising and  Visual Publicity is the nodal multi media 
advertising central agency to execute publicity campaigns through advertisements etc. on 
behalf of various Ministries/Departments of Government of India, Autonomous Bodies and 
Public Sector Undertakings. 
  
 The Co mmittee note with concern that some Ministries/Departments have been 
issuing display advertisements directly in violation of Clause -3 of the Advertisement Policy 
of the Government, which provides that all Central Govt. Ministries/ Departments/ Attached 
& S ubordinate Offices/ Field Offices shall route their advertisements, including display 
advertisements, through DAVP. More so even when Ministries are violating the guidelines 
of Clause 3 including financial guidelines, there are no penal provisions and henc e the 
Ministry is not in a position to invoke them. The immediate fall out of such violation by the 
Ministries/Departments has resulted in small, medium and regional language newspapers 
not getting their due share. Many regional newspapers have been allegi ng favoritism by 
DAVP. The Committee are given to understand that even when the Ministry has time and 
again taken up the issue with the Ministries/Departments to route their advertisements 
through DAVP only, the Ministries /Departments continue to violate the provisions of 
Clause-3. Further the Secretary during the deliberations informed the Committee that the 
payment situation has been put up online, as it is the major source of corruption. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should incorporate some pen al provision in the above 
advertisement policy so as to discourage this trend. 
 

48 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter regarding violation of Clause 3 of the advertisement policy has been 
taken up by this Ministry seriously.  Such violations have been brough t to the notice of 
Cabinet Secretary, who in turn has written to all defaulting Ministries to route their 
advertisements through DAVP.  As such, it is expected that there may not be many  cases 
of violations in future.  
 
(Ministry of I&B I.D. No.10/21/2011-MUC dated 27.7.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 29 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Film and Television Institute of India, Pune 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 30) 
 
 The Committee observe that PG diploma courses in various disciplines of film and 
television, awarded by the institute do not enable the students to take up higher studies 
and research. Therefore, the possibility of getting equivalent status for its PG Diplomas 
from the Ministry of HRD/ Association of Indian Universities as in the case of National 
School of Drama is being explored by the institute by taking up the issue with HRD and the 
Association of Indian Universities. The Committee desire that the issues relating to 
upgrading the status of FTII and its courses should be sorted out expeditiously.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the definite plan of the Ministry for 
accomplishment of the above   proposal. 
 
 Further, the Committee during their study visit to Pune in the year September, 2008 
had observed that the intake of foreign students had been less than the prescribed number 
of seats. The Committee had been informed that better co -ordination with different 
Embassies, ICCR and other Film schools were being resorted to increase the number of 
foreign students in FTII. The Committee wou ld like to know whether the above measures 
have helped in increasing the intake of foreign students alongwith the current status of 
foreign students enrolled in FTII as on date.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is the endeavour of the institute to have a glo bal academic interaction with 
important films schools of the world. Students from many countries keep visiting FTII for 
short duration courses as well as three year PG diploma courses. Presently, there are 
seven foreign students studying in FTII. One seat each in all the four basic courses in film 
in FTII is reserved for foreign students who are admitted through ICCR. These include 
students from Sri Lanka, Poland, Bangladesh, Azerbaijan, France and Switzerland. In 
recent years, students from Kuwait, USA, Fr ance, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Nepal and 
Canada have also studied in FTII.  FTII is also making serious efforts to have more 
academic exchanges with institutions abroad.    
 
[Ministry of I&B OM No. 306/2/2012-F(F) dated 12.06.2012 ] 

49 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 32 of the Chapter-I) 

50 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
The preparation for Twelfth Plan 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 4) 
 
 The Committee have consistently been raising the iss ue of delay in approval of the 
schemes of the Ministry while examining Demands for Grants of the previous year. The 
whole Plan period of the Eleventh Plan was over and four important schemes viz. Global 
Film School, Setting up of National Centre of Excelle nce for Animation, Gaming and 
Special Effects, National Film Heritage Mission under Film Sector and International 
Channel under Broadcasting Sector could not be formally approved during the long period 
of five years. The Committee have consistently been ca utioning the Ministry to streamline 
the approval system so that the situation of approvals in Eleventh Plan is not repeated 
during the Twelfth Plan.  
 
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry that lessons have 
not been learnt by th e Ministry. The aforesaid four schemes which grappled with the 
process of approvals have now been put under the category of new schemes for the 
Twelfth Plan which means that the schemes would again go through the long process of 
approvals. The Committee fi nd that some sort of work would have been done by the 
Ministry in coordination with Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance in the context of 
passing through the various phases of formal approvals. The Ministry could have started 
from the stage the approva l process was left during the Eleventh Plan which could have 
made these schemes on the implementation mode during the first year of the Twelfth Plan. 
Nevertheless, the Committee now exhort the Ministry to look into the issue in the light of 
the aforesaid o bservation of the Committee and ensure that the implementation of the 
schemes start during the first year itself that too in the earlier part of the year so that the 
allocations earmarked for the year 2012-13 are utilized.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In fact the Ministry has been going ahead exactly in the same way as desired by 
Hon‟ble Committee.  A great deal of work was done in respect of four schemes in 
“conceptualizing” and taking up of pre -implementation activities, like preparation of 
Detailed Project Report.  In the case of scheme named “National Film Heritage Mission”, 
even the in-principle approval was obtained from Planning Commission.  Pending approval 
of outlay for the 12 th Plan by Planning Commission, the Ministry has drawn up a time 
bound acti on plan to get the schemes appraised and approved on the basis of outlay 
approved for Annual Plan 2012 -13 in order to ensure that the implementation of the 
schemes could start at the earliest.    It is expected that the schemes will be implemented 
from the first year of the 12th Plan.    
 
[Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 4/31/2012-PC dated 26.06.2012] 
 

51 
 
Addressing to the issue of systemic problems. 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 6) 
 
  The Committee find that the systemic problem is another reason resulting into under 
spending of the Plan programmes of the Ministry. When asked about the details of the 
systemic issues the Committee have been apprised that the under -spending of Capital 
Expenditure is due to lack of coordination among various wings in the Directorates, dis putes 
raised by suppliers causing non -fruition of purchase proposals resulting in low expenditure in 
Capital head are some of the administrative impediments attributable to systemic problems. 
The Ministry has elaborated that in order to expedite the procur ement process and effective 
use of plan funds various measures including revamping of the organization are being 
contemplated. The Committee observe that lack of coordination among various wings is an 
urgent area which need to be addressed to ensure the ef fective functioning of the various 
wings of the Ministry. The Ministry need to formulate some sort of structured mechanism to 
achieve the coordination among various wings in the Directorate. The Committee may also 
like to be apprised about the details of t he revamping exercise. The various proposed 
initiatives should urgently be taken within the stipulated time frame for the effective functioning 
of the various wings which would ensure proper implementation of the plan schemes and cent 
percent utilization o f the resources. The Ministry itself has acknowledged that the present 
procurement system based on procedures prescribed in the DGS&D Manuals does not suit to 
the requirement of a commercial organisation like Prasar Bharati. The Committee understand 
that the manuals of Doordarshan and All India Radio were last revised in the year 1989. The 
Ministry has assured that a new manual would be drawn up to replace the outdated DGS&D 
Manual. The Committee strongly recommend that the new manual should be formulated 
within the stipulated timeframe to ensure an effective procurement system with AIR and 
Doordarshan.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has taken serious note of the above observation of the Committee and 
constituted a Procurement Manual Committee on  31.03.2012 comprising Member (Fin); E -in-
C, Doordarshan and two outside experts/consultants for revision of Procurement Manual and 
review/updating of tender documents. 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. 502/2/2012-B(D) dated _________] 
 
 
IT Automation and Expansion of Doordarshan’s DTH Platform 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 11) 
 
 During the examination of Demands for Grants 2011 -12 on measures being taken 
by Prasar Bharati to generate revenue, the Ministry had stated that it was proposed to 
move towards the use of tools provided by IT to enable automation of various functions so 
as to bring down the man power requirement. Further, Doordarshan is in the process of 
increasing the number of channels in its DTH platform and these channels are proposed to 
be allocated in its DTH platform which is to be allocated by auction method and thereby 
generating more revenue. The Committee are concerned to see that though AIR had 

52 
 
proposed “E -Governance by implementing ERP system” in XI Plan for effective 
management of the vast infrastructure but it could not be approved and this scheme has 
now been proposed as a fresh scheme in XII plan at a cost of Rs. 70 Cr. The Committee 
are not convinced with the reasons cited by the Ministry that though comments were 
sought from the Planning Commission, no comments were received. Later on the Planning 
Commission had opined that the requirements of Doordarshan may also be included in the 
SFC Proposal. Accordingly, requirements of the Doordarshan were obtained. Total 
requirements of AIR & Doordarshan could not be met within the allocated amount of ` 28 
crores during the 11 th plan. Therefore, this scheme could not be put up for approval and it 
was decided to take it up as a fresh scheme in 12th plan. About the proposal for generating 
revenue by Doordarshan through increase in number of channels in DTH platform the 
Committee was informed that Doordarshan‟s DTH platform at present has capacity of 59 
Standard Definition (SD) TV channels. A plan scheme for up -gradation of Doordarsha n‟s 
DTH platform to 97 TV channels was approved by the Government in August, 2010. 
Prasar Bharati Board later approved further expansion of Doordarshan‟s DTH platform to 
150 TV channels. An additional satellite transponder was required for up -gradation of DTH 
platform. The Committee feel that the Ministry should have done adequate preparatory 
work before embarking upon both these schemes. Once the scheme has been 
conceptualized, the reasons for under performance are untenable. Taking a serious note 
of the w ay the Ministry has addressed the above issues, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should take up the project on priority basis and expedite approval from the 
Planning Commission and all corrective action may be taken so as to utilize the outlay 
effectively in the Twelfth Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has taken serious note of the above observation of the Committee 
and would take effective steps for speedy approval and implementation of the scheme in 
both the Directorates. However, the  Scheme for up -gradation of Doordarshan‟s DTH 
platform to 97 TV channels was approved by the Government in August, 2010. Prasar 
Bharati Board later approved further expansion of Doordarshan‟s DTH platform to 150 TV 
channels. Up-gradation of DTH platform from 59 to 97/150 TV channels was dependent on 
availability of an additional transponder from Deptt. of Space (DOS). The matter regarding 
allocation of an additional transponder on INSAT 4B Satellite had been taken up with DOS 
and in various meetings with th em. Doordarshan was informed that its requirement of an 
additional transponder was being considered favourably. However, DOS informed in 
November, 2011 that they were unable to meet Doordarshan‟s immediate requirement of 
additional transponder on INSAT 4B Due to non-availability of additional transponder from 
DOS, it was decided with the approval of Prasar Bharati Board to increase the capacity of 
Doordarshan‟s DTH platform to 75 channels utilizing the existing transponders available 
with Doordarshan. Tenders for up-gradation of DTH platform to 75 channels were received  
and processed. DOS have now made available an additional transponder on INSAT 4B to 
Doordarshan. In view of this, Prasar Bharati Board‟s approval has been sought for taking 
up the expansion of Doordarshan‟s DTH platform from 59 to 97 channels instead of 75 
channels.  
 
Provision for “e-governance” scheme (common to AIR & Doordarshan) has been made by 
AIR in their 12th Plan proposals. 
 

53 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. 502/2/2012-B(D) dated 31.07.2012 ] 
 
 
Under Utilization of Planned fund in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands  
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 14) 
 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that out of the planned allocation of ` 300 crore 
for up-gradation of studios and transmitters of All India Radio in the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, only ` 1.8 Crore has been spent. The Committee are not convinced with the 
reasons cited by the Ministry that delay in approval of schemes only on 27 th April, 2010 
delayed procurement and implementat ion of the project resulting in low expenditure. The 
committee are of the considered view that when the budgetary provision had already been 
made for the project, the Ministry should have set the physical targets, closely monitored 
the progress of physical  targets and ensured full utilization of funds in the Island. The 
Committee take a serious note of the above underspending and recommend the Ministry 
to take adequate measures during 2012 -13 so that projects are expedited and funds 
utilized optimally during the current Financial Year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has taken serious note of the above observations of the Committee 
for strict compliance. 
 
Scheme of “Digitalisation” was approved on 27 th April 2010. All actions have been taken 
for completion of Schemes in Andaman & Nicobar Islands during 2012-13. 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. 502/2/2012-B(D) dated 31.07.2012 ] 
 
 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 16) 
 
The Standing Committee, in their various Repo rts have consistently been 
recommending for organizational and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati. The 
Standing Committee have been expressing serious concern over the non -implementation 
of various provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 such as constitution of a 
Parliamentary Committee and the Broadcasting Council as per provisions in the Act. In 
spite of the continuous insistence on implementation of these provisions, the Ministry has 
neither constituted a Parliamentary Committee and Broadcastin g Council nor these have 
been deleted from the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 by bringing amendments to the Act. The 
Committee observe that the Group of Ministers (GoM) on Prasar Bharati constituted to 
examine various issues pertaining to Prasar Bharati had made  a number of 
recommendations aimed at bringing about significant increase in the degree of efficiency in 
the overall operation of Prasar Bharati on one hand and improving governance in Prasar 
Bharati on the other. It has also undertaken comprehensive revie w to the Prasar Bharati 
Act, 1990 and suggested certain amendments to the Act. However, the Ministry are still in 
the process of preparing a separate cabinet Note for the amendments suggested by the 

54 
 
GoM to Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)  Act 1990. The Committee 
having seen the sad state of affairs in Prasar Bharati ’s functioning such as systemic 
problems, massive under -utilization of funds, acute shortage of staff etc. emphasize that 
the various provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 need to be reviewed 
comprehensively keeping in view the ongoing scenario and new legislations/ modifications 
to the existing Act should be brought to Parliament without any further delay. As 
elaborated by the Secretary during the course of evidence there i s also an urgent need to 
address the issue of relationship between Prasar Bharati and the Government and 
redefine it in clear -cut terms. The subject of „Review of the Functioning of the Prasar 
Bharati Organization ‟  is already under the examination of the Committee and the 
Committee will come out with appropriate recommendations on the subject in due course. 
However, going by the way the organization is functioning at this juncture and the views 
expressed by the Sec retary and the CEO Prasar Bharati, the Committee at this point of 
time would like to emphasize that comprehensive amendments to the Act are long overdue 
and the Ministry after having wider consultations with all concerned should expeditiously 
bring in a co mprehensive amendment to the Prasar  Bharati Act, 1990 so as to address 
issues relating to the organization.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on Prasar Bharati (PB) to 
examine various issues pertaining to the functioning of PB. The GoM has also undertaken 
a comprehensive review of various provisions of the Act in the light of the experience and 
developments since the creation of PB and recommended certain amendments to the Act. 
While making these recommendation s, the GoM also kept in mind its additional mandate 
given to them for examining governance structure of PB and the relationship between the 
Government and PB.These amendments are aimed at improving governance in PB, 
making the Chairperson and Members more accountable and enabling the Government to 
make timely interventions and effectively supervise the functioning of PB. As directed by 
the GoM, the Ministry initially prepared a Cabinet Note on all recommendations of the GoM 
and it was sent to Cabinet Secret ariat. The PMO, meanwhile, directed the Ministry to 
complete inter-ministerial consultation on the proposal. The Cabinet Note was accordingly 
circulated to Department of Expenditure (DoE), Department of Revenue, DoPT, 
Department of Pension & Pensioners' We lfare (DPPW), Planning  Commission, 
Department of Telecommunications(DoT),  and Department of Space (DoS), seeking their 
comments. Besides the GoM recommendations on financial, manpower and employees 
issues of PB, the aforesaid Cabinet Note also contained c ertain legislative proposals 
relating to amendments to the PB Act, 1990. As some of the recommendations of the GoM 
with regard to financial restructuring of PB and filling up of essential category posts were 
considered to be implemented on priority with th e approval of the Cabinet, it was decided 
to de-link the proposal for amendments to PB Act from the Cabinet Note, which was earlier 
circulated for inter-ministerial consultation. Accordingly, the earlier Cabinet Note has been 
withdrawn, and it has been decided to move a separate Cabinet Note for amending Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990, based on the recommendations of 
GoM. 
 
 

55 
 
Commonwealth Games and Related Issues 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 17) 
 
 The Committee are given to under stand that the Ministry had requested the CVO 
Prasar Bharati to investigate into 17 issues and identify and pinpoint irregularities and 
lapses in the Commonwealth Games.  However, in the meantime the CBI informed the 
Prasar Bharati that all the issues exce pt issue No. 14 on „customization of venues‟ are 
under their scope of enquiry and the CVO inquiry will interfere with the investigation being 
conducted by CBI.  The CVO investigation has since been kept on abeyance.  The only 
issue i.e. issue No. 14 relati ng to „customization of venue‟ which was investigated by the 
CVO is under the examination of the Ministry.  The Ministry is awaiting communications 
from CBI on all the 16 other issues on irregularities and lapses. The Committee desire the 
Ministry to follow up and keep track of the CBI investigation and apprise the Committee of 
the findings as and when it is made available to them.  The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to furnish to the Committee the details of the CVO findings on issue No. 14 
„customization of venues‟ which is currently being examined for their information.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
            The recommendation of the Committee regarding follow -up with the CBI has been 
noted for compliance.  The following sub -points of investigation w ere identified by the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in respect of item No. 14 „customization of venues‟: 
 
(I) Whether the cost of customization of venues was deliberately kept below Rs. 20  
crore by Smt. Aruna Sharma, former Director General, Doordars han (DG:DD) to bring it 
within the sanctioning power of DG:DD? 
 
(II) Whether the subsequent increase to Rs. 27 crore was based on filed requirements 
which could not have been envisaged at the time of finalization of the scope of work? 
 
2. The Chief Vigilance Of ficer, Prasar Bharati (CVO) submitted an investigation report 
which was under examination in the Ministry.  In the meantime, on 22.02.2012, a new 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) was appointed in the Prasar Bharati. The Ministry has 
sought comments of the new  CEO, Prasar Bharati on the report of CVO.  The comments 
of CEO, Prasar Bharati are awaited. 
 
 
Emergence of Cross Media Holdings  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 20) 
 
 The Committee find that the Ministry had sponsored a study by Administrative Staff 
College o f India, Hyderabad which has established existence of Cross Media 
Ownership/cross media monopoly in various segments of the Country. The extensive 
study has recommended that Cross Media Ownership Rules for Broadcasting, Print and 
the News Media must be put  in place. It has also suggested that prior to Setting up of 
Media rules, periodic market analysis should be conducted to ascertain the structure of 

56 
 
ownership and the level of competition. The ASCI Report had also stated that the equity 
ownership on restri ction in number of channels owned as provided in the Draft 
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill are inadequate and needs to be modified. The 
Committee are surprised to note that though the above Study had established the 
existence of cross media holdings,  the Ministry, apart from timely uploading the Study 
Report for seeking comments from various Stakeholders, has neither taken any concrete 
action in accordance with suggestion/recommendation of the ASCI study nor set any 
specific deadline to finalize/formu late the rules on Cross Media. The Secretary instead of 
giving his considered view dealt with the issue of monopoly in the context of DTH. The 
Committee may like to put on record that some of the stakeholders who deposed before 
the Committee in the context  of examination of The Cable TV (Regulation) Network 
Second Amendment Bill, 2011 brought before the Committee the emergence and growing 
trend of cross media holdings in the country. The Committee may like to emphasize that 
the issue merits urgent attention  and need to be addressed before it emerges as a threat 
to our democratic structure. The Ministry, therefore, should formulate their stand on the 
issue of cross media ownership in coordination with TRAI after taking into account all 
related aspects and the  prevalent international practice followed by the suitable 
legislation/guidelines in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has indentified the issue of cross media ownerships as an important 
and crucial issue affecting fair competition in t he Indian media landscape, particularly in 
the context of several changes and convergence of technologies. TRAI has earlier looked 
into the issue of media ownership and made its recommendations on 25.2.2009. These 
recommendations were examined in the Minis try and, as recommended by TRAI the 
Ministry sponsored a study through Administrative Staff of India (ASCI) in July, 2009. The 
study dealt with the nature and extent of cross media ownership, existing regulatory 
framework, relevant market and international  experience. The Ministry has placed   study 
of ASCI in the public domain for seeking stakeholder views/comments.  
 
 Since several changes have taken place over the last three years in the media 
sector as also keeping in view the technological advancements , developments in 
convergence and changes in media consumption pattern, the Ministry felt that a stage has 
come to address issues of cross media restrictions afresh. Accordingly a reference to TRAI 
was sent on 16.5.2012 to look into the issue of cross hold ing and make appropriate 
recommendations on the following issues:- 
 
 In the present emerging scenario more and more broadcasting companies owning 
television channels are venturing into various distribution platforms, namely cable TV 
distribution, DTH, and IPTV etc. Similarly many companies owning distribution platforms 
are also entering into television broadcasting. This type of vertical integration can seriously 
affect competition and promote monopolistic practices. Therefore, there is a need to 
address such vertical integration. TRAI may suggest measures that can be put in place to 
address vertical integration in order to ensure fair growth of the broadcasting sector. 
  
 In another scenario companies have controls/ownerships across print, TV and 
Radio leading to horizontal integration. At present there is no restriction for a company to 

57 
 
have ownership across Radio, Television and Print mediums. Such a situation may 
prevent plurality of news and views and, in turn, may have several implications including 
ensuring quality services at reasonable prices. TRAI may also look at this issue and 
suggest appropriate measures in this regard. The recommendations of TRAI on the above 
issues are awaited. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 27) 
 
  The Ministry proposes to convert the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
into an International Media University under the Scheme of Up -gradation of IIMC to 
international standa rds, which will allow it to award its own degrees in place of existing 
post graduate diploma degree courses. The Committee are disappointed to note that the 
Ministry has been extremely slow in implementing the scheme. The scheme was initiated 
at the beginn ing of the Eleventh Plan and five years later, the approvals are still pending 
with the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). The Committee observe that 
IIMC had approached the Ministry of HRD seeking its approval to make PG Diploma 
courses of IIMC  equivalent to Master degree. However, the Ministry of HRD/University 
Grant commission (UGC) had not agreed with the proposal and observed that the 
courses/syllabi proposed by IIMC for its PG Diploma Programmes have not been found to 
be of Masters Level in their present form. IIMC has been advised by the Ministry of HRD to 
resubmit the revised proposal after taking into consideration the observations of UGC so 
that further necessary action could be taken. The Institute as of now cannot award degree 
for which an Act of Parliament is required so as to confer the organization Degree granting 
power. The Committee was also informed that in view of the above development, it is felt 
that the process of bringing in an Act of Parliament would be fast tracked in order  to 
facilitate IIMC to get the Degree granting power. Justifying the Grant of degree granting 
power to IIMC even when its courses are not updated, the Secretary has stated that 
IIMC‟s content has to be different from university content. Therefore, the Mini stry wants to 
really make this point that the content has to be different from a two -year programme and 
therefore, like the IITs ‟ content are different from the engineering degree content of the 
State Universities, there is no complete parity between the t wo contents. The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry to put the scheme on fast track and introduce the Bill to 
Parliament to enable IIMC to award its own degree and allow international collaboration. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry of  HRD may be requested to give its approval 
to IIMC‟s content which is different from university content to enable IIMC to award its own 
degree as soon as possible in the Twelfth Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As recommended by the Committee on demand for grants (2012 -13) relating to the 
Ministry of l&B, following actions have been taken- 

58 
 
 
1. The draft Act of Parliament, incorporating the comments/ changes advised by the 
expert on the earlier draft bill has been forwarded to the Ministry by IIMC on 11.5.2012 for 
consideration. 
 
2. The revised/ modified sy llabi/ course contents proposed for" two year Advanced 
Post Graduate Diploma courses in Journalism (Hindi), Journalism (English), Radio & TV 
Journalism and Advertising & Public Relation, equivalent to Master's Degrees, to be 
offered by IIMC after taking in to consideration and incorporating the observations/ 
recommendations of the UGC Expert Committee have been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (HRD), Department of Higher Education, Govt. of India, on 
22.5.2012. 
 
Setting up of Media Council  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 28) 
 
  The Committee observe that in view of mushrooming of large number of schools 
across the Country which are imparting education and training in media related discipline, 
a need is being felt that a Media Council shoul d be set up on the lines of All India Council 
of Technical Education (AICTE) for electronic media to promote media education and 
research in the Country. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has taken up 
the matter of setting up of Media Counc il with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (HRD). The Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) as a first step 
has decided to set up a task force with representatives from stakeholders, Ministries, UGC, 
IGNOU etc. to examine and identify the pr oblem and suitable remedial steps including 
setting up of an accreditation mechanism. Keeping in view the urgent need for setting up of 
such a council, the committee recommend the Ministry to constantly follow up with the 
Ministry of Human Resource Develop ment on the above issue so that Media Council is 
immediately constituted to facilitate media education and training on media related 
discipline. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A task force with representatives from stakeholders, Ministries, UGC, IGNOU etc. 
has been constituted in the Ministry of Human Resource Development to examine and 
identify the problem and suitable remedial steps including setting up of an accreditation 
mechanism. The Task Force will submit its report/ recommendations within a period of on e 
year from the date of its first meeting. Ministry would constantly follow up with the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development and extend all support in the deliberations of the Task 
Force which is examining the issue relating to media education and traini ng on media 
related discipline. 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
   December, 2012  Standing Committee on 
   Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)         Information Technology 

59 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13th December, 2012 from 
1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7. Shri Tapas Paul 
8. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
9. Shri Javed Akhtar  
10. Shri Salim Ansari 
11. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra 
Agarwal, a Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the 
sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Ru les of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration of the 
Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and ….xxxxxx…….. After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any 
modification. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize 
and present the reports to the House during the o ngoing Session of 
Parliament. 
 
4. xxxxx……………….xxxxx……………..xxxxx…………………xxxxx……………xxxxx. 
 
5. xxxxx……………….xxxxx………………..xxxxx………………xxxxx……………xxxxx. 
 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
xxxxx Matters not related to the Report. 
 

61 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-
SECOND REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos. :- 1, 2, 3, 9, 13, 21, 22, 
23, 24, 29, 31, 32 & 33. 
 
 Total 13 
 Percentage 39.40 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:- 18 & 26  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 6.06 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:-5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, 19, 
25 & 30 
 
 Total 09 
 Percentage 27.27 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of 
interim nature 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.:- 4, 6, 11, 14, 16, 17, 20, 
27 & 28. 
 
 Total 09 
 Percentage 27.27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 