STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Television Audience Measurement in India’]
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010 /Sravana, 1932 (Saka)
14

FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Television Audience Measurement in India’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.08.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010 /Sravana, 1932 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 215
Price : Rs. 100.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
P AGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART-I
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 16
C HAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government ...................................................................... 26
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and require reiteration.................... 27
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are of interim nature .......................................... 36
A PPENDICES
I. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in
their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).... 78
II. Table showing the gist of Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee on which interim
replies have been furnished by Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting....................................... 79
III. Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2009-10)
held on 10 August, 2010 ................................................. 91

(As on 10 August 2010)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-2010)
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Milind Deora
* 5. Shri Charles Dias
6. Shri Rajen Gohain
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
** 9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
11. Shri Abdul Rahman
12. Shri Prem Das Rai
#13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji
16. Dr. Bhola Singh
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
(iii)
* Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 19th November, 2009
**Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 10th September, 2009
#Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 13th October, 2009

(iv)
19. Shri C. Sivasami
20. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
$23. Vacant
##24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
25. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
26. Shri Prabhat Jha
27. Shri P. Rajeeve
&28. Vacant
$$29. Vacant
30. Shri M.P. Achuthan
31. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar —Under Secretary
$Consequent on retirement of Shri Dharampal Sabharwal  w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
##Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 5th January, 2010.
& Consequent on retirement of Shri Shriram Pal w.e.f. 4th July, 2010.
$$Consequent on retirement of Shri N.R. Govindarajar w.e.f. 29th June, 2010.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Television Audience Measurement in India’ of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting.
2. The Sixty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2008. The Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting furnished their updated Action Taken Notes
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixty-seventh
Report on 20 January, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10 August, 2010.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Sixty-seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
N
EW DELHI;  RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
13 August, 2010 Chairman,
22 Sravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Television Audience Measurement in India’
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
2. In their Sixty-seventh Report which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 15 December, 2008 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day, the Committee had dealt with various issues concerning the objectives
of television viewership ratings, the players involved in the rating business,
the extent of coverage, the methodology and the sampling adopted for
rating, etc.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 35 Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting and categorized as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Para Nos:— 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 27
Total : 07
Chapter : II
(ii)Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:—
Para Nos:— Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter : III
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and require reiteration:—
Para Nos:— 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 31 and 32
Total : 07
Chapter : IV

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:—
Para Nos:— 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 30, 33, 34 and 35
Total : 21
Chapter : V
4. The Committee had examined the subject “Television Audience
Measurement in India” in detail and made 35 Recommendations/
Observations in their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).
The conclusions drawn in the Recommendations were arrived at after
getting the feedback/detailed consultations with television and film
personalities, field agencies, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India,
the Prasar Bharati, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation and the other
stakeholders as well as the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting. The Recommendations were made to make the system
of TRP rating system transparent, authentic, accountable and truly
reflective of the viewer’s choice. However, the Committee regret to
note that in as many as 21 recommendations (the gist of recommendations
and the action taken by the Ministry have been appended), no
conclusive action has been taken and as such the replies have been
categorized under the interim category. More so, in almost all the cases,
no firm timelines have been conveyed to bring them to a logical end
on the suggested lines. In most of the cases, it has been stated that
some issues have emerged while considering the TRAI’s recommendations
and as such they have been again referred to TRAI for further
suggestions/recommendations. While expressing unhappiness over the
way the decision on such important issues is being delayed, the
Committee strongly emphasize the need on the part of the Ministry
to expedite the action and address to the shortcoming in the extant
television viewership rating system. The Committee desire that while
formulating any guidelines/legislations to address to the various issues
concerning TAM, the recommendations/observations made by the
Committee in their Sixty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) should
be duly taken into consideration.
5. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
2

the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I and
Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early
date.
6. Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations/Observations which need
reiterations or merit comments.
A. Strengthening of staff strength in Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
7. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that out of the total staff strength of 64 of
Prasar Bharati’s Audience Research Unit including its 18 Field Units,
there were 30 vacancies as on 22 May, 2008 as a result of which
the assigned functions of the Unit are managed with much difficulty.
The Committee further note that the proposals of Prasar Bharati
have been sent to the Ministry to fill up the existing vacancies on
promotion for various categories of posts, as there is a ban on
direct recruitment. Prasar Bharati on the basis of their proposals
hope that the promotional posts would be filled up in the 2008-09
fiscal. Further, a Committee has been appointed to do a cadre review
of the audience research staff so as to remove the bottlenecks in
the existing structure. Prasar Bharati also proposes to combine the
present staff of the Audience Research Units of the All India Radio
and Doordarshan to overcome the staff constraints. In view of almost
50 per cent vacancies in the Audience Research Unit including the
Field Units and a ban on direct recruitment, the Committee urge
the Ministry to expedite the approval of the proposals submitted
by Prasar Bharati so that the promotional posts are filled up in the
2008-09 fiscal itself. The Committee also desire that the cadre review
of the audience research staff be completed at an early date in
order to remove the bottlenecks in the existing structure and enable
the ARU to function efficiently. The Committee feel that the proposal
3

to combine the present staff of the ARUs of AIR and DD is a measure
in the right direction as the synergy would strengthen the research
team at the headquarters and help deployment of sufficient staff
in different field units as per the requirement.”
8. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their Action
Taken Notes inter-alia replied as under:—
“In order to tackle the acute staff shortage and to strengthen the
AR Units of AIR & DD as advised by the Committee, redistribution
of posts in AR Units of AIR & DD was taken up with DG:AIR.
The Ministry initiated cadre review of Audience Research Staff in
order to remove stagnation of officers in the Audience Research
Units. However, the exercise had to be closed as it was advised
by Internal Finance Division that such cadre review should not be
undertaken in isolation for particular Unit and it has to be part of
the overall review of Prasar Bharati. Prasar Bharati is being requested
to give their recommendations on the cadre review of all the cadre
including Audience Research Staff in All India Radio and
Doordarshan.”
9. The Committee had made various suggestions relating to
organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati which include expediting
the approval of the proposals submitted by Prasar Bharati so that
promotional posts are filled up in 2008-09 fiscal itself and early
completion of the cadre review of the audience research staff. However,
the action taken note does not indicate any conclusive action taken on
such an important issue. Moreover, nothing has been mentioned about
the status of the proposals submitted by Prasar Bharati to the
Ministry with regard to filling up the existing vacancies on promotional
basis for various categories of posts. In respect of the cadre review of
the audience research staff, the action taken note indicates that the
exercise had to be closed as advised by Internal Finance Division
which is of the view that cadre review should not be undertaken
in isolation for particular unit and it has to be part of the overall
review of the Prasar Bharati. All this clearly indicates the callous
attitude of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to address such an important
issue. The Committee express unhappiness over the way the issues
related to organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati are being
handled by the Prasar Bharati and the Ministry even when almost a
decade has already passed since the Prasar Bharati was established.
4

The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would
like that the entire issue of organizational restructuring of Prasar Bharati
should be addressed in a stipulated time frame by the Ministry and
Prasar Bharati.
B. Financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
10. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee would also like to add a word of advice for the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting since they have chosen
to harp on Prasar Bharati being an autonomous body. Like most
of the other problems besetting the Prasar Bharati, the staff strength
in the Audience Research Unit and the consequent shortcomings
in its performances is because the Government have unduly delayed
decisions on the organizational and financial restructuring of the
Public Service Broadcaster. These have been discussed and
recommended upon by the Committee in several of their Reports,
the latest reference being in their 47th, 55th, 60th and 63rd Reports
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha). Notwithstanding the stopgap arrangements
being resorted to by Prasar Bharati to tide over the problem, the
solution to all the hardships being faced by Prasar Bharati would
be a thing of past if the issues pending with the Government are
expeditiously decided upon. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Government to settle all matters pertaining to the Public Sector
Broadcaster without any further delay.”
11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as
follows:—
“In order to strengthen Prasar Bharati, the Government on 7th March
2006 constituted a Group of Ministers to examine various issues
pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati including Capital
Restructuring and funding pattern for Prasar Bharati, status of
employees issue amongst others. Group of Ministers has
recommended that all employees recruited on or before 05.10.2007
shall be treated as Government employees on deemed deputation
to Prasar Bharati with all benefits eligible to Government employees.
The Cabinet approval has been obtained on 28.01.2009. However,
5

it came to the notice of the Ministry that certain clauses of the draft
bill required further clarification and amendment in consultation
with concerned Departments to remove certain ambiguities. A
revised Cabinet Note in this regard has been circulated to the
concern Ministries/Departments.”
12. The Committee note that the various issues pertaining to the
functioning of Prasar Bharati including capital restructuring and
funding pattern for Prasar Bharati, status of employees are consistently
being delayed due to one or the other reasons. Initially, the Group of
Ministers had recommended that all employees recruited on or before
5 October, 2007 shall be treated as Government employees on deemed
deputation to Prasar Bharati with all benefits eligible to Government
employees and accordingly Cabinet approval was obtained on
28 January, 2009. The action taken note further reveal that at a later
stage it came to the notice of the Ministry that certain clauses of the
draft Bill require further clarification and amendment in consultation
with concerned Departments to remove certain ambiguities. As such
the revised Cabinet note was circulated to the concerned Ministries/
Departments.
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants
(2010-11), the Committee have been updated on the aforesaid issue.
As per the latest information provided by the Ministry, the
proposals prepared by the earlier Group of Ministers in consultation
with Prasar Bharati were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure). The observations of the Department
of Expenditure are now under the consideration of Prasar Bharati
and once the observations are forwarded to Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, they would be placed before the Group of
Ministers. All this clearly indicates the casual attitude of the
Prasar Bharati and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
on various issues related to capital restructuring, funding pattern and
status of employees etc. While reiterating the earlier recommendation,
the Committee strongly recommend that all the issues should be
finalized in consultation with the Prasar Bharati and the concerned
Ministries/Departments within a stipulated time frame so that a
permanent solution is worked out for the effective functioning of Prasar
Bharati.
6

C. Check on violation of the content/programme/advertising code
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
13. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting have set up an Electronic Media Monitoring Centre
(EMMC) in Delhi which at present has the capacity to
simultaneously monitor 120 channels which can be increased to
300 channels. According to the Ministry, many a times complaints
are received against TV channels for the violation of Programme
and Advertising Codes prescribed under the Cable Television
Network(Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder
and it becomes difficult to get the information/footage from the TV
channels to verify the accuracy thereof. With the setting up of
EMMC, the Government will have the entire footage at their
command and any violation by TV channels can be immediately
seen by the authorities entrusted with monitoring these channels
and a report sent to the Government on the basis of which action
can be initiated. But the Committee are concerned to find that even
continuous monitoring of all broadcast contents of the channels by
EMMC is not sufficient to tackle the alleged manipulation of the
rating studies by the agencies as the Monitoring Centre is not
envisaged to do an audit of the agencies involved in the rating
system. Moreover, the Committee are given to understand that
EMMC alone would not be able to effectively monitor the violation
of the content/programme/advertising code as it is just one of the
three pillars in the Ministry’s overall vision, the other two being
a Regulator and a Legislation. In other words, if the Government
are able to put all three pillars in place simultaneously, then only
an effective monitoring system can emerge to check any violation
of the content/programme/advertising code as well as manipulation
of the rating studies by the agencies. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon the Ministry to take up the matter on priority basis
at the appropriate fora so as to complete the envisaged picture and
ensure that the aims and objectives for which EMMC was set up
are effectively fulfilled.”
14. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their Action
Taken Note have inter-alia replied as under:—
“For putting in place a Regulator, there is a need for an enabling
legislation. Government has been considering bringing a
7

comprehensive legislation to regulate broadcasting services which,
inter-alia, proposed to set up a regulatory authority for broadcasting
services. A draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill has
been discussed with stakeholders soliciting their views and
accordingly the proposed draft of Broadcasting Services Regulation
Bill was redrafted wherever required keeping in view the comments
of stakeholders including States/UTs. The draft Bill was also
discussed in the 26th SIMCON on 18-19 September, 2007 with the
representatives of States. It was decided to seek comments of States/
UTs after the said conference. Accordingly, the then Hon’ble Minister
of Information and Broadcasting addressed a letter on 9th October,
2007 to all Chief Ministers of States/UTs. Secretary I&B also
addressed D.O. letters to Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs on
7.11.2007 seeking comments of the State/UTs Governments. Last
reminder at the level of Minister of Information and Broadcasting
was sent on 14.09.2009 in connection with discussion of proposed
bill in 27th SIMCON. Only 24 States/UTs (18 States and 6 UTs) have
responded so far with their comments on the proposed draft of
the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill. Final view on the Bill
will be taken once the comments are received from remaining States/
UTs and consensus is arrived at with all stakeholders. Electronic
Media Monitoring Cell (EMMC) was set up with the objective of
monitoring content on Television channels reporting cases of
violation of programme and Advertising Codes to the Government/
Regulator which is being done by it and to that extent it has been
able to achieve its aim. However, in the absence of a Regulator,
EMMC is not sufficient to tackle the manipulation in ratings as
observed in the Report. It may, however, be mentioned that any
manipulation of the Rating studies by the Agencies can only be
checked by an Independent Audit which has also recommended
by TRAI. This will be considered while drafting the guidelines/
legislation for regulating TRP Agencies.”
15. The Committee note that even when the Ministry admit that
Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) alone would not be able
to tackle effectively the monitoring of violations of the content/
programme/advertising codes and manipulation in ratings as it is just
one of the three pillars in the Ministry’s overall vision, the other two
being Regulator and a ‘Legislation’, the finalization of the
comprehensive legislation covering all the issues is being unduly
8

delayed as reflected in the action taken note. While deploring the
lackadaisical attitude and lack of urgency on the part of the Ministry
on such an important issue, the Committee recommend that urgent
steps be taken to ensure that aforesaid Bill sees the light of the day
at the earliest.
D. Legality of the reference made to Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India
Recommendations (Para Nos. 28 and 29)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have also pondered over the question of legality
or otherwise of the reference made by the Ministry to the regulatory
body. They tend to agree with the contention of TRAI that as per
the TRAI Act, the regulatory body is responsible for the broadcasting
services, which primarily mean carriage aspect of broadcasting while
the subject matter of television audience measurement falls in the
content domain. That the Government did not invoke any section
of the Act while making the reference to TRAI further strengthens
this belief. The Ministry’s subsequent clarifications about the
reference being covered under Section 11(i), (iv) and (vii) of TRAI
Act, 1997 merely because their invocation had been mentioned in
the context of the reference by TRAI while floating the Consultation
Paper on the subject also does not cut ice. TRAI had categorically
informed the Committee during their oral evidence that there was
a very strong opinion in the Authority to return the reference to
the Government, as it did not fall in their domain. However, they
retained the reference considering it a national cause and because
of its presumed linkage with consumers/subscribers. And in order
to facilitate this they had to find out and invoke sub-sections (iv)
and (vii) of Section 11 of the Act.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee also note with deep regret that TRAI has written
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting that rather than
creating a separate regulator, the content may also be assigned to
them. But the Ministry, who have with much alacrity referred the
ratings business that has a profound bearing on content to TRAI,
9

have taken a stand before the Committee that there will be a
regulator for the purpose once the Broadcasting Bill becomes a law.
While there is a lot of merit in the logic of TRAI to have both the
carriage and content aspect under them for a holistic and
comprehensive approach, the Ministry’s stand suffers from several
infirmities and is unnecessarily delaying a well laid out oversight
of content being broadcast. The Ministry’s stand is also in contrast
of their assurance before the Committee that they would look at
it (content related issues) so that in future, TRAI is able to do so
without any difficulty. The Committee, therefore, desire that in
view of the ground situation and till the final view on the draft
Broadcasting Bill emerges, regulation of content which is governed
by the Advertisement and Programme Code of the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, should be assigned to TRAI
without any further delay.”
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as
under:—
“Although Television in India has been in existence for nearly five
decades now, it is only recently that the number of channels has
grown exponentially. From two channels prior to 1990–91, Indians
viewers were exposed to more than 50 channels by 1996 and to
360 as in June, 2008. The number has further grown to 422 till
February, 2009. The Ministry has been conscious of the role the
Audience Measurement system plays on the common viewers.
Discussions with TAM Media Research regarding methodology of
collecting viewership data, its utility/usefulness and for possibility
of manipulation as well as its effect on the TV channels in general
leading to broadcasting of sensational issues or create sensational
news out of innocuous news began in April, 2007 and TAM Media
Research was asked to make a presentation before the Hon’ble MIB
on 20.7.2007. Further, meeting at the level of Secretary(IB) was held
in August, 2007 with a-MAP and a meeting with large number of
stakeholders was held under the chairmanship of Hon’ble MIB on
7.10.2007. Many more such meetings and discussions were also
held from time to time. Therefore, it may be seen that efforts made
by the Government were for eliciting expert response and was duly
responded to by TRAI. The Government is fully conscious of the
10

impact of rating and is of the belief that a transparent and
representative sample for measuring the audience viewership is a
must. In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations and observations of
the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully considered while
formulating the guidelines/legislation on the subject.”
Reply to the Recommendation (Para No. 28)
18. Further, the Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted
as under:—
“The TRAI has not specifically written to this Ministry that rather
than creating a separate regulator, the content may also be assigned
to them. However, while making its recommendations on
formation of Policy Guidelines for Television Audience
Measurement/Television Rating Points, it recommended that in view
of significant influence exercised by Content on the society, the
regulation of content should also be transferred to TRAI. Till a
final view is taken on the draft Broadcasting Bill and the setting
up of an independent broadcast regulator for the recommendation
that regulation of content should be assigned to TRAI without any
further delay may be premature at this stage and will require wider
consultation with stakeholders.”
Reply to the Recommendation (Para No. 29)
19. While noting that there is a lot of merit in the logic of TRAI
to have both the carriage and content aspects under them for a holistic
and comprehensive approach, the Committee had recommended that
in the view of the ground situation and till the final view on the draft
Broadcasting Bill emerges, regulation of content which is governed by
the Advertisement and Programme Code of the Cable TV Networks
(Regulations) Act, 1995 should be assigned to TRAI without any further
delay. The Ministry has not accepted the recommendation of the
Committee on the plea that it would be pre-mature to assign content
aspect to TRAI till a final view is taken on the draft Broadcasting Bill
and the setting up of an independent Broadcast regulator for which
wider consultations with other stakeholders are required. The Ministry
has further stated that TRAI has not specifically written to assign
content to them, however, while making its recommendations for
11

formation of policy guidelines for television audience measurement/
television rating points, TRAI recommended for transfer of regulation
of content to them. The Committee are unable to comprehend the
difference between TRAI directly writing to the Ministry on an issue
or submitting its suggestion while considering some related issue. The
Committee conclude from the aforesaid position that the pleas made
by the Ministry are simply the delaying tactics. The Ministry are neither
finalizing the content regulation legislation nor giving any heed to the
interim measures suggested by the Committee. The Committee again
emphasize that the content regulation legislation should be introduced
in Parliament expeditiously and till the enactment is made, the
suggestion of TRAI should be considered seriously particularly when
Chairman TRAI had submitted before the Committee that all over the
world, the telecom regulator remained responsible for both transmission
and content aspects of broadcasting. The decision on the issue should
be arrived at and the Committee informed accordingly.
E. Comprehensive Legislation on Broadcasting Services
Recommendations (Para Nos. 31 and 32)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are highly perturbed to note that a suitable
legislation on broadcasting is yet to see the light of the day despite
several efforts of the Government during the last eleven years. Way
back in 1995, the Supreme Court pronounced that airwaves are
public property and have to be controlled and regulated by public
authority in the interest of the public. The Broadcasting Bill, 1997
was accordingly introduced by the Government in the Parliament,
but it lapsed. Another attempt was made when the Convergence
Bill, 2001 was introduced but even this lapsed with the dissolution
of the Thirteenth Lok Sabha. With the Government’s efforts including
preparation of 20 drafts of the legislation not bearing any fruits,
the ground situation today is that the Broadcasting services have
a system of oversight in bits and pieces. We have an Act to regulate
Cable networks and a surfeit of guidelines to regulate up-linking
of TV channels, DTH, FM Radio, Community Radio, down-linking
etc. This is not at all a happy situation. Isolated legislations and
guidelines on some aspects of a major service cannot be a substitute
12

to a self enabling and comprehensive legislation covering the entire
gamut of the activities of the concerned service.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee, however, have a nagging feeling that the Ministry’s
approach towards this important matter lacks the requisite
seriousness. Such prolonged consultation exceeding more than a
year with various stakeholders on a legislation which is already
hanging fire for more than a decade now are not only delaying
the matter but also proving detrimental to the biggest of all the
stakeholders, the public and the public interest. The Committee,
therefore, exhort the Ministry to complete the consultations with
the various stakeholders immediately and make sincere efforts to
fructify a self enabling, people friendly and comprehensive
legislation on broadcasting services without wasting further time.”
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
21. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their Action
Taken Notes inter-alia replied as under:—
“Government has been considering bringing a comprehensive
legislation to regulate broadcasting services which inter-alia
proposed to set up a regulatory authority for broadcasting services.
A draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill has been
discussed with stakeholders soliciting their views and accordingly
the proposed draft of Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill was
redrafted wherever required keeping in view the comments of
stakeholders and posted on the website of the Ministry in July,
2007 soliciting further views of stakeholders including States/UTs.
In the 26th SIMCON held in September, 2007, the States expressed
an urgent need to put in place an independent and autonomous
regulator and urged the Government to pass a Broadcasting Bill
at the earliest. Accordingly, the draft of the proposed Broadcasting
Services Regulation Bill, 2007 was circulated for eliciting the views
of the States/UTs. Only 24 States/UTs (18 States and 6 UTs) have so
far submitted their comments on the proposed Bill. It is observed
from the comments received so far, that while all of them have in
principal agreed with the Bill, a few States/UTs have made certain
suggestions. The States have welcomed the idea of having some
13

regulatory powers as proposed in the Bill. The Government is
striving to build a consensus on an acceptable draft for introduction
in Parliament. The matter has again been discussed by the Hon’ble
State Information Ministers in 7th SIMCON held on 5th December,
2009. Ministry has taken a fresh initiative for setting up of an
Independent Broadcasting Regulator and a series of consultations
with stakeholders by way of wide ranging consultation process
that has been started for meeting with the objective of achieving
consensus on the Content Code and putting the Broadcasting
Regulator in place. HMIB has already held discussions with media
heads on 10.7.2009. Subsequently, Secretary level meetings have
been held with various stakeholders. Meetings with Indian
Broadcasting Federation (IBF), Multi System Operator’s Alliance,
News Broadcasters Association (NBA), Cable Operators Federation
of India (COFI). Advertising Standards Council of India and
Broadcasting Editors Association. To take the process further, a
Task Force has been constituted on 27.11.2009 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, I&B with two representatives each from
News Broadcasters Association, Indian Broadcasting Foundation
and Broadcast Editors Association. The Task Force would interact
with the different stakeholders to understand their perspective on
the need, scope and jurisdiction, organizational structure, powers
and functions of independent Broadcast regulator and issues relating
to regulation of content. The Task Force held its first meeting on
29th December, 2009 to discuss the methodology, to identify various
groups, frequency of meetings etc. The Task Force proposed to
furnish its recommendations to the Government within two
months.”
22. The Committee had observed that a suitable legislation on
the broadcasting is yet to be materialized despite the Supreme Court
judgment way back in 1995 and had asked the Government to fructify
a self enabling, people friendly and comprehensive legislation on
broadcasting services without wasting any further time. However, the
action taken note reveal that inspite of having wider consultations
with different stakeholders such as Indian Broadcasting Federation,
Multi System Operator’s Alliances, News Broadcasting Association,
Cable Operators Federations of India, Advertising Standard Council
of India and Broadcasting Editors Association and discussions at various
14

fora for such a long time, the Government seemed to have not reached
at a logical end.
The Committee note that a Task Force has now been constituted
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting with two representatives each from the News Broadcasters
Association, Indian Broadcasting Foundation and Broadcast Editors
Association to interact with different stakeholders to understand their
perspectives on the need, scope and jurisdiction, organizational
structures, powers and functions of independent Broadcast Regulator
and issues relating to regulation of contents. The Task Force was to
submit its report within 2 months from the date of constitution i.e.
29th December, 2009. The Committee hope that the consultations by
Task Force would have been over by now and the Ministry would be
in a position to take the final view on the legislation. The Committee
are of the opinion that the most affected party in this State of affair
is the public and as such the comprehensive legislation covering all
the issues including content regulation should be introduced in
Parliament without any further delay.
15

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that Doordarshan has its own Audience
Research Unit (ARU) since its inception with the objective of providing
research inputs, planning and broadcasting need-based programmes and
improving the effectiveness and usefulness of these programmes to the
people of the country. The unit conducts pre-telecast and post-telecast
studies viz. audience profile and assessment, viewership surveys,
evaluative/impact studies as per the requirement at the Directorate and
Kendra levels. In addition to the above research works, the unit undertakes
analysis of voluntary feedback received through viewers’ letters, press
comments, preparation of programme composition, Annual Reports, etc.
The Committee find that the ARU conducts television ratings only for
Doordarshan channels in both the rural and urban areas with the help
of the representative samples. Doordarshan is, however, utilizing the data
of both its in-house audience research as well as of private agencies to
meet its requirements of ratings. The Committee feel that a greater caution
should be exercised by Doordarshan while utilizing the data of the private
agencies in the fulfillment of its own requirement of rating studies, because
the methodology adopted by the private rating agencies is allegedly not
above board and purely commercial in nature besides suffering from a
number of shortcomings, as discussed earlier. The onus, therefore, lies
with the Ministry and Prasar Bharati to bring in some kind of synergy
to ensure that Doordarshan is not deceived while utilizing the data of
the private agencies and its audience research system becomes broad
based.
Action Taken by the Government
Doordarshan (DD) has already brought to the notice of the
Parliamentary Committee the fact of TAM’s coverage areas and meters
locations being mainly C&S homes and thus favouring satellite channels
at the cost of Doordarshan. Hence Doordarshan is supplementing its
Audience Research data with TAM data. As there is no other currency
available to give the holistic picture and acceptable to the industry
16

DD is also using the same data. DD is also processing the proposals of
a-MAP and TMR to offer adequate competition to TAM. As a-MAP proposes
to cover small towns and rural areas, it could be more representative of
the Indian TV audience. It may also boost DD viewership ratings, resulting
in a possibly greater share of the ad market.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee observe that in DART, daily viewership data is
collected through diary from representative panel members covering both
rural and urban audience of the country. In order to disseminate the TRP
ratings, the reports by the in-house research unit are prepared on weekly
basis at the Kendra level and submitted to the concerned Kendras as well
as the Directorate for use by the programme planners, producers, policy
makers and marketing managers to plan commercial broadcast and to
improve the quality of the programmes. This panel diary system is
reportedly cheaper, transparent and reliable and as useful as the people
meter system from utility perspective. So far as the accuracy of the
measurement is concerned, the Committee are informed that the panel
diary system lags behind the people meter system, which records
viewership data minute by minute procured through latest software for
analysis and reporting. However, the Committee find that although the
people meter system gives accurate measurement, yet it is reportedly not
foolproof, too costly to be acquired by a single broadcaster and too
complicated for the layman’s understanding unlike the panel diary system.
As discussed elsewhere, the people meter system lacks transparency as
it is not open to the broadcasters/user agencies or any other agency
including the Government besides promoting television media’s role for
commercial gains. Thus, in nutshell, the panel diary system adopted by
Doordarshan, despite its limitation in accuracy, is miles ahead of the
people meter system on issues of transparency, reliability and authenticity.
The best aspect of the system is that it penetrates the rural areas and
keeps in view the television media’s role in larger public interest. The
Committee are, therefore, of the view that efforts should be made to
explore the possibility of making the studies of the panel diary system
as accurate as the people meter system, if it is at all so, failing which
Prasar Bharati and the Ministry should chalk out an alternate method
containing all the positive features already existing in DART plus the
accuracy of measurement factor making the rating system of Doordarshan
the best one.
17

Action Taken by the Government
Doordarshan (DD) has informed that it is planned to cover the entire
country by considering the a-MAP proposal and simultaneously
strengthening the DART of DD. The sample size of DART being increased
gradually to 14,400 from the present 5200.
In addition to this as suggested by the committee to chalk out an
alternative method containing all the positive features already existing
in DART, DD has planned to have a viewership survey throughout the
country with one lakh sample size once in a year. This survey would
cover all regions to give an in depth picture of diverse characteristics of
various socio-economic groups.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that Doordarshan pays Rs. 1.60 crore annually
to TAM Media Research for supply of Television Ratings on weekly basis
for urban audiences of cities/towns having more than one lakh population
and covered by the agency. Although Prasar Bharati is on record that the
ratings of TAM Media Research are highly prejudiced against Doordarshan
channels and programmes, yet it has tied up with TAM Media Research
for getting feedback on Ratings studies of urban areas. One of the main
reasons for compulsion on Prasar Bharati to have a tie-up with TAM
Media Research, inspite of its obvious weaknesses in the rating system
and biased attitude against Doordarshan programmes, has been stated
to be the acceptance of the ratings of the TAM Media Research as the
basis for the programmes scheduling, content tailoring, etc. by the
broadcasters, advertisers and the production houses under the aegis of
IBF. Secondly, in January 2007, TAM Media Research expanded its coverage
from 70 cities to 148 cities. As this expansion was strictly urban and
restricted to Cable and Satellite homes, it resulted in significant decrease
in the ratings of DD channels/programmes. But surprisingly, when TAM
Media Research was requested by Doordarshan to enlarge the coverage
so as to cover the rural audiences, the private agency expressed its inability
to do so on the plea of scarcity of funds and asked for an additional
amount of Rs. 7.75 crore from Doordarshan. The Committee, however,
find that Prasar Bharati has been approached by the other private rating
agency i.e. a-MAP for a customized rural panel to unlock the true value
of Doordarshan. A-MAP alongwith another new player in the rating
business i.e. Television Monitoring and Research (TMR) has made
presentations to Prasar Bharati to cover parts of rural areas and for channel
18

mapping so as to reflect/increase the reach and effectiveness of the
Doordarshan channels. The Committee find that the total capital cost for
the project in the rural areas as per the tie-up made with-a-MAP would
be approximately Rs. 9.01 crore with an annual recurring cost of
Rs. 4.65 crore. The entire cost is to be borne by DD and a-MAP’s
remuneration for setting up the panel would be ten per cent of the capital
outlay. The Committee also find that the TMR proposal envisages a one
time meter cost of Rs. 50,000 per set. Additionally, around 100 nodes can
be set up at different places at a monthly cost of Rs. 7000 per node. The
best feature of TMR is that its technology permits the monitoring of all
the channels being broadcast by MSOs/Cable Operators/DTH, etc. which
would enable Doordarshan to see whether the cable operators are showing
select DD channels on the required bands with requisite quality of signals
as specified in the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. The
Committee find much worth in the proposals of a-MAP and TMR, which
seems to be economically viable and intend to reflect Doordarshan’s reach
and increase its effectiveness in the rating studies. As a-MAP proposes
to cover small towns and rural areas, the Committee feel that it would
be more representative of the Indian Television audience and boost DD
viewership ratings resulting in a greater share of the advertisement market.
Similarly, TMR’s monitoring of the violation of mandatory showing of
DD channels by the cable operators would help DD to take corrective
measures which would translate into higher viewership and revenue and
facilitate better functioning of the Public Service Broadcaster. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Prasar Bharati should seriously
consider the proposals of a-MAP and TMR, more so when TAM Media
Research has conveyed its inability to correctly reflect the popularity of
Doordarshan channels and programmes on the plea of fund constraints.
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee has recommended Prasar Bharati to seriously
consider the proposal of a-MAP and TMR. Since the a-MAP’s proposal
was given one and half year back, DD has informed that a-MAP had been
asked to send an updated proposal after including monitoring of the
emerging technologies in rural areas. After receiving the proposal, the
same would be processed by DD. DD has informed that TMR’s proposal
had been received and after the presentation made by them, the proposal
has been examined by the technical and finance wings of Doordarshan
which have advised to go for open tendering process according to financial
rules. The terms and Conditions of the tender documents are being
prepared for a pilot project for a 3 months pilot project study to evaluate
the utility of TMR’s proposal in the next financial year 2009-10.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
19

Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that according to the Ministry the panel diary
system adopted by Doordarshan for its in-house rating studies
notwithstanding certain limitations, is a useful as the people meter system
adopted by the private rating agencies and DD has been exhorted to
broad base the DART system. But according to Prasar Bharati, DART has
lost its credibility and it may not be worthwhile to expand the DART
experiment. So much so that Prasar Bharati is contemplating investment
in installation of people meters in rural areas and some kind of joint
venture as an alternative to DART. The Committee fail to reconcile the
apparently contradictory statements and deprecate the Ministry’s casual
response and unacceptable plea that if Prasar Bharati says DART has
outlived its utility, then the Ministry has no comments to offer as
Prasar Bharati is an autonomous organization. The Committee are well aware
of the autonomous character of Prasar Bharati. They equally understand
the Ministry’s role and responsibility and desire that at least such
callousness on the part of the Ministry should be avoided while deposing
before any Parliamentary Committee or furnishing written replies to their
questionnaire. The Committee also recommend that Prasar Bharati, instead
of just mentioning the DART has outlived its utility/credibility, should
formulate certain concrete proposals in consultation with the Ministry
so that an alternative to Rating System can be worked out. The Committee
further find that the diary based system is still prevalent in many countries
to supplement the ratings done through the electronic meters. As such,
the panel diary system has to co-exist with and supplement the people
meter method, as also recognized by TRAI.
Action Taken by the Government
Doordarshan has informed that it is planned to enlarge the panel
for the DART study . For quick retrieval of data, system more efficient
processing of the panel diary system is being worked out. For designing
the system for efficient data utilization, computer experts would be
involved to revamp the present system. This would be in addition to the
present system of TAM as well as the a-MAP proposal.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
According to Prasar Bharati, if one of Doordarshan programmes
has a Television Audience Measurement rating of seven and another has
a rating of five, the programme which is lower in rating sometimes gets
more advertisement because advertisers are conscious of Doordarshan’s
20

reach and use it as a leverage. Prasar Bharati has also submitted that at
any given time if ratings of all cable and satellite and non-cable and
satellite homes are taken into consideration, they eyeballs caught by
Doordarshan programmes will be far more than the private channels. But
TAM Media Research does not project it. Similar apprehensions and
concerns about the credibility of the ratings done by TAM Media Research
have been conveyed to the Committee by eminent cine and TV personalities
and various stakeholders. The Committee while generally in agreement
with the above contention of Prasar Bharati would also like the
Broadcasting Corporation to ponder about its own role in the matter.
Had Doordarshan programmes been so popular as compared to that of
the private channels, they would have been able to attract more advertisers.
Such apprehensions of the Committee have been corroborated by the
plea taken by CEO, Prasar Bharati that Doordarshan does not really
consider revenue as the main motive when he was asked to State whether
Doordarshan was getting sufficient revenue by way of advertisements as
compared to the private channels. The Committee acknowledge that
Doordarshan, as a Public Service Broadcaster, has certain social obligations
to fulfil and has to cater to the entire spectrum of Indian population. But
simultaneously Doordarshan has to find ways and means to generate
adequate resources, which can be effectively utilized to augment the
infrastructure and produce quality programmes enabling it to compete
with the private channels. And getting sufficient advertisements could
be one such effective means. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry
and Prasar Bharati to realize the ground realities and take all possible
measures to ensure that Doordarshan gets adequate advertisements and
its viewership rating soars.
Action Taken by the Government
Doordarshan has concurred that the viewership of DD channels is
not being properly reflected in the TRPs as terrestrial homes and homes
in different parts of the country are not covered by TAM. The Ministry
agrees with the Committee that ratings should properly reflect the
combined strength of Doordarshan viewership pattern in terrestrial, C&S
homes and DTH. It would help Doordarshan to project true picture of
viewership to its clients. This matter has been taken up by Doordarshan
with the TAM for working out a combined consolidated data.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that although the quality of programmes of
Doordarshan has gone up to some extent, as claimed by Prasar Bharati,
21

yet there is scope for much improvement. The Committee are particularly
concerned to find that despite producing some good programmes,
Doordarshan does not have an effective marketing strategy to attract the
advertisers. They feel that in order to sustain competition from the private
channels and increase the ratings of Doordarshan programmes, it is
imperative that apart from improving the quality of programmes telecast
by Doordarshan to a marked extent, an effective marketing and promotion
strategy also needs to be evolved. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry and Prasar Bharati should take appropriate measures
to substantially improve the quality of programmes produced/telecast by
Doordarshan and put in place a vibrant and effective marketing strategy
in place so that more advertisers are attracted enabling Doordarshan to
generate substantial revenue and remain a strong contender in the
Television Viewership Ratings race.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry concurs with the views of the Committee that poor
reception quality of Doordarshan Channels has resulted in loss of
viewership and advertisement revenue. To enable Doordarshan to generate
more TRPs and revenue and strongly enforce the cable TV Network
(Regulation) Act, 1995 so as to translate into higher viewership and
revenue, DD has opened cable cells in all regional kendras to receive and
monitor and redress complaints about the quality of signals in C&S Homes.
The Section 4A (2) of the Cable Television Networks(Regulation)
Act 1995 provides that If the Central Government is satisfied that it is
necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, be notification in the
Official Gazette, specify one or more free-to-air channels to be included
in the package of channels forming basic service tier and any or more
such channels may be specified, in the notification, genre-wise for
providing a programme mix of entertainment, information, education
and such other programmes. Further, Section 8 of the Act provides
compulsory transmission of Doordarshan channels:–
(1) Every cable operator shall re-transmit –
(i) channels operated by or on behalf of Parliament in the
manner and name as may be specified by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
(ii) at least two Doordarshan terrestrial channels and one
regional language channel of a State in the prime band,
in satellite mode on frequencies other than those carrying
terrestrial frequencies.
22

(2) The channels referred to in sub-section (1) shall be re-
transmitted without any deletion or alteration of any
programme transmitted on such channels.
(3) The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)
established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Prasar
Bharati(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (25 of
1990) may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
number and name of every Doordarshan channel to be re-
transmitted by cable operators in their cable service and the
manner of reception and re-transmission of such channels.
The Ministry vide order dt. 19.02.2008, issued Directives to monitor
the availability of free-to-air channels and channels notified for mandatory
carriage on cable networks to State and Distt. level Monitoring Committee
for Pvt. Television Channels.
In addition DD has informed that they have taken the following
steps to improve the quality of the programming and generating more
revenues;—
1. Marketing divisions have been established at nine places in
India for direct marketing of Doordarshan programmes.
2. Doordarshan has already launched the scheme of self-financed
commissioning. It is helping in increasing revenue generation
and enhancing the quality of programming.
3. Doordarshan is now acquiring films from the rights holders
directly to increase the popularity of the channels. As a result,
revenue from films during prime time on DD National has
doubled.
4. A division known as Development Communication Division
has been functioning for taking care of govt. business. This
division is responsible for procuring businesses from various
govt. departments and public sector undertakings. This
initiative has also succeeded in increasing revenues and
quality of in-house programmes.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
As stated previously in the Report, the system of television audience
measurement has been in existence in the Country for last one and half
23

decade, functioning unrestrained and unchecked in the interest of a few
and with utter disregard to the genuine preferences and choices of the
viewers. Unfortunately, however, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting which is mandated with the task of overseeing broadcasting
services in the Country had never in these past fifteen years thought of
any intervention in the matter. It was only after the Committee had its
first personal interaction with the Ministry on 8 January, 2008 and gave
a bit of their mind on the goings on in the television rating business,
that the Ministry woke up from slumber and asked TRAI on 17th January,
2008 to give their recommendations on the system of television audience
measurement in the Country. For all these fifteen years this gross inaction
of the Ministry enabled a single rating agency to have a virtual free run
to monopolize the rating business. Thus, without any competition,
transparency and accountability, the system of audience measurement
instead of painting the large canvass of viewers preferences became a
tool to have decisive say in the content of programmes. The result is that
channels have been dishing out programmes which are neither reflective
of the preferences of common man nor in consonance with the social
ethos or the diversity of a Country like India. The reference to TRAI by
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the opinion of the
Committee was a knee jerk reaction in response to the Committee ongoing
examination and the mounting concerns and dissatisfaction being
expressed by media, consumer groups, broadcasters, other stakeholders,
etc.
Action Taken by the Government
Although Television in India has been in existence for nearly five
decades now, it is only recently that the number of channels has grown
exponentially. From two channels prior to 1990–91, Indian viewers were
exposed to more than 50 channels by 1996 and to 360 as in June, 2008.
The number has further grown to 457 till 15th April, 2009. The Ministry
has been conscious of the role the Audience Measurement system plays
on the common viewers. Discussions with TAM Media Research regarding
methodology of collecting viewership data, its utility/usefulness and for
possibility of manipulation as well as its effect on the TV channels in
general leading to broadcasting of sensational issues or create sensational
news out of innocuous news began in April 2007 and TAM Media Research
was asked to make a presentation before the Hon’ble Minister of
Information and Broadcasting on 20.7.2007. Further, meeting at the level
of Secretary (IB) was held in August, 2007 with a-MAP and a meeting
with large number of stakeholders was held under the chairmanship of
Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting on 7.10.2007. Many
more such meetings and discussions were also held from time to time.
Thus, it is humbly submitted that the efforts made by the Government
24

were not in the nature of knee-jerk reaction in response to the examination
by the Hon’ble Committee but were continuing in parallel. The
Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating and is of the belief
that a transparent and representative sample for measuring the audience
viewership is a must. In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations and
observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully considered while
formulating the guidelines/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
25

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
26

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that out of the total staff strength of 64 of
Prasar Bharati’s Audience Research Unit including its 18 Field Units,
there were 30 vacancies as on 22 May, 2008 as a result of which the
assigned functions of the Unit are managed with much difficulty. The
Committee further note that the proposals of Prasar Bharati have been
sent to the Ministry to fill up the existing vacancies on promotion for
various categories of posts, as there is a ban on direct recruitment. Prasar
Bharati on the basis of their proposals hope that the promotional posts
would be filled up in the 2008-09 fiscal. Further, a committee has been
appointed to do a cadre review of the audience research staff so as to
remove the bottlenecks in the existing structure. Prasar Bharati also
proposes to combine the present staff of the Audience Research Units
of the All India Radio and Doordarshan to overcome the staff constraints.
In view of almost 50 per cent vacancies in the Audience Research Unit
including the Field Units and a ban on direct recruitment, the Committee
urge the Ministry to expedite the approval of the proposals submitted
by Prasar Bharati so that the promotional posts are filled up in the
2008-09 fiscal itself. The Committee also desire that the cadre review of
the audience research staff be completed at an early date in order to
remove the bottlenecks in the existing structure and enable the ARU to
function efficiently. The Committee feel that the proposal to combine the
present staff of the ARUs of AIR and DD is a measure in the right direction
as the synergy would strengthen the research team at the headquarters
and help deployment of sufficient staff in different field units as per the
requirement.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to tackle the acute staff shortage and to strengthen the
AR unit, Prasar Bharati proposes to combine the present staff of the
27

AR units of AIR and DD as advised by the Committee. This synergy
would strengthen the Research team at headquarters and help in posting
sufficient staff in select regions as per requirement.
The Ministry initiated cadre review of Audience Research Staff in
order to remove stagnation of officers in the Audience Research Unit.
However, the exercise had to be closed as it was advised by Internal
Finance Division that such cadre review should not be undertaken in
isolation for particular Unit and it has to be part of the overall review of
Prasar Bharati. The Prasar Bharati has entrusted a study for overall
organizational restructuring to National Productivity Council (NPC).
The consolidated report of NPC has still not been received in
Ministry.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee would also like to add a word of advice for the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting since they have chosen to harp
on Prasar Bharati being an autonomous body. Like most of the other
problems besetting the Prasar Bharati, the staff strength in the Audience
Research Unit and the consequent shortcomings in its performances is
because the Government have unduly delayed decisions on the
organizational and financial restructuring of the Public Service Broadcaster.
These have been discussed and recommended upon by the Committee
in several of their Reports, the latest reference being in their 47th, 55th,
60th and 63rd Reports (Fourteenth Lok Sabha). Notwithstanding the
stopgap arrangements being resorted to by Prasar Bharati to tide over
the problem, the solution to all the hardships being faced by Prasar Bharati
would be a thing of past if the issues pending with the Government are
expeditiously decided upon. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Government to settle all matters pertaining to the Public Sector Broadcaster
without any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to strengthen Prasar Bharti, the Government on
7th March 2006 constituted a Group of Ministers to examine various issues
pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati including Capital Restructuring
and funding pattern for Prasar Bharati, status of employees issue amongst
28

others. Group of Ministers has recommended that all employees recruited
on or before 05.10.2007 shall be treated as Government employees on
deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati with all benefits eligible to
Government employees. The Cabinet approval has been obtained on
28.01.2009 and notice for introduction of Bill was issued to the Bill section
of Rajya Sabha on 24.02.09 but could not be taken up in the last session
of the Rajya Sabha. This initiative will address concern of about 38000
employees about their future.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, BC-II Section
O.M. No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III), dated 20.01.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting have set up an Electronic Media Monitoring Centre in Delhi
which at present has the capacity to simultaneously monitor 120 channels
which can be increased to 300 channels. According to the Ministry,
many a times complaints are received against TV channels for the violation
of Programme and Advertising Codes prescribed under the Cable
Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder
and it becomes difficult to get the information/footage from the
TV channels to verify the accuracy thereof. With the setting up of
EMMC, the Government will have the entire footage at their command
and any violation by TV channels can be immediately seen by the
authorities entrusted with monitoring these channels and a report
sent to the Government on the basis of which action can be initiated. But
the Committee are concerned to find that even continuous monitoring
of all broadcast contents of the channels by EMMC is not sufficient to
tackle the alleged manipulation of the rating studies by the agencies as
the Monitoring Centre is not envisaged to do an audit of the agencies
involved in the rating system. Moreover, the Committee are given to
understand that EMMC alone would not be able to effectively monitor
the violation of the content/programme/advertising code as it is just one
of the three pillars in the Ministry’s overall vision, the other two being
a Regulator and a Legislation. In other words, if the Government are
able to put all three pillars in place simultaneously, then only an effective
29

monitoring system can emerge to check any violation of the content/
programme/advertising code as well as manipulation of the rating
studies by the agencies. The Committee, therefore, impress upon
the Ministry to take up the matter on priority basis at the appropriate
fora so as to complete the envisaged picture and ensure that the
aims and objectives for which EMMC was set up are effectively
fulfilled.
Action Taken by the Government
For putting in place a Regulator, there is a need for an enabling
legislation. Government has been considering bringing a comprehensive
legislation to regulate broadcasting services which, inter-alia, proposed
to set up a regulatory authority for broadcasting services. A draft of the
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill has been discussed with Stakeholders
soliciting their views and accordingly the proposed draft of Broadcasting
Services Regulation Bill was re-drafted wherever required keeping in view
the comments of stakeholders including States/UTs. The draft Bill was
also discussed in the 26th SIMCON on 18-19 September, 2007 with the
representatives of States. It was decided to seek comments of States/UTs
after the said conference. Accordingly, the then Hon’ble Minister of
Information and Broadcasting addressed a letter on 9th October, 2007 to
all Chief Ministers of States/UTs. Secretary, I&B also addressed D.O. letters
to Chief Secretaries of all State/UTs on 7.11.2007 seeking comments of
the State/UTs Governments. Last reminder at the level of Secretary, I&B
was sent on 23.01.2009. Only 15 States/UTs have responded so far with
their comments on the proposed draft of the Broadcasting Services
Regulation Bill. Final view on the Bill will be taken once the comments
are received from remaining States/UTs and consensus is arrived at with
all stakeholders.
Electronic Media Monitoring Cell (EMMC) was set up with the
objective of monitoring content on Television channels reporting cases
of violation of programme and Advertising Codes to the Government/
Regulator which is being done by it and to that extent it has been
able to achieve its aim. However, in the absence of a Regulator, EMMC
is not sufficient to tackle the manipulation in ratings as observed in the
Report. It may, however, be mentioned that any manipulation of the
Rating studies by the Agencies can only be checked by an Independent
Audit which has also being recommended by TRAI. This will be
30

considered while drafting the guideline/legislation for regulating TRP
Agencies.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III), dated 20.01.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee have also pondered over the question of legality
or otherwise of the reference made by the Ministry to the regulatory
body. They tend to agree with the contention of TRAI that as per the
TRAI Act, the regulatory body is responsible for the broadcasting services,
which primarily mean carriage aspect of broadcasting while the subject
matter of television audience measurement falls in the content domain.
That the Government did not invoke any section of the Act while making
the reference to TRAI further strengthens this belief. The Ministry’s
subsequent clarifications about the reference being covered under Section
11(i), (iv) and (vii) of TRAI Act, 1997 merely because their invocation had
been mentioned in the context of the reference by TRAI while floating
the Consultation Paper on the subject also does not cut ice. TRAI had
categorically informed the Committee during their oral evidence that
there was a very strong opinion in the Authority to return the reference
to the Government, as it did not fall in their domain. However, they
retained the reference considering it a national cause and because of its
presumed linkage with consumers/subscribers. And in order to facilitate
this they had to find out and invoke sub-sections (iv) and (vii) of Section
11 of the Act.
Action Taken by the Government
Although Television in India has been in existence for nearly five
decades now, it is only recently that the number of channels has grown
exponentially. From two channels prior to 1990–91, Indian viewers
were exposed to more than 50 channels by 1996 and to 360 as in June,
2008. The number has further grown to 422 till February, 2009. The
Ministry has been conscious of the role the Audience Measurement system
plays on the common viewers. Discussions with TAM Media Research
regarding methodology of collecting viewership data, its utility/usefulness
31

and for possibility of manipulation as well as its effect on the TV channels
in general leading to broadcasting of sensational issues or create
sensational news out of innocuous news began in April 2007 and TAM
Media Research was asked to make a presentation before the
Hon’ble MIB on 20.7.2007. Further, meeting at the level of Secretary (IB) was
held in August, 2007 with A—MAP and a meeting with large number of
stakeholders was held under the chairmanship of Hon’ble MIB on
7.10.2007. Many more such meetings and discussions were also held from
time to time. Therefore, it may be seen that efforts made by the
Government were for eliciting expert response and was duly responded
to by TRAI. The Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating
and is of the belief that a transparent and representative sample for
measuring the audience viewership is a must. In this regard, TRAI’s
recommendations and observations of the hon’ble Committee shall be
carefully considered while formulating the guidelines/legislation on the
subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III), dated 20.01.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee also note with deep regret that TRAI has written
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting that rather than creating
a separate regulator, the content may also be assigned to them. But the
Ministry, who have with much alacrity referred the ratings business that
has a profound bearing on content to TRAI, have taken a stand before
the Committee that there will be a regulator for the purpose once the
Broadcasting Bill becomes a law. While there is a lot of merit in the logic
of TRAI to have both the carriage and content aspect under them for a
holistic and comprehensive approach, the Ministry’s stand suffers from
several infirmities and is unnecessarily delaying a well laid out oversight
of content being broadcast. The Ministry’s stand is also in contrast of
their assurance before the Committee that they would look at it (content
related issues) so that in future, TRAI is able to do so without any difficulty.
The Committee, therefore, desire that in view of the ground situation and
till the final view on the draft Broadcasting Bill emerges, regulation of
32

content which is governed by the Advertisement and Programme Code
of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, should be
assigned to TRAI without any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
The TRAI has not specifically written to this Ministry that rather
than creating a separate regulator, the content may also be assigned to
them. However, while making its recommendations on formation of Policy
Guidelines for Television Audience Measurement/Television Rating Points,
it recommended that in view of significant influence exercised by Content
on the society, the regulation of content should also be transferred to
TRAI. Till a final view is taken on the draft Broadcasting Bill and the
setting up of an independent broadcast regulator for the recommendation
that regulation of content should be assigned to TRAI without any further
delay may be premature at this stage and will require wider consultation
with stakeholders.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III), dated 20.01.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendations (Para Nos. 31 and 32)
The Committee are highly perturbed to note that a suitable
legislation on broadcasting is yet to see that light of the day despite
several efforts of the Government during the last eleven years. Way back
in 1995, the Supreme Court pronounced that airwaves are public property
and have to be controlled and regulated by public authority in the interest
of the public. The Broadcasting Bill, 1997 was accordingly introduced by
the Government in the Parliament, but it lapsed.
Another attempt was made when the Convergence Bill, 2001 was
introduced but even this lapsed with the dissolution of the Thirteenth
Lok Sabha. With the Governments efforts including preparation of
20 drafts of the legislation not bearing any fruits, the ground situation today
is that the Broadcasting services have a system of oversight in bits and
pieces. We have an Act to regulate Cable networks and a surfeit of
guidelines to regulate uplinking of TV channels, DTH, FM Radio,
33

Community Radio, downlinking etc. This is not at all a happy situation.
Isolated legislations and guidelines on some aspects of a major service
cannot be a substitute to a self-enabling and comprehensive legislation
covering the entire gamut of the activities of the concerned service.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee, however, have a nagging feeling that the Ministry’s
approach towards this important matter lacks the requisite seriousness.
Such prolonged consultation exceeding more than a year with various
stakeholders on a legislation which is already hanging fire for more than
a decade now are not only delaying the matter but also proving
detrimental to the biggest of all the stakeholders, the public and the
public interest. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to complete
the consultations with the various stakeholders immediately and make
sincere efforts to fructify a self enabling, people friendly and
comprehensive legislation on broadcasting services without wasting
further time.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
Action Taken by the Government
Government has been considering bringing a comprehensive
legislation to regulate broadcasting services which inter-alia proposed to
set up a regulatory authority for broadcasting services. A draft of the
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill has been discussed with Stakeholders
soliciting their views and accordingly the proposed draft of Broadcasting
Services Regulation Bill was redrafted wherever required keeping in view
the comments of stakeholders and posted on the website of the Ministry
in July, 2007 soliciting further views of Stakeholders including States/
UTs. The draft Bill was also discussed in the 26th SIMCON on
18-19 September, 2007 with the representatives of States. It was decided
to seek comments of States/UTs after the said conference. Accordingly,
the then Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting addressed a
letter on 9th October, 2007 to all Chief Ministers of States/UTs. Secretary,
I&B also addressed D.O. letters to Chief Secretaries of all State/UTs on
7.11.2007 seeking comments of the State/UTs Governments. Last reminder
at the level of Secretary, I&B was sent on 23.01.2009.
Only 15 States/UTs have responded so far with their comments on
the proposed draft of the Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill. Final
34

view on the Bill will be taken once the comments are received from
remaining States/UTs and widest consultation with all stakeholders.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III), dated 20.01.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of the Chapter-I)
35

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Amongst the innumerable inventions by mankind, television with
its presence in billions of homes and establishments, is indisputably
serving as the greatest tool for information and knowledge dissemination
and entertainment. In the Indian context where the Entertainment and
Media (E&M) Industry is showing an overall compoundable growth of
18 per cent, a rate much higher than the growth rate of economy, the
television is the bulwark of revenue generation, with about 360 channels
and 120 million TV homes (2007 estimates). The Committee note that
as per the industry estimates the size of E&M Industry in India was
Rs. 51,300 crore out of which Rs. 22,600 crore or 40 per cent is the
contribution of television segment. Out of Rs. 22,600 crore, advertising
on television alone contributes Rs. 8000 crore. The Committee have been
given to understand that as per industry estimation, the E&M Industry
would be more than double to Rs. 1,15,700 crore by 2012. The television
advertising figures would also reportedly increase by two and a half
times to Rs. 20,000 crore. With such impressive industry growth
projections, the system of television audience measurement/television
rating points called TAM or TRP in common parlance, which have been
in existence on a commercial basis in the country since 1993, have acquired
added significance. This is due to the fact that rightly or wrongly, the
advertisers, the broadcasters and the production houses i.e. the three key
players in the broadcasting services, construe the Television viewerships
ratings as an indication of the viewers likes and dislikes. The reported
increase of 29 per cent in the number of advertisers on TV between
2003 and 2007, the increasing number of channels, the options of various
delivery platforms, the technological innovations and friendly policy
environments have further intensified the competition and clamor to retain
the viewers by the broadcasters and advertisers. As the ratings
paradoxically are now determining the spending pattern on
advertisements, programme scheduling and content besides influencing
the pricing of channels, little heed is being paid to the viewers
interest.
36

Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that TRP ratings may not be an accurate index of viewership.
Because of this, the Ministry suo motu referred the matter to TRAI for
their recommendations in January, 2008. The final recommendations of
the TRAI have been received and are under active consideration of the
Government.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee find that initially the only data available and
followed for viewership ratings was collected by Doordarshan’s audience
research unit through its 40 kendras and 100 All India Radio Stations.
This was known as Doordarshan Audience Ratings (DART). Such
collection of data through DART commenced in 1988, continued upto
2001 and was later revived in 2004. So far as the entry of private agencies
in the field of audience research in India is concerned, the Indian National
Television Audience Measurement (INTAM) was established in 1994 for
conducting television ratings. Another rating agency called TAM Media
Research was formed in 1998. In 2001, both INTAM and TAM Media
Research were formally merged. In 2004, another private rating agency
namely the Audience Measurement and Analytics Limited (a-Map) came
into existence but its commercial operations started only in February, 2007.
Thus, TV ratings on a commercial basis are now being done in India by
the two private agencies i.e. TAM Media Research and a-Map. This very
commercial angle of the ratings has become a subject of much concern
and debate. The Committee’s examination of the subject through several
study visits and a series of interaction with the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, Prasar Bharati
Broadcasting Corporation, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation, eminent
TV and film personalities, other stakeholders as well as the agencies
involved in ratings, has revealed several grey areas in the extant audience
measurement system that inter-alia include lack of transparency,
authenticity, credibility, objectivity and competition with scant respect to
the likes and sensitivities of the viewing public. These have been
commented upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that TRP ratings may not be an accurate index of viewership
and transparency and due authenticity. Because of this, the Ministry
37

suo motu referred the matter to Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
for their recommendations in January, 2008. The final recommendations
of the TRAI have been received and are under active consideration of
the Government.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The main aims and objectives of the rating system are to indicate
the popularity of the TV channels, provide information about the TV
viewing habits of the viewers from different socio-economic background
and to help advertisers and corporate media planners in selecting
the right media at the right time to reach the targeted audience. But
the Committee are highly concerned to note that due to various
shortcomings, which have been explained in detail subsequently, the
extant viewership ratings carried out by the agencies do not appear to
conform to the aims and objectives for which the system has been evolved.
Briefly put, there is inadequate representation of the plurality of the
platforms, regions, rural areas and small towns to reflect a correct picture.
Then, there is lack of transparency and reliability in the methods adopted
by the rating agencies for selection of the households as they maintain
confidentiality of the ratings data which may promote induced viewership
and data tampering. The Committee also find that there is every possibility
of biased ratings due to the presence of the interested parties in the
ownership of the rating agencies, absolutely no competition in the rating
services and non-availability of real time ratings through unobtrusive
means. The absence of any independent audit of the methodology adopted
by the rating agencies also act detriment to the aims and objectives of
the rating system. Most importantly, the likes, dislikes and interests of
the viewers largely remain unaddressed by the extant rating system. The
Committee are surprised to observe that although the extant rating system
has been in existence for more than a decade and half, yet it does not
conform to the aims and objectives because of the above-said serious
lacunae. They, therefore, exhort the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting to put some effective mechanism in place in consultation
with all the stakeholders including the Industry, to overcome the
impediments narrated above so that the extant rating system takes care
of the interests of all the stakeholders including that of the viewers,
complying thereby with the aims and objectives of TV ratings.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that TRP ratings may not be an accurate index of viewership.
38

Because of this, the Ministry suo motu referred the matter to TRAI for
their recommendations in January, 2008. The final recommendations of
the TRAI have been received and are under active consideration of the
Government. This Ministry is equally concerned that the interest of the
viewers is not appropriately reflected in the methodology adopted by
the rating agencies because in a vast country like India which has approx.
130 million TV viewers ratings system for TV is based merely on 7000
people meter. Therefore, consultations have been held even at the level
of honourable MIB with the rating agencies like TAM, a-MAP as well
as the Broadcasting Organisations, consumer forums and other
stakeholders. The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008 with the
representatives of Broadcasting Audience Research Council (BARC), Indian
Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), National Council of Allied and Economic
Research (NCAER), Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA), Advertising
Agencies Association of India (AAAI), and Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation to discuss the final recommendation of TRAI
on Television Audience Measurement/Television Rating Points. The
observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully considered while
formulating the guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
In so far as the reach and spread of rating studies is concerned,
the Committee note that TAM Media Research conducts its rating studies
in all the States except Jammu and Kashmir, Bihar, Jharkhand and the
States in the North-Eastern States, a-MAP covers all the States barring
those in the North-East. So far, TAM Media Research has covered
148 towns having population of more than one lakh and a-MAP has covered
87 towns on similar population criterion. What greatly perturbs the
Committee is that both the rating agencies have no coverage whatsoever
of the rural areas which account for 70 per cent of India’s population.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India, Prasar Bharati and the Indian Broadcasting Foundation
in their deposition before the Committee have also expressed similar
concerns. Even one of the rating agencies has been candid enough to
admit that both of them leave a large part of India, particularly rural
India, uncovered. The other agency has cited resource constraints as a
reason for the non-coverage of all the States and the rural areas. The
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, during the course
of oral evidence has informed the Committee that TAM Media Research
has informed that it is going to shortly commence ratings in Bihar, Assam
and Jharkhand. The Committee feel that the rating system can neither
39

be comprehensive nor be foolproof without covering all the States and
most importantly without reflecting the preference of rural India. Even
if all the States are covered by the two rating agencies, their system with
its strong urban bias would continue to remain questionable, as it would
not reflect the choice of the rural audience. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that some via media should be explored by the Ministry to
ensure adequate coverage of the rural areas in the country by the existing
two rating agencies and those who may join in future. This would not
only eliminate the pronounced urban bias of the sample but also make
the ratings truly reflective of the viewing preferences of a cross-section
of viewers of the country.
Action Taken by the Government
Due to the initiative taken by this Ministry, both the rating agencies
viz. TAM and a-Map have increased the number of these people meters
covering States of Bihar, Assam and Jharkhand. However, this step may
not be adequate in itself. The Ministry is in agreement with the
observations of the Hon’ble Committee that TRP ratings may not be an
accurate index of viewership. Because of this, the Ministry suo motu
referred the matter to TRAI for their recommendations in January, 2008.
The final recommendations of the TRAI have been received and are under
active consideration of the Government. This Ministry is equally concerned
that the interest of the viewers is not appropriately reflected in the
methodology adopted by the rating agencies because in a vast country
like India which has approx. 130 million TV viewers, ratings system for
TV is based merely on 7000 people meter. Therefore, consultations have
been held even at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Information and
Broadcasting with the rating agencies like TAM, a-MAP as well as the
Broadcasting Organisations, consumer forums and other stakeholders.
The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008 with the representatives
of Broadcasting Audience Research Council (BARC), Indian Broadcasting
Foundation (IBF), National Council of Allied and Economic Research
(NCAER), Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA), Advertising Agencies
Association of India (AAAI) and Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation to discuss the final recommendation of TRAI on Television
Audience Measurement/Television Rating Points. Recommendations of
the Hon’ble Committee shall be taken into consideration while formulating
such guidelines/legislation. TRAI’s recommendations in this respect shall
also be considered so that urban bias in the rating system is eliminated
to the extent possible.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
40

Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that as of now the rating data generated
by viewers is collected by the two rating agencies through electronic
devices placed in selected households in a few urban areas of the country.
This electronic device, which is attached to the television, automatically
records the data required to indicate viewer’s preferences. The size
and contours of the sample are determined with the help of educational
standards, socio-economic and socio-cultural groupings, demographics,
cable and satellite channel penetration, availability of terrestrial
channel, household size, time spent on watching television, channels
watched, power cuts, cable operators charges, etc. The devices used by
both TAM Media Research and a-Map are analog and digital technologies
compatible. As of now TAM Media Research has about 7000 devices
installed in households in 148 towns having population of 1 lakh and
above. Similarly, a–map has about 6000 devices in 87 towns with a
population of 1 lakh and above. In the case of TAM Media Research,
some households have two devices installed as they have more than one
TV. As stated previously, both agencies do not cover several States and
the entire rural India. Sample size-wise coverage of the 1.13 billion
population of the Country works out to about 0.005 per cent. The
Committee can very well imagine how reflective and truthful such a
minuscule sample size can be of a country as socio-economically diverse
and large as India.
Action Taken by the Government
This Ministry shares the concern of the Hon’ble Committee that
the interest of the viewers is not considered in the methodology adopted
by the rating agencies because in a vast country like India which has
approx. 130 million TV viewers ratings system for TV is based merely
on 7000 people meter. Consultations have, accordingly, been held even
at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting with
the rating agencies like TAM, a-MAP as well as the Broadcasting
Organisations, consumer forums and other stakeholders. The Ministry
also held a meeting on 18.12.2008 with the representatives of Broadcasting
Audience Research Council (BARC), Indian Broadcasting Foundation
(IBF), National Council of Allied and Economic Research (NCAER), Indian
Society of Advertisers (ISA), Advertising Agencies Association of India
(AAAI) and Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to
discuss the final recommendation of TRAI on Television Audience
Measurement/Television Rating Points. Recommendations of the Hon’ble
Committee and TRAI regarding sample size shall be taken into
41

consideration while formulating such guidelines/legislation so that urban
bias in the rating system is minimized.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Coming to the rotation aspect of the household, in the sample TAM
Media Research does not have any clear cut procedure for rotation of
sample households. A-MAP does have a rotation policy of 10 per cent
household being rotated every six months. Meaning, thereby, that they
would take at least 5 years to rotate the original sample. The Committee
are sure that such a situation is not at all conducive to a vibrant, impartial
and comprehensive sampling and the research data sanctity in such
circumstances cannot be ensured. Apart from it, this very small sample
size limits the reflection of plurality of platforms, regions, rural areas and
small towns, etc. by excluding almost 70 million of the 120 million TV
homes. The extant measurement methods are inadequate to cover the
new technologies like, digital TV, HDTV, interactive television and digital
video recorders. Resultantly, the TRPs are distorted, the broadcasters and
others fix with these distorted ratings due to TINA factor has made the
monopolistic tendencies of one of the players flourish unrestricted. It has
also encouraged creation of barriers and use of various unfair and
anti-competitive measures to distort the competition.
Action Taken by the Government
This Ministry shares the concern of the Committee that the interest
of the viewers is not appropriately reflected in the methodology adopted
by the rating agencies because in a vast country like India which has
approx. 130 million TV viewers, ratings system for TV is based merely
on 7000 people meter. Therefore, consultations have been held even at
the level of Hon’ble MIB with the rating agencies like TAM, a-MAP as
well as the Broadcasting Organisations, Consumer forums and other
stakeholders. The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008 with the
representatives of Broadcasting Audience Research Council (BARC), Indian
Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), National Council of Allied and Economic
Research (NCAER), Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA), Advertising
Agencies Association of India (AAAI) and Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation to discuss the final recommendation of TRAI
on Television Audience Measurement/Television Rating Points.
Recognizing that, as of now, TV ratings are purely market-driven and
there is no law/guideline to regulate the same, the recommendations of
the Hon’ble Committee shall be taken into consideration while formulating
such guidelines.
42

TRAI’s recommendations in this respect shall also be considered
so that the urban bias in the rating system is eliminated to the extent
possible. In view of the issue of TV ratings being studied by Government
authorities, Television audience research agency has of late started covering
digital platforms also. However, because of the limited number of
people meters, it may not be an adequate step. This issue shall also be
considered while formulating comprehensive guidelines/legislation on
the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee also note a serious drawback in the present
measurement system. The reporting of data by TAM Media Research is
on a weekly basis. A-MAP’s reporting is done on overnight basis and is
in consonance with the rating practices in several other countries. The
Committee also note that the present trend in the world is way ahead
with a system of real time ratings through unobtrusive means being in
vogue. All the above narrated facts lead to the conclusion that the
methodology and sample of the TRP rating agencies operating in the
Country is deficient on several counts including abysmally low size of
sample, outdated methodology, lack of representative character, elements
of manipulation, lack of reliability and transparency and a disdain for
the socio cultural ethos. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should take immediate steps to not only eliminate the
shortcomings in the extant rating system but also ensure that it is in tune
with the best in the world.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that present measurement system suffers from many
drawbacks. Because of this, the Ministry suo motu referred the matter
to TRAI for their recommendations in January, 2008. The final
recommendations of the TRAI have been received and are under active
consideration of the Government. This Ministry is equally concerned that
the interest of the viewers is not appropriately reflected in the
methodology adopted by the rating agencies because in a vast country
like India which has approx. 130 million TV viewers ratings system for
TV is based merely on 7000 people meter. Therefore, consultations have
been held even at the level of Hon’ble MIB with the rating agencies like
TAM, a-MAP as well as the Broadcasting Organisations, Consumer forums
43

and other stakeholders. The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008
with the representatives of Broadcasting Audience Research Council
(BARC), Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), National Council of Allied
and Economic Research (NCAER), Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA),
Advertising Agencies Association of India (AAAI) and Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation to discuss the final
recommendation of TRAI on Television Audience Measurement/Television
Rating Points. However, as of now, TV ratings are purely market-driven
and there is no law/guideline to regulate the same. Recommendations
of the Hon’ble Committee shall be taken into consideration while
formulating such guidelines/legislation. TRAI’s
recommendations in this respect shall also be considered so that
the urban bias in the rating system is eliminated to the extent
possible. In view of the issue of TV ratings being studied by Government
authorities, Television audience research agency has of late started covering
digital platforms also. However, because of the limited number of
people meters, it may not be an adequate step. This issue shall also be
considered while formulating comprehensive guidelines/legislation on
the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee observe that although a-Map has claimed that its
technology is capable to handle free-to-air, cable, CAS and DTH modes
of television reception, yet according to Prasar Bharati the rating systems
presently being used by TAM Media Research and a-Map are not in sync
with the new/emerging technologies such as Digital TV, HDTV and IPTV.
The Regulatory Authority has also opined that new technologies like
portable people meter and Return Path Data which are getting introduced,
should also be taken advantage of by the rating agencies to ensure that
the emerging technologies/delivery platforms being made available for
television viewing are also measured. The Committee feel that if the
rating systems do not keep pace with the emerging new technologies/
delivery platforms, they would not be able to cover the viewers through
different platforms. Such inadequacy of the measurement methods to
capture new television viewing through HDTV, IPTV, etc. will only lead
to distortion of the rating system. The Indian Broadcasting Foundation
has also expressed similar views. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that in view of the pressing need for making the rating systems compatible
with the emerging technologies, the rating agencies should use such
technology, which is capable of capturing data over different platforms,
44

as mentioned above so as to ensure a holistic view of the viewers
preferences. It is also imperative that the measurement devices are
continuously upgraded in tune with the changing scenario.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that the present measurement system does not ensure a holistic
view of the viewers’ preferences. Because of this, the Ministry suo motu
referred the matter to TRAI for their recommendations in January, 2008.
The final recommendations of the TRAI have been received and are under
active consideration of the Government. This Ministry is equally concerned
that the interest of the viewers is not appropriately reflected in the
methodology adopted by the rating agencies because in a vast country
like India which has approx. 130 million TV viewers ratings system for
TV is based merely on 7000 people meter. Therefore, consultations have
been held even at the level of Hon’ble MIB with the rating agencies like
TAM, a-MAP as well as the Broadcasting Organisations, Consumer forums
and other stakeholders. The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008
with the representatives of Broadcasting Audience Research
Council (BARC), Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), National
Council of Allied and Economic Research (NCAER), Indian Society of
Advertisers (ISA), Advertising Agencies Association of India (AAAI) and
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to discuss the final
recommendation of TRAI on Television Audience Measurement/Television
Rating Points. However, as of now, TV ratings are purely market-driven
and there is no law/guideline to regulate the same. Recommendations
of the honorable Committee shall be taken into consideration while
formulating such guidelines. TRAI’s recommendations in this respect shall
also be considered so that the urban bias in the rating system is eliminated
to the extent possible. In view of the issue of TV ratings being studied
by Government authorities, Television audience research agency has of
late started covering digital platforms also. However, because of the limited
number of people meters, it may not be an adequate step. This issue shall
also be considered while formulating comprehensive guidelines/legislation
on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the television audience measurement
system in India has not been regulated so far and as such there are no
45

restrictions on the entry of new agencies to undertake rating of television
viewership. Intriguingly, however, there is a virtual monopoly in the
extant rating industry. According to the Ministry, apart from the prohibitive
cost of equipment/rating meters, the other major reasons for more entities
not entering the system reportedly appear to be the entry barriers, use
of various unfair and anti-competitive measures by the existing players,
apprehensions in the minds of the broadcasters etc. Prasar Bharati is of
the opinion that the industry has so far preferred to maintain status quo
and not been inclined to encourage the new players. As a result, there
is always a skewer picture of the ratings done, which helps the cable and
satellite channels in getting a larger share of the advertising pie. Prasar
Bharati has also opined that cross holdings by the stakeholders in the
bodies that make up the rating agencies is another reasons why the new
players are likely to face unfair barriers. According to the IBF, the
broadcasters themselves are not satisfied with the existing monopoly in
the rating system. The Ministry’s statement that they have taken
suo moto measures to motivate new players to come in the field of TV ratings
does not convince the Committee because in a span of fifteen years, only
two players have entered the field. Most importantly, the second player
started its rating studies as late as in 2007. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that instead of leaving things to take their own course, the
Ministry in tandem with the industry and all other stakeholders, should
resort to effective measures to address the above said impediments that
discourage the new players to enter the rating studies so that there is
sufficient competition and the system becomes fair and truly reflective
of the viewers’ choice.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that at present there is insufficient competition in the rating
system and viewers’ choice are not truly reflected. Because of this, the
Ministry suo motu referred the matter to TRAI for their recommendations
in January, 2008. The final recommendations of the TRAI have been
received and are under active consideration of the Government. This
Ministry is equally concerned that the interest of the viewers is not
appropriately reflected in the methodology adopted by the rating agencies
because in a vast country like India which has approx. 130 million TV
viewers, ratings system for TV is based merely on 7000 people meter.
Therefore, consultations have been held even at the level of honorable
MIB with the rating agencies like TAM, a-MAP as well as the Broadcasting
Organisations, Consumer forums and other stakeholders. The Ministry
also held a meeting on 18.12.2008 with the representatives of Broadcasting
Audience Research Council (BARC), Indian Broadcasting Foundation
(IBF), National Council of Allied and Economic Research (NCAER), Indian
46

Society of Advertisers (ISA), Advertising Agencies Association of India
(AAAI) and Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to
discuss the final recommendation of TRAI on Television Audience
Measurement/Television Rating Points. However, as of now, TV ratings
are purely market-driven and there is no law/guideline to regulate the
same. Recommendations of the honorable Committee shall be taken into
consideration while formulating such guideline/legislation. TRAI’s
recommendations in this respect shall also be considered so that the
urban bias in the rating system is eliminated to the extent possible. In
view of the issue of TV ratings being studied by Government authorities,
Television audience research agency has of late started covering digital
platforms also. However, because of the limited number of people meters,
it may not be an adequate step. This issue shall also be considered while
formulating comprehensive guidelines/legislation on the subject. TRAI
has recommended that Government should not directly intervene and
that the industry led body, BARC should self-regulate TV rating system.
As per TRAI, Self-regulation should aim to achieve the following
objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate, up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest possible standards of integrity and
to ensure that its finding are not misused/manipulated by
anyone to convey a wrong impression
• To promote, maintain and uphold fair, ethical and healthy
practices relating to ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or deceptive practices employed in
connection with the sale or views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the conditions and standards/norms
prescribed by the Government for the rating process
However, BARC has responded as follows:—
“BARC supports the principles and objectives of self regulation
and self administration for broadcast audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or oversight, directly or indirectly,
by Government self regulation and Government intervention are
a clear contradiction in terms. The first four objectives listed
here described the stated objectives of BARC. However, to observe
and enforce conditions/norms prescribed by the Government cannot
be an objective of self-regulation. This is a clear contradiction in
terms.”
47

As mentioned earlier, final recommendations of TRAI have been
received and further action will be taken in consultation with the various
stakeholders on the basis of consensus.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
According to some eminent TV and film personalities, with whom
the Committee interacted during their study visits to different places, the
electronic people meter system devised and used by the rating agencies
is not transparent, reliable and authentic as it is secretly placed in a select
few households in major urban areas. The Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting are also of the same view. The two rating agencies claim
that the system adopted by them is transparent from an operational point
of view although they do not reveal the household names or addresses
where the people meter is placed. Both the rating agencies admitted
before the Committee that they presently do not follow any well laid
down system of frequent rotation of people meter homes. One of the
rating agencies agreed albeit reluctantly before the Committee that it
gives inexpensive gifts, as a token of its gratitude to the people in whose
houses meters are installed. The Committee find that the Ministry, despite
in agreement over the lack of transparency in the extant rating system,
have done nothing concrete to bring in transparency except referring the
matter to TRAI. The Committee cannot but express their serious
displeasure over the lack of transparency, reliability and authenticity,
persisting in a system, which has been in vogue since the last one and
a half decade. The Committee feel that although revealing the household
names or household addresses where people meters are installed may
impede the rating studies, yet disclosure of the data and methodology/
process adopted by the agencies for the system, in detail and in clear
terms, to the clients, users and the public is imperative for fair and
transparent studies. The Committee also desire that periodical rotation
of the panel homes by the rating agencies should be adhered to for
conducting objective and unbiased ratings. Moreover, in order to bring
in transparency and to make the whole system encompassing, reliable
and authentic, the rating agencies, besides disclosing the sample selection
and size, the frequency of the panel home rotation and the margin of
statistically acceptable error, should also acknowledge and highlight the
comments and view points of the users of the rating data as well as that
of the viewing public.
48

Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Hon’ble
Committee that the present TRP ratings lack complete transparency and
reliability. Because of this, the Ministry suo motu referred the matter to
TRAI for their recommendations in January, 2008. The final
recommendations of the TRAI have been received and are under active
consideration of the Government. This Ministry is equally concerned that
the interest of the viewers is not appropriately reflected in the
methodology adopted by the rating agencies because in a vast country
like India which has approx. 130 million TV viewers ratings system for
TV is based merely on 7000 people meter. Therefore, consultations have
been held even at the level of Hon’ble MIB with the rating agencies like
TAM, a-MAP as well as the Broadcasting Organisations, Consumer forums
and other stakeholders. The Ministry also held a meeting on 18.12.2008
with the representatives of Broadcasting Audience Research Council
(BARC), Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), National Council of Allied
and Economic Research (NCAER), Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA),
Advertising Agencies Association of India (AAAI) and Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation to discuss the final
recommendation of TRAI on Television Audience Measurement/Television
Rating Points. However, as of now, TV ratings are purely market-driven
and there is no law/guideline to regulate the same. Recommendations
of the honorable Committee shall be taken into consideration while
formulating such guidelines/legislation. TRAI’s recommendations in this
respect shall also be considered so that the urban bias in the rating system
is eliminated to the extent possible. In view of the issue of TV ratings
being studied by Government authorities, Television audience research
agency has of late started covering digital platforms also. However, because
of the limited number of people meters, it may not be an adequate step.
This issue shall also be considered while formulating comprehensive
guidelines/legislation on the subject. TRAI has recommended that
Government should not directly intervene and that the industry led body,
BARC should self-regulate TV rating system. As per TRAI Self-regulation
should aim to achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate, up to date and relevant findings;
• To maintain the highest possible standards of integrity and
to ensure that its finding are not misused/manipulated by
anyone to convey a wrong impression;
• To promote, maintain and uphold fair, ethical and healthy
practices relating to ratings and its views;
49

• Discourage unfair or decepted practices employed in
connection with the sale or views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the conditions and standards/norms
prescribed by the Government for the rating process
However, BARC has responded as follows:—
“BARC supports the principles and objectives of self regulation
and self administration for broadcast audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or oversight, directly or indirectly,
by Government self regulation and Government intervention are
a clear contradiction in terms. The first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives of BARC.
Recommendations of TRAI and comments of industry-led body
BARC are as follows:—
TRAI Recommendation
(1)
Functions
BARC shall not undertake
audience measurement directly
and shall resort to an open,
transparent and competitive
bidding process for the various
stages involved in the
rating process; including
(a) establishment survey (b) panel
design and quality control
(c) recruiting and metering, data
collection and processing and
(d) Audit.
Methodology
The Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting shall provide the key
eligibility norms for the selection
of rating agencies and also provide
performance obligation norms
including scope of work in the
Request for Proposal (RFP) issued
by BARC for appointment of rating
agencies. These will be duly
considered by the Technical
BARC Comment
(2)
BARC will commission, and own
result of all studies. Actual field
work will be carried out by market
research service providers chosen
through an open, transparent and
competitive bidding process.
It is for the user groups to
determine eligibility and
performance norms, through such
means as they consider
appropriate to the task. The
Technical Committee is a
committee of experts, meant to
work autonomously of the Board
of BARC. What specialist
knowledge or demonstrated
50

Committee while finalizing the
relevant BARC documents.
Reporting Requirements
BARC shall provide such
information and reports as may be
asked for by the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting from
time to time. The Ministry shall
maintain confidentiality of the
information thus provided, if so
desired by BARC. However, the
addresses and location of homes
where people meter are installed
shall not be reported to the
Ministry.
(b) The reports shall be made
available in a transparent and
equitable manner. BARC shall
display the rate card for the various
reports and discounts offered
thereon on its website.
Complaint Redressal mechanism
BARC shall have in place a
complaints Redressal mechanism,
which shall be responsible for
handling complaints, shortcomings
and deficiencies in the rating
system brought to notice by Board
of Directors, consumer
organizations, users of ratings and
the general public. BARC may
consider the model followed by
Advertising Standards Council of
India (ASCI).
(1) (2)
expertise MIB has in this regard is
not evident.
BARC as a duly constituted not for
profit company under the
Companies Act will comply with
all statutory and other reporting
obligations pertinent to a company
of its nature. The confidentiality of
the addresses of homes where
meters are installed is vital to the
integrity of an audience
measurement system, and BARC
appreciates that acknowledgement.
Transparency is one of the tenets
of BARC.
This is indeed the intention of
BARC.
As mentioned earlier, final recommendations fo TRAI have been
received and action will be taken in consultation with the various
stakeholders on the basis of consensue.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
51

Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee observe that during the years 2006-07 and
2007-08, there were shortfalls in expenditure to the tune of Rs. 6.45 lakh
and Rs. 13.69 lakh respectively by Doordarshan Audience Research Units
when compared to the allocations made as per the final estimates. Such
shortfalls have been attributed to not undertaking the surveys by Srinagar
DDK due to non-conducive atmosphere there and staff constraints in
Delhi, Mumbai, Nagpur and Bhubaneshwar DDKs. For the financial year
2008-09, a proposal for fund allocation of Rs. 2.26 crore has been made
to enable the Audience Research Unit to conduct the rating studies.
According to the Ministry, although there was no paucity of funds during
the years 2006-07 and 2007-08, yet a higher allocation for DART would
lead to increase in the advertising revenue. The Committee do not agree
with the apparently contradictory statements of the Ministry. They fail
to understand the basis on which a higher allocation for DART would
be justified when there have been shortfalls in the expenditure of the
units, as mentioned above. In other words, a higher allocation for DART
will lead to an increase in the advertising revenue only if the Audience
Research Units are able to effectively and optimally utilize the earmarked
amount. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
urgently look towards removing the impediments like staff constraints
that are being faced by various DDKs and are hampering the rating studies
so that they are able to conduct the required number of studies.
Consequently, a higher allocation can be considered to increase the samples
of the study and to acquire computers and software for data tabulation
and analysis for comprehensive rating studies.
Action Taken by the Government
Prasar Bharati has informed that as recommended by the committee
steps have been taken to remove the impediments like staff constraints,
higher allocation to increase the sample of the study and to acquire latest
technology for analysis and tabulation of data. It is planned to increase
the sample size of the DART survey from the present 5200 to 14400
gradually to cover all the areas in the country so as to get a fair representation
of the different socio-economic groups. The rates fixed in 1986 for various
services of Data Collection and Panel Motivator etc. are being revised to
improve the quality of the data and the personnel engaged in the diary panel
system of DART. The tabulation plan and compilation of the data has to
be redesigned keeping in view of the growth of the DD channels and presence
of different platforms like terrestrial, cable and satellite homes, CAS, DTH
etc. Besides this, some Audience Research Units namely, Gorakhpur, Rajkot
and Nagpur would be relocated to cover uncovered States.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
52

Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note that the leading industry associations of the
broadcasters, the media and the advertising sector have jointly formed
the Broadcasting Audience Research Council (BARC) to oversee and
control the television rating system in India. A not-for profit-body under
the Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 it has equal representation
from the Indian Society of Advertisers (ISA), the Indian Broadcasting
Foundation (IBF) and the Advertising Agencies Association of India
(AAAI). The basic thrust of BARC for rating research, purportedly, will
be that it should be truly representative, robust and transparent. For this
purpose, the Council is planning to adopt the BARB model of United
Kingdom and is in the process of conducting baseline studies to know
the TV viewers universe. Once these are over, the Council intends to
conduct rating research for its members by awarding contracts to rating
agencies. While taking note of this development, the Committee have a
feeling that this very belated initiative by the industry associations is
something akin to the reference made by the Ministry to TRAI. As soon
as the Committee commenced the scrutiny of the TV ratings system, and
sensing that the concerns of the Committee, the parliamentarians, the
media, the consumer groups, the public at large would now compel the
Government to take action to regulate the ratings business, the industries
concerned have come up with this idea of having a body of their own.
Their insistence on keeping the Government out of the regulatory
mechanism; not nominating the Public Service Broadcaster amongst the
directors of IBF on BARC Board in the most crucial formative years of
the Council; the general reluctance of the Prasar Bharati management to
be a part of IBF because of ethical issues involved; the Ministry’s admission
that they would not be having any say in the composition/functioning
of BARC; there being no interaction or interface with the Government
pre and post formation of BARC; the cross industry and converging
industries stakes, the asymmetrical voting pattern in BARC, with four
directors of IBF having only one vote being ranged against four directors
each of AAAI and ISA having two votes and the portends of IBF being
outvoted every time on crucial matters, the asymmetrical voting strengths
being compounded by the injudicious corpus sharing between IBF, AAAI
and ISA in the ratio of 80:15:5 when all three have equal rights and
powers; the conflict of interest amongst IBFs members; there being no
clear cut acknowledgement or demarcation of the role of the Public Service
Broadcaster in the scheme of things inspite of it being the largest in terms
of reach and spread and also being entrusted with the mandate of public
service, which is quite diverse from the highly commercial interests of
other players involved; the lopsided funds contribution model, the virtual
exclusion of viewers interest by the IBF during their candid admission
53

before the Committee that ratings to not affect viewers but the
stakeholders, etc. are all pointers towards the fact that the ‘voluntary’ act
of formation of BARC by the industry associations has everything but
public interest in mind. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should consider these development very carefully and with a
fine toothcomb so that the ratings business does not continue unregulated
and unfettered and in its present form under the different banner.
Notwithstanding the endeavours of some of the stakeholders, the
Committee desire a comprehensive action plan from the Ministry on this
crucial matter without any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
TRAI’s Recommendations
(1)
Till BARC is fully functional in
terms of selection of Rating
Agencies, BARC shall engage
constructively with the existing
rating agencies for resolution of
any complaints received in respect
of the rating services.
BARC shall formalize MOU with
the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting to reflect the above
feature and the eligibility
conditions for selection of rating
agencies.
Timeframe for Implementation –
The Authority expects that the
Government will be able to
complete processing the
recommendations in four weeks
and the MOU can be signed
between BARC and the Ministry
within two weeks thereafter. BARC
should become fully functional
within eight weeks of signing the
BARC Comments
(2)
This is indeed the intention of
BARC.
BARC believes there is no role for
government intervention or
involvement in this industry
initiative. As such, there is no case
for such an MOU.
There is no case for any
government or government-related
agency to assess or intervene in the
conduct of an initiative taken by
industry in the conduct of its own
business except if such activity
violates the law of the land.
54

However, as recommended by the honorable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that internationally the television rating
business can broadly be classified into three categories i.e. Own Services
(OS), Media Owner Contract (MOC) and Joint Industry Committee (JIC).
Own Services are set up on an entrepreneurial basis and wholly owned
and managed by a research supplier. The MOC is a system where one
or more broadcasters (an occasionally an agency or advertiser) use to
commission research from a research supplier. JIC is a system where the
research is commissioned by a committee representing all the interested
parties i.e. broadcasters, advertisers and media agencies. At present,
countries like India, USA, Russia and Spain follow the OS system, whereas
Germany, France, Norway and Canada have adopted the MOC system.
Similarly, countries like United Kingdom, Italy, New Zealand and South
Africa follow the JIC system. The Committee find that all the three systems
have their own advantages and disadvantages. As such, there is no fixed
structure about the method, which the international audience rating
organizations follow and the choices have been made to suit Country
specific measurement issues and needs. The Broadcasters Audience
Research Board (BARB) in the United Kingdom, the Media Rating Council
(MRC) in the United States of America, the Bureau of Broadcast
Measurement (BBM) in Canada, the Australia Television Audience
MOU. Setting up of functional
norms by BARC may take another
four weeks and initiation of activity
by BARC should get started by
January, 2009.
The Authority further recommends
that if BARC fails to meet with the
objectives or is found deficient in
its functioning, the Government
shall then consider regulation of
rating system through TRAI by
way of legislative enactment or any
other institutional framework.
(1) (2)
55

Measurement (OZTAM) in Australia and the South African Advertising
Research Foundation (SAARF) in South Africa remain responsible for the
television audience measurement/TRP system in their respective countries.
According to Prasar Bharati, the existing model in the UK i.e. BARB will
be suitable for India as well as Doordarshan, subject to it being
implemented properly. But IBF in their submission have opined that it
will be better not to replicate a system operating in a particular Country.
However, IBF supports the idea of having a joint industry body of the
three contending industries viz. broadcasters, advertisers and the
advertising agencies. The Committee are of the opinion that instead of
blindly following any particular model, a transparent system in consonance
with the global best practices and the social ethos of the Country should
be evolved to protect the interest of not only the broadcasters, advertisers
and media agencies but more significantly that of the most important
stakeholder i.e. the viewer.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
Recommendation of TRAI
(1)
The Authority recommends Self-
regulation through the Industry led
body, with Government exercising
oversight through its nominees in
the industry led body and
guidelines covering organization,
functions and methodology to be
adopted for ratings by the Industry
led body. The continuance of
Government nominees on BARC’s
board may be reviewed after five
years. Such industry led body
should be a not-for-profit body
registered under the Companies
Act, 1956.
Comments of BARC
(2)
BARC supports the principles and
objectives of self regulation and
self administration for broadcast
audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or
oversight, directly or indirectly, by
Government Self regulation and
Government intervention are a
clear contradiction in terms. The
first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives of
BARC. However, to observe and
enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
56

However, as recommended by the honorable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that till date no stipulated system of formal
registration has been laid down for the agencies carrying out the rating
studies. In view of the need for a more transparent and credible system,
the Ministry have referred the matter to TRAI. According to Prasar Bharati,
a well laid out system of registration and proper guidelines will be
required to ensure transparency and independence of the rating agencies.
(1) (2)
Self-regulation should aim to
achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in
quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate,
up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest
possible standards of integrity
and to ensure that its finding
are not misused/manipulated
by anyone to convey a wrong
impression;
• To promote, maintain and
uphold fair, ethical and
healthy practices relating to
ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or
decepted practices employed
in connection with the sale or
views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the
conditions and standards/
norms prescribed by the
Government for the rating
process.
The first four objectives listed here
describe the stated objective of
BARC. However, to “observe and
enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government”
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
57

The Broadcasting Corporation has further opined that the eligibility criteria
for registration of rating agencies should be expertise, experience, plurality
of the regions and viewership, financial stability and clients should not
be permitted to have cross holdings with rating agencies. According to
the Indian Broadcasting Foundation, the key qualifications for a rating
agency should be proven international experience, willingness to adhere
to BARC’s stringent research design, oversight and audit requirements,
etc. The Committee tend to agree with the views expressed by the Public
Service Broadcaster and IBF and recommend that the Government should
work out modalities so that the rating agencies are registered and fulfil
all the eligibility criteria suggested by Prasar Bharati and IBF, sans proven
international experience proposed by IBF, as it would be a restrictive
clause for many aspiring players. The Committee specifically desire that
with a view to maintaining operational and ethical standards as well as
unbiased reporting, the rating agencies should not have any stakes in the
broadcasters, advertisers agencies and vice versa.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
Recommendation of TRAI
(1)
The Authority recommends Self-
regulation through the Industry led
body, with Government exercising
oversight through its nominees in
the industry led body and
guidelines covering organization,
functions and methodology to be
adopted for ratings by the Industry
led body. The continuance of
Government nominees on BARC’s
board may be reviewed after five
years. Such industry led body
should be a not-for-profit body
registered under the Companies
Act, 1956.
Comments of BARC
(2)
BARC supports the principles and
objectives of self-regulation and
self-administration for broadcast
audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or
oversight, directly or indirectly, by
Government. Self-regulation and
Government intervention are a
clear contradiction in terms. The
first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives of
BARC. However, to observe
and enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation.This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
58

Self-regulation should aim to
achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in
quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate,
up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest
possible standards of
integrity and to ensure that
its finding are not misused/
manipulated by anyone to
convey a wrong impression;
• To promote, maintain and
uphold fair, ethical and
healthy practices relating to
ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or
decepted practices employed
in connection with the sale or
views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the
conditions and standards/
norms prescribed by the
Government for the rating
process
Eligibility criteria for registration
of rating agencies
Recommendation
With the setting up of BARC, the
Authority considers that there is
no need for registration of rating
agencies with the Government. The
RFP inviting bids for getting the
rating work done shall, however,
be finalized by BARC after duly
considering the eligibility
conditions and performance
obligations as provided by the
Ministry of Information and
(1) (2)
The first four objectives listed here
describe the stated objective of
BARC. However, to “observe
and enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government”
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
BARC is happy to consider all
constructive suggestions. However,
it does not believe there is a
prescriptive role for Government or
Government related agencies in this
and other matters pertaining to
audience measurement.
59

Broadcasting from time to time.
The indicative guidelines/standards
are attached as Annexure III.
The key features of the eligibility
conditions, general operational and
ethical and disclosure standards are
given below:—
Essential eligibility conditions for
rating agencies
1. The Rating Agency is set up
and registered as a company
under the Companies Act,
1956.
2. The Rating Agency has, in its
Memorandum of Association,
specified rating activity as one
of its main objects.
3. The rating agency has, in its
employment, persons having
adequate professional and
other relevant experience.
4. No single company, legal
person, either directly or
through its associates, shall
have substantial equity
holding in more than one
Rating agency. “Substantial
equity’ herein will mean
equity of 10% or more”.
5. A promoter company/Legal
person/Directors of rating
agency cannot have stakes in
Broadcaster, Advertiser and
Advertising agency either
directly or through its
associates. Similarly, a
Broadcaster, Advertiser or
Advertising agency shall also
not have any stake in rating
agencies.
(1) (2)
In order to harness world-class
expertise BARC proposes to issue
a global RFP for market research
agencies/service providers. It is
perfectly possible that required
expertise may vest in a company
not based in India.
60

General Standards
6. A rating agency shall,
wherever necessary, disclose
to the clients, possible sources
of conflict of duties and
interests, which could impair
its ability to make fair,
objective and unbiased
ratings.
7. A rating agency or any of its
employees shall not render
directly or indirectly any
advertisement/advertisement
related advice about any
channel/channel related
programme in the publicly
accessible media. Operational
and Ethical Standards.
8. Appropriate quality control
procedures shall be
maintained with respect to all
external and internal
operations which may
reasonably be assumed to
exert significant effects on the
final results.
9. Rating has to be technology
neutral. Viewership shall be
assessed and rating given
irrespective of the source of
the viewing platform viz.
cable TV, DTH, IP TV etc. The
Measurment devices must be
able to operate on every
platform.
10. The anonymity of all
personnel in any way
concerned with sample
respondents or households
shall be preserved.
(1) (2)
61

11. All weighting or data
adjustment procedures
utilized by a rating agency in
the process of converting
basic raw data to rating
reports shall be based on
systematic, logical
procedures, consistently
applied by the rating agency
and defensible by empirical
analysis.
Disclosure Standards
12. Each report shall include
statements calling attention
to all omissions, errors and
biases known to the rating
service which may exert a
significant effect on the
findings shown in the report.
13. Each rating report shall point
out changes in or deviations
from, the standard operating
procedures of the rating
service which may exert a
significant effect on the
reported results. This
notification shall indicate the
estimated magnitude of the
effect.
14. Each rating report shall
contain standard error data
relevant to the audience
estimates contained therein.
Such data shall be presented
whether or not effective
sample sizes are shown. The
method used to develop
standard error estimates as
well as the formulas used to
compute the standard errors
shall be fully disclosed.
(1) (2)
62

However, as recommended by the honorable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee have a lurking suspicion that due to the
monopolistic regime prevalent in the extant rating system and in the
absence of any independent audit of the system, the possibility of TV
audience measurement being manipulated cannot be ruled out, especially
when the data is kept completely secret by the rating agencies. The IBF’s
admission before the Committee that none of the two existing private
rating systems passes the transparency yardstick as there is no independent
audit/oversight by either the industry or the regulator is highly perturbing.
The Ministry in their submission have agreed that putting in place an
independent audit system, as is being done in a number of other countries,
can be one of the mechanisms to check manipulation of the audience
measurement. The Committee feel that the extant system of TV
viewership ratings has not become confined only to the business interests
of the broadcasters, advertisers and advertising agencies but the larger
and fundamental public interest has been totally ignored inspite of the
fact that the rating studies have a definite say on the programme contents
and schedules. The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should
be comprehensive, mandatory and periodical audit of the functioning of
the rating agencies/system carried out by independent, qualified and
expert auditing firms to bring in a semblance of transparency in the
rating system and to ensure that the manipulations against larger public
interest are eliminated.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
(1) (2)
15. The rating agency besises
publishing the methodology/
process in detail shall also
publish the comments/
viewpoint of the users of the
rating data on their website.
63

and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
Recommendation of TRAI
(1)
The Authority recommends Self-
regulation through the Industry led
body, with Government exercising
oversight through its nominees in
the industry led body and
guidelines covering organization,
functions and methodology to be
adopted for ratings by the Industry
led body. The continuance of
Government nominees on BARC’s
board may be reviewed after five
years. Such industry led body
should be a not-for-profit body
registered under the Companies
Act, 1956.
Self-regulation should aim to
achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in
quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate,
up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest
possible standards of integrity
and to ensure that its finding
are not misused/manipulated
by anyone to convey a wrong
impression;
• To promote, maintain and
uphold fair, ethical and
healthy practices relating to
ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or decepted
practices employed in
connection with the sale or
views of ratings; and
Comments of BARC
(2)
BARC supports the principles and
objectives of self regulation and self
administration for broadcast
audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or
oversight, directly or indirectly, by
Government Self regulation and
Government intervention are a
clear contradiction in terms.
The first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives
of BARC. However, to observe
and enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
64

However, as recommended by the honorable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee are surprised to note that inspite of a plethora of
user/consumer centric measures available to stakeholders in several
industries, there is no specific forum or regulatory body to redress the
grievances of the stakeholders and the viewers against the rating studies/
agencies. In the absence of any grievances redressal forum, Prasar Bharati
(1) (2)
• Observe and enforce the
conditions and standards/
norms prescribed by the
Government for the rating
process.
Mandatory audits of rating
agencies, qualification of auditor,
scope of such audit and reporting.
The Authority recommends that:—
• There should be
comprehensive mandatory
audit of the rating system
carried out by independent
qualified auditing firms
having experience of TV
ratings audit.
• The Audit team should
comprise of technical experts,
statistician, media expert,
chartered accountant and
legal professional.
• The audit should be
conducted at least once in
three years. A copy of the
Audit report should be
submitted to the
Government.
There will be independent, third-
party audit. The frequency and
scope of audit will be determined
by BARC Board and a summary
Auditors’ Report will be placed on
BARC’s website.
65

has urged IBF to work towards that direction. IBF on its part has submitted
that the proposed BARC will urgently tackle the issue and may institute
a mechanism similar to the Consumer Complaints Council (CCC) of the
Advertising Standard Council of India (ASCI). The Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting have stated that although IBF has been in existence
since long, yet it was only after the issue was taken up by the Ministry
and meetings were called, that non-existence of any grievances redressal
mechanism has caught the attention of IBF and the formulation of BARC
has been proposed. The Ministry have also expressed their inability to
make further comments on the issue as the details of grievances redressal
mechanism have not been made available to them. The Committee do
not appreciate the attitude and statement of the Ministry as instead of
engaging in blame game the Ministry themselves should have taken some
pro-active measures long ago to facilitate establishment of some
complaints/grievances redressal mechanism. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon the Ministry to take up the matter urgently at the
appropriate fora and ensure that an effective mechanism is put in place
to handle the complaints/grievances against the shortcomings and
deficiencies in the rating system brought to notice by the viewers,
stakeholders, users, consumer organizations, etc.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
Recommendation of TRAI
(1)
The Authority recommends Self-
regulation through the Industry led
body, with Government exercising
oversight through its nominees in
the industry led body and
guidelines covering organization,
functions and methodology to be
adopted for ratings by the Industry
led body. The continuance of
Government nominees on BARC’s
board may be reviewed after five
years. Such industry led body
Comments of BARC
(2)
BARC supports the principles and
objectives of self regulation and
self administration for broadcast
audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or
oversight, directly or indirectly, by
Government Self regulation and
Government intervention are a
clear contradiction in terms. The
first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives of
BARC. However, to observe and
66

(1) (2)
should be a not-for-profit body
registered under the Companies
Act, 1956.
Self-regulation should aim to
achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in
quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate,
up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest
possible standards of integrity
and to ensure that its finding
are not misused/manipulated
by anyone to convey a wrong
impression;
• To promote, maintain and
uphold fair, ethical and
healthy practices relating to
ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or
decepted practices employed
in connection with the sale or
views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the
conditions and standards/
norms prescribed by the
Government for the rating
process.
Complaint Redressal mechanism
(a) BARC shall have in place a
complaints Redressal
mechanism, which shall be
responsible for handling
complaints, shortcoming and
deficiencies in the rating
system brought to notice by
Board of Directors, consumer
organizations, users of ratings
and the general public. BARC
enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms. The first
four objectives listed here describe
the stated objective of BARC.
However, to “observe and enforce
conditions/norms prescribed by
the Government” cannot be an
objective of self-regulation. This is
a clear contradiction in terms.
67

(1) (2)
may consider the model
followed by Advertising
Standards Council of India
(ASCI).
 (b) Till BARC is fully functional
in terms of selection of Rating
Agencies, BARC shall engage
constructively with the
existing rating agencies for
resolution of any complaints
received in respect of the
rating services.
BARC shall formalize MoU with
the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting to reflect the above
features and the eligibility
conditions for selection of rating
agencies.
Timeframe for Implementation –
The Authority expects that the
Government will be able to
complete processing the
Recommendations in four weeks
and the MoU can be signed
between BARC and the Ministry
within two weeks thereafter. BARC
should become fully functional
within eight weeks of signing the
MoU. Setting up of functional
norms by BARC may take another
four weeks and initiation of
activity by BARC should get
started by January, 2009.
The Authority further recommends
that if BARC fails to meet with the
objectives or is found deficient in
its functioning, the Government
shall then consider regulation of
rating system through TRAI by
way of legislative enactment or any
other institutional framework.
This is indeed the intention of
BARC.
BARC believes there is no role for
government intervention or
involvement in this industry
initiative. As such, there is no case
for such an MoU.
There is no case for any
government or government-related
agency to assess or intervene in the
conduct of an initiative taken by
industry in the conduct of its own
business except if such activity
violates the law of the land.
68

However, as recommended by the honorable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that presently there is no intervention by the
Government in the extant rating system and the industry is left to itself
to sort out the issue. According to the Ministry, as the deficiencies of the
Television Viewership Ratings system have not been addressed as yet,
despite it being in place for fifteen years, the intervention by the
Government is needed to set the matter right. Prasar Bharati has also
opined that there should be some kind of governmental oversight of the
rating system and the industry needs to be regulated so as to protect the
interest of all the stakeholders including the viewers. But according to
IBF, any governmental involvement in regulating the TRP system is not
at all desired as it may affect the business environment of the stakeholders.
Downplaying the importance of the viewers, IBF has contended that due
to the ratings, viewers are not affecte but the stakeholders are; advertisers
base their advertising spend on what the ratings tell them, this expenditure
is the principal revenue source for most broadcasters; advertising and
media agencies draw a sizable portion of their revenue from the
commissions earned on such expenditure and thus while rating certainly
measures what the audiences do, it’s economic effect is only felt by the
broadcasters, advertisers and advertising agencies. The Committee are in
absolute disagreement with the contention of IBF and would like to make
it clear in no uncertain terms that viewers have the largest stake in the
rating system. And the rating system in vogue in utter disregard to the
viewers’ sensitivities and preferences is promoting misuse of the
television’s platform in the spread of violence, vulgarity, crime, sex,
sensationalisation and blind imitation of the western culture, ignoring
India’s great cultural traditions and values. All this is being done in order
to attract viewership, especially the vulnerable groups, gain popularity
and earn are revenue. Thus, IBF’s contention that viewers are not affected
due to ratings is unacceptable to the Committee as economic interest of
certain classes can not and should not be given precedence over the
social ethos of the masses. The Committee have a feeling that perhaps
this sort of purely commercial attitude of the apex industry bodies like
IBF laced with a striking apathy towards the viewing public has resulted
in the system not improving despite it being in existence for so many
years under industry regulation. It is, therefore, high time the Government
intervened in the matter and put in place some sort of governmental
69

oversight/regulation on the TRP system to make it credible and accountable
to the choice and sensitivities of the viewers and prevent misuse of the
television media’s role protecting thereby the country’s rich culture,
traditional and social ethos.
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the importance of matter, this Ministry had sought the
recommendations of TRAI on the entire gamut of television ratings system
and the final recommendations have since been received. The relevant
recommendations of TRAI and response of BARC on the above is as
follows:—
Recommendation of TRAI
(1)
The Authority recommends Self-
regulation through the Industry led
body, with Government exercising
oversight through its nominees in
the industry led body and
guidelines covering organization,
functions and methodology to be
adopted for ratings by the Industry
led body. The continuance of
Government nominees on BARC’s
board may be reviewed after five
years. Such industry led body
should be a not-for-profit body
registered under the Companies
Act, 1956.
Self-regulation should aim to
achieve the following objectives:—
• Continuous improvement in
quality and method of rating
system, to provide accurate,
up to date and relevant
findings;
• To maintain the highest
possible standards of integrity
and to ensure that its finding
are not misused/manipulated
by anyone to convey a wrong
impression;
Comments of BARC
(2)
BARC supports the principles and
objectives of self regulation and
self administration for broadcast
audience measurement. This
implicity precludes intervention or
oversight, directly or indirectly, by
Government. Self regulation and
Government intervention are a
clear contradiction in terms. The
first four objectives listed here
described the stated objectives of
BARC. However, to observe and
enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
The first four objectives listed here
describe the stated objective of
BARC. However, to “observe and
enforce conditions/norms
prescribed by the Government”
cannot be an objective of self-
regulation. This is a clear
contradiction in terms.
70

However, as recommended by the honourable Committee, these
developments shall be carefully considered while formulating the
guideline/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee find the callous and indifferent attitude of the
Ministry towards the deleterious effects of the manipulated viewership
ratings of the broadcast content inexplicable. For a decade and a half,
the Government have remained a silent spectator to the surfeit of violence
and obscenity, the gradual denigration of Indian culture, social ethos and
values system under the specious plea that the rating system, hitherto,
remained unregulated and no policy/guidelines have been laid down by
them as the rating system is a business activity and the Government do
not normally interfere in business activity unless a larger public interest
is involved. The Ministry also remained blissfully smug under the notion
that industry would take corrective action on its own to make it more
• To promote, maintain and
uphold fair, ethical and
healthy practices relating to
ratings and its views;
• Discourage unfair or decepted
practices employed in
connection with the sale or
views of ratings; and
• Observe and enforce the
conditions and standards/
norms prescribed by the
Government for the rating
process.
The Authority further recommends
that if BARC fails to meet with the
objectives or is found deficient in
its functioning, the Government
shall then consider regulation of
rating system through TRAI by
way of legislative enactment or
any other institutional
framework.
(1) (2)
There is no case for any
government or government-related
agency to assess or intervene in the
conduct of an initiative taken by
industry in the conduct of its own
business except if such activity
violates the law of the land.
71

broad based and representative. At the cost of sounding repetitive, the
Committee would state that with almost 100% geographic coverage by
TV of a country having a population of 1.13 billion and 120 million TV
homes how larger a public interest is further required to convince the
Ministry that the rating system in vogue is not merely a business activity.
Moreover, the draft Broadcasting Bill which by the Ministry’s own
admission has been drafted twenty times since 1997 and has a lot to say
on broadcast content, ought to have given vital inputs to the Ministry
about the goings on in the rating business, more than a decade back, to
make them sit back and take appropriate corrective measures. The
Ministry, however, in their micawberish hope felt that the industry would
take corrective steps on its own and did nothing. The Committee consider
this deliberate inaction on the part of the Ministry a gross failure and
would like them to come up with comprehensive policy/guidelines in the
matter without any further dithering so that something is done to insulate
the hapless viewers from undesirable content being aired by the channels.
Action Taken by the Government
Although Television in India has been in existence for nearly five
decades now, it is only recently that the number of channels has grown
exponentially and from two channels prior to 1990–91, Indian viewers
were exposed to more than 50 channels by 1996 and to 360 as in June,
2008. The number has further grown to 422 till February, 2009. The
Ministry has been conscious of the role the Audience Measurement system
plays on the common viewers. Discussions with TAM Media Research
regarding methodology of collecting viewership data, its utility/usefulness
and for possibility of manipulation as well as its effect on the TV channels
in general leading to broadcasting of sensational issues or create
sensational news out of innocuous news began in April 2007 and TAM
Media Research was asked to make a presentation before the Hon’ble
MIB on 20.7.2007. Further, meeting at the level of Secretary (IB) was held
in August, 2007 with a-MAP and a meeting with large number of
stakeholders was held under the chairmanship of Hon’ble MIB on
7.10.2007. Many more such meetings and discussions were also held from
time to time. Therefore, it may be seen that appropriate efforts were
made by the Government and there was no deliberate inaction on its
part. The Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating and is
of the belief that a transparent and representative sample for measuring
the audience viewership is a must. In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations
and observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully considered
while formulating the guidelines/legislation on the subject.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
72

Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that a committee of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting headed by the Secretary of the Ministry has conducted
a preview of the existing Programme and Advertising Codes and have
formulated Self-Regulation Guidelines for the Broadcasting Sector. These
have been submitted to the Government in March, 2008. These drafts
Guidelines reportedly have addressed to a large extent the issues of
obscenity, vulgarity and denigration of Indian culture in the TV
programmes. Though the said Committee of the Ministry did not
deliberate upon the system of ratings, but the Committee feel that if the
guidelines are able to effectively put a check on the obscenity, vulgarity
and violence content and the denigration of Indian culture in the broadcast
content, the manipulative practices inherent in the present ratings system
will be automatically curbed to a large extent, flourish as they do primarily
on such objectionable contents. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
draft guidelines should be processed and finalized by the Government
urgently so that they are in the realm of implementation without any
further loss of time.
Action Taken by the Government
The Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating and is
of the belief that a transparent and representative sample for measuring
the audience viewership is a must. In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations
and observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully considered
while formulating the guidelines/legislation on the subject. Being conscious
of the impact of instances of obscene, vulgar and violent content on the
minds of viewers especially impressionable minors, the Government has
been actively involved in the formulation of guidelines to contain such
impact. However, certain sections of the media especially the news
channels do not see any role for the Government in monitoring of content
and have pleaded for complete self regulation by the industry. News
Broadcaster Association (NBA) and Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF)
have formulated their own codes and protocols specially in the aftermath
of 26/11/terrorist attack in Mumbai. They have also made a representation
before the Government not to go ahead with content code without seeking
a consensus. Further, action shall be taken after considering the views
of all the sections of the stakeholders and experience of self regulation
set in place by NBA.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
73

Recommendation (Para No. 34)
Time and again during the examination of the subject by the
Committee, the Ministry took shelter behind the inadequacy of the Cable
TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 in not covering the broadcast
measurement services. It was only when the Committee pointed out that
the Act had comprehensive penal provisions for content regulation and
the Ministry could have by the means of content regulation rendered
several malpractices in the ratings system infructuous, that the Ministry
could appreciate the exact scope and ambit of this Act. Apart from the
Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 the Committee found that
there is any array of legislations, which should have been involved by
the Ministry to regulate content and advertisements of the channels. These
include the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986;
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986; the Cinematograph Act, 1952; the
Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954;
the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950; the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; the Prize Competitions Act;
the Copyright Act, 1957; the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the Pharmacy
Act, 1948. Sadly however, during the years 2005, 2006 and 2007, a mere
221 notices were issued to defaulting channels and action like orders,
advisories, warnings, scrolling of apologies, which don’t count for much,
was taken in 67 cases. The Committee are pained to observe this lack
of action or rather will on the part of the Ministry on a matter of high
national importance over the last so many years. Inspite of so many laws,
to deal with all types of violations in the broadcast content, in existence,
the Ministry have abysmally failed to invoke them and take deterrent
action against the violators. The specious pleas that the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting is not the administrative Ministry for these
legislations and the Ministry could act more decisively with their own
legislation, which has remained elusive till date, are totally untenable.
The Committee rank this as another failure of the Ministry, which
facilitated the rot to set within. The Secretary’s admission before the
Committee about not much being done by the Ministry in the last fifteen
years only goes to corroborate this belief of the Committee. They, therefore,
desire that the Ministry should at least now act more purposefully and
professionally to have an effective oversight of the broadcast content
within the framework.
Action Taken by the Government
Regulation of improper content on the Television Channels have
been engaging the attention of this Ministry and to that end, the Cable
Television Act and Rules framed thereunder need to be reinforced. Initially
when the Act was framed, there were hardly any satellite TV channels
74

in India and therefore the Act was mostly targeted towards Cable
Networks rather than satellite channels which have often been
sensationalising content to attract more viewership in the race for
garnering higher TRP Ratings and consequently higher ad revenues.
The Programme and Advertising Codes under the Cable TV Rules
contain provisions which are on the lines of various enactments
enumerated by the Hon’ble Committee. As pointed out during evidence,
this ministry has been taking action against the defaulting TV channels
to the extent permissible under the Cable TV Act. However, due to absence
of specific broadcasting legislation for setting up an independent content
Regulator and pecuniary penalty, Hon’ble Committee felt that adequate
steps were not being taken.
The Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating and each
of the belief that a transparent and representative sample for measuring
the audience viewership is a must. In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations
and observations of the Hon’ble Committee shall be carefully be
considered while formulating the guidelines on the subject. Being
conscious of the impact of the obscene, vulgar and violent content on
the minds of viewers especially impressionable minors, the Government
has been actively involved in the formulation of guidelines to contain
such impact. However, certain sections of the media especially the news
channels do not see any role for the Government in monitoring of content
and have pleaded for complete self regulation by the industry. News
Broadcasters Association (NBA) and Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF)
have formulated their own codes and protocols specially in the aftermath
of 26/11/terrorist attack in Mumbai. They have also made a representation
before the Government not to go ahead with content code without seeking
a consensus. Further, action shall be taken after considering the views
of all the sections of the stakeholders. Amendments to the Cable Television
Rules are under consideration of the Ministry to address the issue.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
To sum up, the Committee find that even after in existence for
more than one and half decade, the extant TRP system suffers from a
slew of shortcomings which include lack of transparency, authenticity,
credibility, accountability, competition and the serious limitations of small
sample size and their impact on content and scheduling of programmes
with scant regard to the choice and sensitiveness of the viewers if the
viewers. The purely commercial attitude of the industry and its exclusive
75

focus on the interest of only three stakeholders namely the broadcasters,
advertisers and advertising agencies relegating the most important
stakeholder i.e. the viewers to the background has prevented the rating
industry to address the shortcomings effectively. The inaction of the
Ministry, even after admitting that some governmental oversight is needed
to regulate the industry, has worsened the situation. The Committee in
the preceding paragraphs have dealt with these shortcomings in detail
and hope that their considered recommendations will receive focused
attention of the Government, at least for the sake of the common viewers.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry shares the concerns of the Committee that the extant
Television Rating Point system suffers from a slew of shortcomings.
Regulation of improper content on the Television Channels has been
engaging the attention of this Ministry and to that end, the Cable Television
Act and Rules framed thereunder had to be strengthened accordingly.
Initially when the Act was framed, there were hardly any satellite
TV channels in India and therefore the Act was mostly targeted towards
Cable Networks rather than satellite channels which have showing
distorted content to attract more viewership. This has led to race for
garnering higher TRP Ratings.
The Programme and Advertising Codes under the Cable TV Rules
contain provisions which are on the lines of various enactments
enumerated by the Hon’ble Committee. As pointed out during evidence,
this Ministry has been taking action against the defaulting TV channels
to the extent permissible under the Cable TV Act. However, due to absence
of specific broadcasting legislation for setting up an independent content
Regulator and pecuniary penalty, Hon’ble Committee felt that adequate
steps were not being taken.
The Government is fully conscious of the impact of rating on the
content of television channels and agrees that a transparent and
representative sample for measuring the audience viewership is required.
In this regard, TRAI’s recommendations and observations of the Hon’ble
Committee shall be carefully considered while formulating the guidelines/
legislation on the subject. Being conscious of the impact of instances of
obscene, vulgar and violent content on the minds of viewers especially
impressionable minors, the Government has been actively involved in the
formulation of guidelines to contain such impact. However, certain sections
of the media especially the news channels do not see any role for the
Government in monitoring of content and have pleaded for complete self
regulation by the industry. News Broadcasters Association (NBA) and
Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) have formulated their own codes
76

and protocols specially in the aftermath of 26/11/terrorist attack in
Mumbai. They have also made a representation before the Government
not to go ahead with content code without seeking a consensus. Further,
action shall be taken after considering the views of all the sections of
the stakeholders and the experience with self regulation as put in place
by NBA.
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting BC-II Section O.M.
No. 3103/3/2207-BC-II (Vol. III) dated 20.01.2010]
N
EW DELHI;  RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
13 August, 2010 Chairman,
22 Sravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
77

APPENDIX I
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:—
Paragraph Nos: 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 27
Total : 07
Percentage : 20.00
(ii)Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
Paragraph No: Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : 00.00
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration
Paragraph Nos: 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 31 and 32
Total : 07
Percentage : 20.00
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of
interim nature:—
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
30, 33, 34 and 35
Total : 21
Percentage : 60.00
78

Gist of the
Recommendations/
Observations of the
Committee
(2)
The Committee had
observed that paradoxically
the ratings are now
determined by the spending
pattern on advertisements,
programme scheduling and
content besides influencing
the pricing of channels and
little heed is being paid to
the viewers interest.
The Committee had pointed
out several grey areas in the
extant audience measurement
system which inter-alia
included lack of transparency,
authenticity, credibility,
objectivity and competition
with scant respect to the
likes and sensitivities of the
viewing public.
The Committee had
observed that there is lack of
transparency and reliability
in the collection of data and
most importantly, the likes,
Recomm-
endations/
Observa-
tions
Para No.
(1)
1.
2.
3.
Gist of the interim
replies furnished by the
Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting
(3)
The Ministry referred the
matter to TRAI for their
recommendations in
January, 2008 and the same
have been received by them.
However, they have again
referred back the matter to
TRAI on 19.12.2009 for
further suggestions/
recommendations.
–do–
The Ministry have merely
informed that the
observations of the Hon’ble
Committee shall be carefully
considered while formulating
APPENDIX II
TABLE SHOWING RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ON WHICH INTERIM REPLIES HAVE BEEN
FURNISHED BY MINISTRY OF INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING
79

(1) (2) (3)
dislikes and interests of the
viewers had largely
remained unaddressed by
the extant rating system.
Therefore, the Committee
had desired that some
effective mechanism should
be put in place in
consultation with all the
stakeholders to overcome the
impediments so that the
extant rating system takes
care of the interests of all the
stakeholders including that
of the viewers.
The Committee had pointed
out that the rating system
can neither be
comprehensive nor be
foolproof without covering
all the States and most
importantly without
reflecting the preference of
rural India and had
recommended that some via
media should be explored by
the Ministry to ensure
adequate coverage of the
rural areas in the country by
the existing two rating
agencies i.e. TAM Media
Research and a-Map.
The Committee had
concluded that the sample
size of 0.005 per cent of 1.13
billion population adopted
by TAM Media Research and
a-Map cannot be considered
as representative of a country
like India taking into
consideration its social and
economic diversity.
the guidelines/legislation on
the subject.
–do–
–do–
4.
5.
80

(1) (2) (3)
While noting that TAM
Media Research does not
have any clear cut procedure
for rotation of sample
households and a-Map does
have a rotation policy of
10 per cent households
being rotated every six
months, the Committee have
found that such a situation
is not at all conclusive to a
vibrant, impartial and
comprehensive sampling.
Besides, the Committee have
opined that the extant
measurement methods of
TRP are inadequate to cover
the new technologies like,
digital TV, HDTV, interactive
television and digital video
recorders. Resultantly, the
samplings are distorted and
encouraged creation of
barriers and use of various
unfair and anti competitive
measures to distort the
competition.
The Committee had noted
that the present trend in the
world is way ahead with a
system of real time ratings
through unobtrusive means
being in vogue and therefore,
recommended that the
Ministry should take
immediate steps to not only
eliminate the shortcomings
in the extant rating system
but also ensure that it is in
tune with the best in the
world.
The Ministry have
informed that TRAI’s
recommendations in this
respect shall also be
considered so that the urban
bias in the rating system is
eliminated to the extent
possible. In view of the issue
of TV ratings being studied
by Government authorities,
Television audience research
agency has of late started
covering digital platforms
also. However, because of
the limited number of
people meters, it may not be
an adequate step. This issue
shall also be considered while
formulating comprehensive
guidelines/legislation on the
subject.
–do–
6.
7.
81

(1) (2) (3)
The Committee had
recommended that in view
of the pressing need for
making the rating system
comparable with the
emerging technologies, the
rating agencies should use
such technology, which is
capable of capturing data
over different platforms so as
to ensure a holistic view of
the viewers preferences.
The Committee had urged
the Ministry to take effective
measures to address the
reported impediments like
entry barriers, use of various
unfair and anti competitive
measures by the existing
players and apprehensions in
the minds of the new players
to enter the rating business
so that there is sufficient
competition and the system
becomes fair and truly
reflective of the viewers
choice.
Expressing their serious
displeasure over the lack of
transparency, reliability and
authenticity persisting in the
rating system, which has
been in vogue since the last
one and a half decade, the
Committee emphasize on
periodical rotation of the
panel homes by the rating
agencies. Besides, the
Committee opined that the
disclosure of the data and
–do–
Recommendations of the
Hon’ble Committee shall be
taken into consideration
while formulating such
guideline/legislation. TRAI’s
recommendations in this
respect shall also be
considered so that the urban
bias in the rating system is
eliminated to the extent
possible. While considering
its recommendations some
issues emerged which have
been referred to TRAI for
further suggestions/
recommendation vide letter
dated 09.12.2009.
While considering TRAI’s
recommendations some
issues emerged which have
been again referred back to
TRAI for further
suggestions/recommenda-
tion vide letter dated
09.12.2009.
8.
9.
10.
82

(1) (2) (3)
methodology/process
adopted by the rating
agencies for the system, in
detail and in clear terms, to
the clients, users and the
public is imperative for fair
and transparent studies.
The Committee had
recommended that the
Ministry should urgently
look towards removing the
impediments like staff
constraints that are being
faced by various Door
Darshan Kendras (DDKs) so
that they are able to conduct
the required number of
studies. Consequently, a
higher allocation can be
considered to increase the
samples of the study and to
acquire computers and
software for data tabulation
and analysis for
comprehensive rating
studies.
The Committee had
recommended that the
Ministry should consider viz.
the insistence on keeping the
Government out of the
regulatory mechanism; not
nominating the Public
Service Broadcaster amongst
the directors of IBF on BARC
Board in the most crucial
formative years of the
Council; the general
reluctance of the Prasar
Bharati management to be a
part of IBF because of ethical
issues involved; the
The Ministry have informed
that higher allocation to
increase the sample of DART
Study has already been
proposed in the revised
DART Survey Study and
also for analysis and
tabulation of data. For this,
rates have also been revised
for data collection and for
panel motivators. Keeping in
view the growth of DD
channels and presence of
different platforms, tabulation
plan is being worked out.
The Committee have been
informed that while
considering its
recommendations some
issues emerged which have
been referred to TRAI for
further suggestions/
recommendations vide letter
dated 09.12.2009.
17.
20.
83

(1) (2) (3)
Ministry’s admission that
they would not be having
any say in the composition/
functioning of BARC; there
being no interaction or
interface with the
Government pre and post
formation of BARC; the cross
industry and converging
industries stakes, the
asymmetrical voting pattern
in BARC, with four directors
of IBF having only one vote
being ranged against four
directors each of AAAI and
ISA having two votes and the
portends of IBF being
outvoted every time on
crucial matters, the
asymmetrical voting
strengths being compounded
by the injudicious corpus
sharing between IBF, AAAI
and ISA in the ratio of 80:15:5
when all three have equal
rights and powers; the
conflict of interest amongst
IBFs members; there being
no clear cut acknowledgement
or demarcation of the role of
the Public Service
Broadcaster in the scheme of
things inspite of it being the
largest in terms of reach and
spread and also being
entrusted with the mandate
of public service, which is
quite diverse from the highly
commercial interests of other
players involved; the
lopsided funds contribution
model, the virtual exclusion
of viewers interest by the IBF
84

(1) (2) (3)
during their candid
admission before the
Committee that ratings to not
affect viewers but the
stakeholders, etc. should be
carefully addressed so that
rating business does not
continue unregulated and
unfettered. The Committee
had also desire for a
comprehensive action plan
and on this crucial matter
without any further delay.
The Committee had opined
that instead of blindly
following any particular
model of any country, a
transparent system in
consonance with the global
best practices and the social
ethos of the Country should
be evolved to protect the
interest of not only the
broadcasters, advertisers and
media agencies but more
significantly that of the most
important stakeholder i.e. the
viewer.
The Committee have
recommended that the
Governments should work
out modalities so that the
rating agencies are registered
and fulfill all the eligibility
criteria. The Committee
specifically desire that with
a view to maintaining
operational and ethical
standards as well as
unbiased reporting, the
rating agencies should not
have any stakes in the
–do–
–do–
22.
23.
85

(1) (2) (3)
broadcasters, advertisers
agencies and vice versa.
The Committee had desired
that there should be
comprehensive, mandatory
and periodical audit of the
functioning of the rating
agencies/system carried out
by independent, qualified
and expert auditing firms to
bring in a semblance of
transparency in the rating
system and to ensure that the
manipulations against larger
public interest are
eliminated.
The Committee had
impressed upon the Ministry
to take up urgent steps at the
appropriate fora to have an
effective mechanism to
handle the complaints/
grievances against the
shortcomings and
deficiencies in the rating
system brought to notice by
the viewers, stakeholders,
users, consumer
organizations, etc.
The Committee noted that
the rating system in vogue
in utter disregard to the
viewers’ sensitivities and
preferences is promoting
misuse of the television’s
platform in the spread of
violence, vulgarity, crime,
sex, sensationalisation and
blind imitation of the
western culture, ignoring
India’s great cultural
–do–
–do–
–do–
24.
25.
26.
86

(1) (2) (3)
traditions and values. All this
is being done in order to
attract viewership, especially
the vulnerable groups, gain
popularity and earn are
revenue. The Committee also
did not accept the Indian
Broadcasting Foundation’s
contention that viewers are
not affected due to ratings
and had opined that the
economic interest of certain
classes cannot and should
not be given precedence over
the social ethos of the
masses. The Committee felt
that perhaps this sort of
purely commercial attitude
of the apex industry bodies
like IBF laced with a striking
apathy towards the viewing
public has resulted in the
system not improving
despite it being in existence
for so many years under
industry regulation. Therefore,
the Committee recommended
that it is high time the
Government should intervene
in the matter and put
in place some sort of
governmental oversight/
regulation on the TRP system
to make it credible and
accountable to the choice and
sensitivities of the viewers
and prevent misuse of the
television media’s role
protecting thereby the
country’s rich culture,
traditional and social
ethos.
87

(1) (2) (3)
The Committee had
observed that the
Government had remained
the silent spectator to the
surfeit of violence and
obscenity, the gradual
denigration of Indian
culture, social ethos and
values system under the
specious plea that the rating
system, hitherto, remained
unregulated and no policy/
guidelines have been laid
down by them as the rating
system is a business activity
and the Government do not
normally interfere in
business activity unless a
larger public interest is
involved. As such the
Committee had observed
that this deliberative inaction
on the part of the Ministry is
a gross failure and
emphasize for a
comprehensive policy/
guideline in the matter
without any further delay.
The Committee had noted
that the Ministry had
formulated a Self Regulation
Guidelines for the
Broadcasting Sector and had
submitted to the
Government in March, 2008
to address to a large extent
the issues of obscenity,
vulgarity and denigration of
Indian culture in the TV
programmes. The Committee
had desired that the draft
Guidelines should be
The Ministry have informed
that the Government is fully
conscious of the impact of
rating and is of the belief
that a transparent and
representative sample for
measuring the audience
viewership is a must. In this
regard, TRAI’s recommenda-
tions and observations of the
Hon’ble Committee shall be
carefully considered while
formulating the guidelines/
legislation on the subject.
The Ministry have
informed that TRAI’s
recommendations and
observations of the Hon’ble
Committee shall be carefully
be considered while
formulating the guidelines
on the subject. However,
certain sections of the media
especially the news channels
do not see any role for the
Government in monitoring
of content and have pleaded
for complete self regulation
30.
33.
88

(1) (2) (3)
processed and finalized by
the Government urgently so
that they are in the realm of
implementation without any
further loss of time.
While noting the Ministry’s
inaction and indifference
towards the deleterious
effects of manipulated TRP
ratings during the last fifteen
years and their failure to take
action against violators of
Broadcast Content Code
inspite of a plethora of laws
viz. the Cable TV Networks
(Regulation) Act, 1995, the
Indecent Representation of
Women (Prohibition) Act,
1986; the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986; the
Cinematograph Act, 1952;
the Drugs and Magic
Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisements) Act, 1954;
the Emblems and Names
(Prevention of Improper
Use) Act, 1950; the
Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954; the
Prize Competitions Act; the
Copyright Act, 1957; the
by the industry. News
Broadcasters Association
(NBA) and Indian
Broadcasting Foundation
(IBF) have formulated their
own codes and protocols
specially in the aftermath of
26/11/terrorist attack in
Mumbai. The Government
has also constituted a Task
Force which will hold
consultations with all
stakeholders for arriving at
a consensus on content
Code.
–do–
34.
89

(1) (2) (3)
Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940, the Pharmacy Act,
1948, the Committee had
emphasized that the Ministry
should act more
purposefully and
professionally oversight of
the broadcast content within
the framework of the existing
laws.
The Committee hope that
their recommendations
would receive focused
attention of the Government,
at least for the sake of the
common viewers.
–do–
35.
90

APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th August, 2010 from 1600
hours to 1800 hours in Room No. ‘62’ , First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Milind Deora
4. Shri Charles Dias
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Prem Das Rai
10. Shri Toofani Saroj
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Dr. Bhola Singh
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
91

Rajya Sabha
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Prabhat Jha
16. Shri M.P. Achuthan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
*** *** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up first item on the agenda
i.e. consideration and adoption of two draft Action Taken Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on Sixty-seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Television Audience Measurement
in India’. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the
aforesaid draft reports without any modification.
*** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
92