 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA)  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) 
  
 
18 


 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA)  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
COMPOSITON OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
 REPORT  
 Part-I  
 Chapter-I 1-3 
I. History and background of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) 
Amendment Bill  
 
1 
 Chapter-II 4-22 
II. Analysis of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 
2010 
 
4 
(i) The status of employees working in Prasar Bharati 
 
4 
(ii) Non implementation of the provisions made under Section 11 of ‘The Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990’ 
 
5 
(iii) Proposed status of deemed deputation to employees of Prasar Bharati 
 
5 
(iv) Recruitment Regulations and Service Conditions of Employees of Prasar Bharati 
  
12 
(v) Pay and Allowances to Prasar Bharati Employees 
 
14 
(vi) Issues relating to officers of Indian Information Service, Central Secretariat Service 
 
16 
(vii) Status of Work Charged Employees 
 
17 
(viii) Financial viability of Prasar Bharati 
 
18 
(ix) Absorption of Employees in Organisation like MTNL/BSNL 
 
21 
(x) Comprehensive Review of ‘The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990’  
 
21 
 Part-II  
 Recommendations/Observations 23-40 
   
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment  Bill, 2010 
 
41 
II. Statement indicating the history and background of the Bill as furnished by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
48 
III. Statement indicating the sanctioned strength and vacancies in the Prasar Bharati 
Corporation as furnished by Prasar Bharati 
 
54 
IV. Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee held on 20 October, 2010 
 
55 
V. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 27 October, 2010 
 
58 
*VI. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 23 November, 2010 
 
60 
*VII Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 8 December, 2010  
 
 
* Not included in the cyclostyled copy. 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
           
          Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
   
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Prem Das Rai 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
17. Dr. Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
20. Shri C. Sivasami 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
*25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2.     Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director  
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eighteenth Report on „The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) 
Amendment Bill, 2010‟ relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
 
2. The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010 
was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010 and referred to this Committee on  
8 September, 2010 for exami nation and report within two months.  On the request of 
the Committee, the time given was extended till the last week of Winter Session of 
Parliament by the Speaker, Lok Sabha to enable the Committee to have wider 
consultations and present the Report to the House. 
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar 
Bharati briefed the Committee on the provisions made under the amending legislation 
on 20 October, 2010.  Since the provisions under the amending legislation relate  to 
Recruitment Rules and Service Conditions of Prasar Bharati employees, the Committee 
invited written views in the form of memoranda from the staff/employees Associations 
viz. National Federation of Akashvani and Doordarshan Employees Association (NFADE)  
and Akashvani and Doordarshan Administrative Staff Association (ADASA).  The 
Committee also heard their views at the sitting held on 27 October, 2010.  The 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati on 23 November, 2010.  The representatives of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Departments of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) 
assisted the Committee in clarifying the legal position with regard to the aforesaid 
amending legislation at the sitting of the Committee held on 23 November, 2010 
   
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 8th December, 2010. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati for tendering oral evidence 
before the Committee and providing valuable information that the Committee desired in 
connection with examination of the Bill.  The Committee also wish to express their 
thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal 
Affairs and Legislative Department) in assisting the Committee.  They further wish to 

 
 
express their thanks to the representatives of the National Federation of Akashvani and 
Doordarshan Employees Association (NFADE) and Akashvani and Doordarshan 
Administrative Staff Association (ADASA) for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing written suggestions on the amending Bill.  
  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    December, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
  

 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
I. HISTORY AND BACKGROUND OF THE PRASAR BHARATI 
(BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INDIA) AMENDMENT BILL, 
2010 
 
 The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010 
(Appendix-I) was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010 and was referred 
to the Standing Committee on Information Technology on 8 September, 2010 for 
examination and report to the House within two months i.e. by 7 November, 2010.   
Hon‟ble Speaker, subsequently, permitted extension of time upto the last week of 
Winter Session of Parliament for the purpose of presenting Report on the request of 
the Standing Committee as per the decision taken at the sitting held on 20 October, 
2010 so as to facilitate wider consultations on the provisions made under the Bill. 
 
2. The aforesaid legislation seeks to settle the long-pending issues of the status 
of employees working in Prasar Bharati.  The Prasar Bharati Corporation was 
established w.e.f. 23 November, 1997 as per the provisions made under „The Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990‟.  Prior to the creation of 
Prasar Bharati, All India Radio and Doordarshan were attached offices of the 
Ministry of Information and Broa dcasting.  The employees on their strength were 
Central Government employees.  These employees continued to work in Prasar 
Bharati after its establishment.  Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act provides for 
transfer of officers or employees serving in All India Radio or Doordarshan to the 
Corporation by the Central Government where it has ceased to perform any of the 
functions of the Corporation specified in Section 12 thereof.  It further provides that 
no such order shall be made in respect of any officer who has intimated, within the 
specified period, his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation.  
However, the employees were not given option in terms of Section 11 for transfer 
of their services to the Corporation.  As indicated by the Minis try, such option has 

 
 
been dispensed with in view of the resistance from the Staff/Employees 
Associations.   
 
3. It has been mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill 
that the Government kept receiving representations from the employees about their 
status as to whether they were to remain as Government employees or as 
employees on deemed deputation serving in an autonomous organization.  It gave 
rise to a number of litigations in various High Courts.  Since the matter concerning 
Prasar Bh arati were considered to be of grave public importance, the Central 
Government decided to constitute a Group of Ministers on 7 March, 2006 to take a 
final view.  Further, Supreme Court of India, in appeals clubbed together in Civil 
Appeal No. 3244/2002, while upholding the right of the Prasar Bharati Broadcasting 
Corporation of India to transfer the employees directed the Union of India on 2 
February, 2007 to take a firm decision in terms of Section 11 of the aforesaid Act 
and complete the entire process of  deciding the service related issues of Prasar 
Bharati employees.     
4. Accordingly, the Group of Ministers in its meetings held on 5 October, 2007 
and 26 September, 2008 recommended that the Government employees shall 
continue to serve in Prasar Bharati on „deemed deputation‟ basis till the time of 
their retirement with all facilities at par with Central Government employees and 
that the persons recruited after 23 November, 2007 i.e. the date on which Prasar 
Bharati was established, and serving in Prasar Bharati on the date of the decision of 
the Group of Ministers i.e. 5 October, 2007 will also be treated as Government 
employees on „deemed deputation‟ to Prasar Bharati and will enjoy all facilities at 
par with the Central Government employees.  With regard to the matters related to 
the posts borne on the strength of the cadres of the Indian Information Service, 
Central Secretariat Service and any other cadres borne outside Akashvani and 
Doordarshan, the Bill provides that the terms and conditions of their service in the 

 
 
Corporation shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  Further, the amending 
legislation provides that the provisions made under the proposed Bill shall not 
include persons engaged or appointed on daily wages, casual, ad hoc or work 
charged basis.   
5. Since the provisions made under the Bill relate to the service conditions of 
the employees working in Prasar Bharati, the Committee invited views of various 
Staff/Employees Associations and also heard the views of the representatives of 
two Associations viz. National Federation of Akashvani and Doordarshan Employees 
(NFADE) and Akashvani and Doordarshan Administrative Staff Association (ADASA).  
The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar 
Bharati briefed the Committee about the provisions made in the Bill at their sitting 
held on 20 October, 2010.  The Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati 
at their sitting held on 23 November, 20 10.  The representatives of the Legislative 
Department and Department of Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
assisted the Committee in clarifying the various legal issues involved.  The 
Committee in the process of examination of the Bill calle d for written replies to 
various issues that emerged during the deliberations on the provisions made under 
Bill from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as well as Prasar Bharati.  
Having examined the provisions made under the Bill after due delib erations and in 
consultation with the representatives of the Staff/Employees Associations, the 
Committee could arrive at their views on the various provisions made in the Bill.  
The detailed position with regard to the deliberations alongwith the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee with regard to the provisions 
made in the Bill has been given in the subsequent Chapters of the Report. 
CHAPTER-II 
 

 
 
II. ANALYSIS OF THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING 
CORPORATION OF INDIA) AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
(i) The status of employees working in Prasar Bharati 
6. The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 
provides for the establishment of a Broadcasting Corporation of India, to be 
known as Prasar Bharati.  The said Act came into force on 15 Septemb er, 
1997.  The accounts of Prasar Bharati were separated from the accounts of 
the Government w.e.f.             1 April, 2000.  Prasar Bharati started 
receiving funds as Grants -in-Aid and loan w.e.f. 1 April, 2000.  The Prasar 
Bharati was functioning as if  it was a Government Department until the 
accounts were separated w.e.f. 1 April, 2000.  As informed by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting until this time the salaries of employees and 
the contributions towards pension were made out of Consolidat ed Fund of 
India.   
7. As per the information furnished by Prasar Bharati, the total number of 
sanctioned strength of AIR and Doordarshan is 48173 [AIR 
(26473)+Doordarshan (21700)].  There are 11498 vacancies and as such 
the existing strength is 36675.   
8. Out of 36675 employees 2738 (2465 for AIR and 273 for Doordarshan) 
were recruited during the period 23 November, 1997 (the appointed day 
when notification for establishment of Prasar Bharati Corporation was 
issued) to              5 October, 2007 (the da te of decision regarding the 
status of employees by the Group of Ministers).  Besides, 895 employees 
were recruited after 5 October, 2007. Thus out of total 36675 employees 
33042 employees i.e. 90.09 per cent of the employees were serving in All 

 
 
India Radi o and Doordarshan prior to the establishment of Prasar Bharati 
and continued serving Prasar Bharati after its establishment.  
(ii) Non implementation of the provisions made under Section 11 of 
„The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 
1990‟. 
 
9. Section 11 of „The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) 
Act, 1990‟ provides the detailed provisions to transfer Central Government 
Employees serving in Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation. In this 
connection the employees we re supposed to give the option to be 
transferred to the Corporation or their intention of not being in the 
Corporation. The aforesaid provisions are also applicable to the members of 
the Indian Information Service the Central Secretariat Service or any oth er 
service or to persons borne on cadres outside Akashvani and Doordarshan 
who have been working in Akashvani or Doordarshan immediately before the 
appointed day.  When enquired about the reasons for not calling the option 
from officers and staff and absorbing them as Prasar Bharati employees, the 
Ministry in the written note has submitted as under:- 
“There is no technical hitch in calling for option under Section 11 of the 
Prasar Bharati Act from the employees for either getting absorbed in 
Prasar Bharati or remaining as Government servants. However, such 
an option has been dispensed with in view of the resistance from the 
employee associations.” 
 
(iii) Proposed status of deemed deputation to employees of Prasar 
Bharati 
10. The option as prescribed under Section 11 of the principal Act could 
never be obtained from the employees and the uncertainty about their 
status continued.  As mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
the Bill, the Government kept receiving rep resentations from the employees 
about their status as to whether they were to remain as Government 

 
 
employees or as employees on deemed deputation serving in an 
autonomous organization.  It gave rise to a number of litigations in various 
High Courts.  The P arliamentary Standing Committee on Information 
Technology in 47 th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) and in subsequent 
Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting have consistently been insisting to end the stalemate about the 
status of employees.  
11. The detailed note as furnished by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting indicating the history and background of the Bill is given at 
Appendix-II.  
12. It has been mentioned in the aforesaid note that since the 
establishment of the Corporation w.e.f. 23 November, 1997, Corporation has 
passed orders transferring employees of operational and administrative staff 
to various parts of India as per requirements. The legality of such transfer 
orders were challenged by certain employees before CAT, Chandigarh bench 
on the ground that the Corporation does not have the power to transfer the 
employees and by an order  dated 6 October, 2000, the said transfer orders 
were quashed by CAT, Chandigarh Bench. 
13. Subsequently aggrieved b y the said judgment, the Corporation filed 
Writ Petition in 2001 (CWP No. 10856 -CAT/2001) before the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana which was dismissed by the said High Court on 26 July, 
2001. Aggrieved by the said judgment of the High court, the Corpora tion 
filed a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court in 2002. 
 
 

 
 
14. The important observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case 
are as under:- 
“The short question which arises for consideration is as to 
whether in the peculiar situation o btaining in the matter, the 
Corporation can be said to have any power of transfer of the 
employees who although are working in its establishment, but 
continue to be the employees of the Central Government. 
xxxxxx…..This case raises practical problems which  is the 
creation of Union of India and the appellants. It is difficult for us 
to comprehend as to why the Union of India did not exercise its 
statutory functions for such a long time. It was, in our opinion, 
obliged to take a decision one way or the other.  It was for the 
Union of India to transfer the officers or employees of the 
Doordarshan and Akashvani to the Corporation. In such an 
event, the employees could have exercised their option as 
envisaged under sub -section (5) of Section 11 of the Act. The 
consequences of passing of an order under sub -section (1) of 
Section 11, as noticed herein before, are provided for under sub-
section (4) thereof. The transfer of an employee deputed under 
sub-section (1) of Section 11 is that of a permanent nature. So 
long an order under sub -section (1) is not passed, indisputably 
the employees and officers would continue to be the employees 
of the Central Government. They shall unless otherwise an order 
is passed would be governed by the terms and conditions of 
services evidenced by the rules framed by the President of India 
under proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of 
India. Indisputably, no such order having been passed, the 
respondents continued to be the employees of the Central 
Government. However, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever 
that the services of the respondents have been placed at the 
disposal of the Corporation although no order of deputation has 
been passed. 
xxxxxxxx…….The situation as obtaining in the present case, 
however, in our opinion, wou ld amount to be a case of deemed 
deputation. It is true that no order has been passed by the 
Central Government on this behalf, but the respondents acted in 
the manner as if such an order had been passed. The 
respondents have been working with the Corporat ion for along 
time without any demur whatsoever. They are undoubtedly 
under the control and supervision of the officers of the 
Corporation. There are a large number of departments. Each 
department has separate functions. Work of one department, 
however, would be related to another. 
xxxxx……..It has not been disputed that the functions of the 
Central Government has been taken over by the Corporation in 
terms of Section 12 of the Act, when the Corporation has started 
functioning on and from the appointed day. It requires man 
power for managing ifs affairs. It has been doing so with the 

 
 
existing staff. They are being paid their salaries or other 
remunerations by the Corporation. They are subjected to 
effective control by its officers. The respondents, for all in tent 
and purposes, are therefore, under the control of the 
Corporation. 
xxxxx………The Corporation has not framed its own rules. In 
absence of any rules, however, an employer, it is well -known, 
would have an inherent power to deal with its employees. In a 
situation of this nature, we have no doubt that the same would 
include a power of transfer. It is one thing to say that an 
employer does not possess of any power to transfer in terms of 
the extant rules or conditions of service or the nature thereof, 
but the same does not mean that the employer must have the 
power to transfer its employees only in terms of a statute. 
xxxxxx…….We do not find that the action taken by the appellants 
herein in transferring the respondents is in any way arbitrary or 
irrational. The  orders of transfer have been passed in the 
interest of the administration and with a view to carry on its 
functions.” 
 
15. With the continuous pursuance of the issue by the Parliamentary 
Committees and Courts, the Government decided to constitute a Group of 
Ministers on 7 March, 2006 to take a final view.  In the meanwhile, Supreme 
Court of India in appeals clubbed together in Civil Appeal No. 3244/2002, 
while upholding the right of Prasar Bharati Broadcasting Corporation of India 
to transfer the employees , directed the Union of India on 2 February, 2007 
to take a firm decision in terms of Section 11 of the aforesaid Act and 
complete the entire process of deciding the service related issues of Prasar 
Bharati employees within six months.   
16. While elaborating on the steps initiated by the Government to settle 
the issue of status of employees of Prasar Bharati, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting during the course of deliberations stated as 
under:- 
“A Group of Ministers was constituted in  2006 and they held a 
large number of meetings.  One of the issues placed before the 
Group of Ministers was regarding the status of the employees.  

 
 
The Group of Ministers, in one of its meeting held on 5 October, 
2007, recommended that the employees workin g in Prasar 
Bharati may continue on deemed deputation with all benefits 
available to Central Government employees.  However, the 
minutes of the meeting of 5 October, 2007 were not clear as to 
the employees serving in Prasar Bharati up to which date are to 
be extended this benefit.  A need was, therefore, felt to specify 
this cut-off date. 
Therefore, the issue was again deliberated in the meeting of the 
Group of Ministers held on 26 September, 2008.  In this 
meeting, the Group of Ministers reiterated its recommendations 
that the Government employees shall continue to serve in Prasar 
Bharati on deemed deputation basis till the time of their 
retirement with all facilities at par with Central Government 
employees and those persons recruited after 23 November, 
1997, which, as I mentioned, is the Appointed Day when the 
Corporation came into existe nce, and serving in Prasar Bharati 
on the date of the decision of the Group of Ministers, i.e. 5 
October, 2007, shall also be treated as Government employees 
on deemed deputation basis and will enjoy all facilities at par 
with Central Government employees.   It further recommended 
for bringing necessary amendments to the Act for giving effect to 
this decision.   
After the new Government came, the Group of Ministers was re -
constituted and in its meeting held on 16 April, 2010, the earlier 
decision stood about the deemed deputation status.” 
 
17. In pursuance of the decision taken by the Group of Ministers, Section 
11 of the principal Act has been proposed to be dispensed with and 
substituted by Section 11(1), 11(2), 11(3), 11(4), 11(5), 11 A and 11 B of 
the ame nding legislation.  The aforesaid provisions provides the status of 
deemed deputation to (a) the officers and employees recruited for the 
purpose of Akashvani and Doordarshan before the appointed day and in 
service in the Corporation as on        1 st day of April, 2000 as well as to; (b) 
all officers and employees recruited during the period on or after the 
appointed day till 5 th day of October, 2007.  For            (a) category the 
deemed deputation status is provided till retirement but for         (b) 
category the word „till retirement‟ has not been added which makes the 
provision for this category vague.   
 
18. When asked about the reasons for making the difference between the 
aforesaid two categories of officers and employees, the Ministry in the 

 
 
written response has stated that under the provisions in the proposed Clause 
11 (1) and (2), the employees covered shall be on deemed deputation to the 
Corporation till their retirement and they shall be eligible for all the benefits 
on par with the Government servants.  
 
19.  The representative of the Ministry during the course of deliberations 
further submitted before the Committee as under: 
“Actually we were under the impression that that should be 
reasonably clear, but in case the Committee feel that there i s 
some confusion here, that line can be added.  It is not a 
problem”. 
 
20. As stated in the earlier part of the report, 2738 employees were 
recruited after the establishment of Broadcasting Corporation of India to 5 
October, 2007 and as per the cut-off date decided by Group of Ministers, the 
Bill proposes the status of deemed deputation for such employees.  As per 
the information furnished by Prasar Bharati, 895 employees were recruited 
after 5 October, 2007.  The Bill provides that such officers and employ ees 
recruited after 5 October, 2007 shall be officers and employees of the 
Corporation and be governed by such conditions of service as may be 
specified in the regulation.  The representatives of ADASA who appeared 
before the Committee apprehended that the officers and employees who are 
recruited and working in Prasar Bharati after 2007 may also claim the status 
of deemed deputation and the amendment may create a lot of problem in 
future to the employees.  When enquired how one category of employees 
recruited after the establishment of Prasar Bharati can be considered on 
deemed deputation and the second category as regular employees of Prasar 
Bharati, the representative of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
during the course of deliberations submitted as under:-  
“Actually for this distinction between deemed deputation and 
Prasar Bharti‟s own employees the cut off date is 2007.  
Anything before that is deemed deputation and anything after 
that is Prasar Bharti.  That is very clear.” 
 
21. The Staff/E mployees Associations who furnished memoranda and 
appeared before the Committee were not totally agreeable to the status of 

 
 
deemed deputation provided to the officers and employees.  The various 
reservations of the employees were (i) Deemed deputation is a  temporary 
arrangement and to make the temporary status permanent without paving 
the way for absorption is bound to create conflicts and adversely affect the 
interest of the employees so placed;         (ii) The Staff/Employees 
Associations had certain app rehensions about their promotional prospects 
vis.-a-vis. the promotional opportunities to Prasar Bharati regular 
employees.  Elaborating on the concerns of the Staff/Employees 
Associations, the representative of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting during the course of deliberations stated as under:-  
“Now, the employees naturally because this is not a model which 
they understood very clearly, had their apprehensions, which 
they voiced. To the extent possible and quite reasonably, we 
have managed to  answer all those questions and we are 
reasonably confident in the Ministry and in the Prasar Bharti, 
that we should be able to address the problems which they 
apprehend would arise, and secondly, there are a couple of 
things which they mentioned. I will also mention them.  
There are a couple of places where they have mentioned that 
they foresee something may happen in the future, where we do 
not foresee that kind of a problem arising because the 
recruitment rules for the Prasar Bharti employees who would b e 
recruited now are going to be drafted. So, that would be easily 
taken care of while drafting the rules.” 
22. On the observation of the Committee that the status of deemed 
deputation is a temporary status which can be interpreted differently by the 
Courts, the representative during the course of deliberations stated as 
under:-  
“The situation on the ground as of today is not such where such 
a happy situation may be allowed to flourish.  This is the middle 
course.  It is not the best course, definitely not.   This is actually, 
if I may say so, “a fairly clumsy arrangement ”, but it is the best 
arrangement under the possible circumstances because on the 
other end you are in danger of falling off and hurting yourself.” 
 
23. On the apprehension of the employees with regard to the promotional 
prospects of employees on deemed deputation vis. -a-vis. regular employees 
of Prasar Bharati, the Ministry in the written note stated as under:-   
“The seniority of the employees recruited in a particular cadre 
against Direct Recruitment Quota would be as per existing 

 
 
Government rules and instructions regarding the manner of 
interpolation of Direct Recruits and promotees in the seniority 
list.  Prasar Bharati in this context has informed that there is no 
ground for such apprehe nsion as employees on deemed 
deputation would continue to be governed by the original 
Recruitment Rules viz. Government Recruitment Rules and would 
be en bloc senior to the Prasar Bharati employees recruited after 
5.10.07 to the respective cadres and would  therefore, not affect 
their promotional prospects.” 
24. The representative further submitted as under:- 
“We have discussed this issue with the Association also after the 
Association met this hon. Committee.  It was explained to them 
very clearly that anyb ody who joins, his or her seniority is fixed 
on that date.  So, anybody who joins after 2007 obviously goes 
to the bottom of the list.  So, inter-se seniority is not an issue.” 
 
25. While commenting on the demand of ADASA for grant of upgraded pay 
scales on par with 11 categories of programme and engineering staff, the 
Ministry in the written note stated as under:- 
“The demand of ADASA for grant of upgraded pay scales on par 
with the 11 categories of programme and engineering staff by 
decision of the Cabine t in the year 1999 was considered by the 
GoM on Prasar Bharati in their second meeting held on 17 June, 
2010.  The GoM has recommended that a group of Joint 
Secretaries of the Departments of Expenditure, Legal Affairs, 
Personnel and Training and the Minist ry of Information and 
Broadcasting may be constituted to look into the specific issues 
relating to disparity in pay scales and other related issues for 
categories of employees that are exclusive to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting/Prasar Bharat i arising out of 
upgraded pay scales granted to 11 categories of employees of 
Prasar Bharati as per the decision taken in 1999.  The GoM has 
further recommended that the issues relating to disparities in the 
pay scales of common administrative categories o f employees 
like LDCs, UDCs and other ministerial cadres would not be 
considered by the Committee as this would have wide ranging 
implications.  The Group of Joint Secretaries is examining the 
issues as per the recommendations of GoM.”  
 
(iv) Recruitment R egulations and Service Conditions  of Employees 
of Prasar Bharati  
 
26. The Bill provides that a ll officers and employees recruited after 5 
October, 2007 shall be officers and employees of the Corporation and shall 
be governed by such conditions of service as may be specified in the 
regulation.  Section 33 of „The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990‟ provides for making 

 
 
regulations for enabling the Corporation to perform its functions under the 
Act.  The aforesaid Section further provides that such regulations shall be  
made only with the prior approval of the Central Government.  Section 33 
(2) (c) provides for making regulations with regard to the method of 
recruitment and conditions of service of officers and other employees.  
Further the proposed amended Section 33 ( d) provides for making 
regulation in respect of the condition of service of officers and employees 
recruited after the 5 th day of October, 2007.  Section 10 of the Act provides 
for the establishment of Recruitment Board.  As per the information 
furnished by the Ministry, the said regulations have not yet been notified.  
The Group of Ministers in its meeting held on 17 June, 2010 has directed 
Prasar Bharati to finalize the recruitment regulations and service conditions 
for all categories of employees and the  proposal for constitution of the 
Recruitment Board and place the same for the consideration of the Prasar 
Bharati Board latest by 31 July, 2010.  The GoM further directed that Prasar 
Bharati would take a decision on all these proposals by            31 Au gust, 
2010.  As per the information furnished by Prasar Bharati, Recruitment Rules 
of over 190 cadres in Doordarshan and AIR are under active consideration 
and finalization.  At present, 88 numbers of RRs have been scrutinized and 
screened for being put up  to Prasar Bharati Board for approval before they 
are sent to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for clearance.  The 
Committee have further been informed that the remaining RRs are also 
expected to be finalized shortly and would be placed before the Board.    
With regard to setting up of Recruitment Board, the Ministry has informed 
that the draft Notification for constituting the Recruitment Board has been 
received in the Ministry on                16 November, 2010 and is under 
examination in the Ministry.   
27. The data with regard to sanctioned strength and vacancies as 
furnished by Prasar Bharati has been given at Appendix-III.  The analysis 
of the data indicates that out of the sanctioned strength of 48173, 11498 
posts i.e. almost one -fourth of the posts are lying vacant.  In the 
Programme Wing, the position is more critical.  Out of the sanctioned 
strength of 10679, 3746 posts i.e. 35.08 per cent of posts are lying vacant.   

 
 
28. CEO, Prasar Bharati while updating the Committee about the status of 
Recruitment Regulations, service conditions and Recruitment Board(s) stated 
as under:- 
“Considering the kind of work which is involv ed, the strategy 
that we have adopted, broadly speaking, is that the critical 
vacancies which we had identified earlier and which had been 
communicated, and the number of such critical vacancies is 
3,452.  In respect of those critical vacancies, we are fir st 
concentrating on such cadres that would contribute the 
maximum critical vacancies.  So, we have done the work in 
respect of these 88 cadres.  It covers that.  
In any case, we can only do all these only when the Recruitment 
Board actually comes into bein g, for which we have already sent 
a notification to the Government for clearing it.”      
29. He further added as under:- 
“It is difficult for me to tell you straightaway that we will indeed 
finish this work of 190 cadres rolls in two months.  As I told yo u 
that within a few months we have done 88 cadres and that takes 
care of the initial work, which we are going to undertake and 
also the remaining work.  All of them are various stages of 
finalization.”   
  
In response to a query with regard to the importan t recommendations 
of Shunu Sen Committee Report, the Ministry in the written reply has stated 
that the said Committee in its Report submitted to Government on 20 May, 
2000 had recommended that „as far as possible all employees should be 
employed by Prasar Bharati and not be on deputation from either the 
Government or Private Agency‟. 
 
30. When asked about the deadline for finalization of Recruitment 
Regulations and service conditions, the CEO, Prasar Bharati stated as 
under:- 
“I can say that we will definitely finish it off by 31 March, 2011.” 
 
(v) Pay and Allowances to Prasar Bharati Employees 
31. As per the proposed Clause 11(5) as a substitute to Section 11 of the 
Prasar Bharati Act, the officers and employees recruited after the 5 th day of 
October, 2007 shall be officers and employees of the Corporation and shall 
be governed by such conditions of service as may be prescribed in the 

 
 
regulations.  NFADE who appeared before the Committee suggested that 
service conditions of Prasar Bharati employees ma y be decided before the 
amendment of the Act.  The Ministry in this regard has stated that they 
propose to keep the pay scales of Prasar Bharati employees on the same 
level as those of the Government employees.  The Prasar Bharati employees 
may have to be given a package to compensate for medical facilities, 
housing and education. 
32. All the Central Government employees recruited after 1 st January, 
2004 are entitled to different pension scheme.  In this connection, the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the Affidavit filed in the Supreme 
Court has stated that the draft amendment Bill has been approved by Union 
Cabinet on 28 January, 2009.  The aforesaid draft Bill contains clarification 
with regard to the applicability of the new pension scheme to the employees 
recruited after 1 st January, 2004.  The draft Bill contained a proviso in this 
regard as given below:  
“Provided further that the employees recruited between the day 
of              1 st January, 2004 and 5 th October, 2007 shall be 
covered by the pension scheme published in the notification of 
the Government of India, in the Ministry of Finance vide F. No. 
5/7/2003-ECB & PR. Dated the 22 nd December, 2003, in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part 1, Section 1, dated the     
22nd December, 2003.” 
  
33. When asked to furnish the details of the entitlement of pay and 
allowances and other perks to the regular employees of Prasar Bharati as 
well as the employees on deemed deputation as per the amending 
legislation, the Ministry of Information and B roadcasting has stated that the 
employees on deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati shall be entitled to pay 
allowances and other perks on par with the Government servants. They 
would be given CGHS, Government accommodation, pension, admission of 
wards in Ken driya Vidayalaya etc. This has been incorporated in suggested 
sub-section 11 (3) of the proposed legislation. 
 
34. About the housing facility, the Ministry has further stated that the 
employees of erstwhile AIR and Doordarshan, on deemed deputation to 
Prasar Bharati, continue to be eligible for allotment of General Pool 

 
 
accommodation beyond November, 2007 on the same basis as other eligible 
Government servants and they have not been allocated specific houses by 
Directorate of Estates for allotment to the employees of Prasar Bharati. 
 
35. When asked whether Prasar Bharati plan to construct their own houses 
for the residential purpose of Prasar Bharati, the Committee have been 
apprised that the Prasar Bharati has been constructing residential quarters 
of its own wherever land is available and is part of Plan projects scheme.  At 
present the following staff quarters are being constructed by Prasar Bharati:- 
(i) 916 staff quarters in four metros, i.e. Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai 
and Kolkata; 
(ii) 32 number of hostel accommodation at Srinagar; and  
(iii) 38 number of staff quarters at Guwahati. 
 
 
(vi) Issues relating to officers of Indian Information Service, 
Central Secretariat Service 
 
 36. As per the suggested Section 11 A (1) the provisions of proposed 
Section 11 (providing the status of deemed deputation) shall not apply to 
the officers and employees of the Indian Information Service, the Central 
Secretariat Service or any other service bo rne on any cadre outside 
Akashvani or Doordarshan who have been working in Akashvani or 
Doordarshan before the appointed day or in service in the Corporation after 
that day.  It has been mentioned that the terms and conditions of their 
service shall be as prescribed.  
37. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill in this regard states 
as under:- 
“The Group of Ministers in its meeting held on 16 April, 2010 
considered the issue relating to the status of the employees 
belonging to the Indian Informatio n Service, the Central 
Secretariat Service and other cadres borne outside the cadre of 
Akashvani and Doordarshan and recommended that status quo 
be maintained in respect of the said employees subject to the 
conditions, inter-alia, that Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati may jointly work out the 
number of deputation posts to be manned by officers from 
Indian Information Service cadre.” 

 
 
38. On being asked to state about finalization of number of posts and 
terms of deputation of IIS officers to Prasar Bharati before bringing the 
amending legislation, the Ministry in their reply stated that at present 
sufficient number of officers in IIS cadre is not available for posting against 
vacancies in Prasar Bharati.  In  view of this Prasar Bharati are being given 
certain number of posts for recruitment of its own officers. 
In the above context, the witness during the course of oral evidence 
stated: 
“There will be a certain section of officers who will be coming on 
deputation from CSS and Indian Information Service. 
Consciously we have decided that as of today, if my memory 
does not serve me wrongly, about 240 officers are on deputation 
who have gone from the IIS and CSS and about hundred posts 
will be allowed to be filled by Prasar Bharati with their own direct 
recruitment. In all autonomous organizations – when I say all, I 
mean 100 per cent – there is always a certain deputation 
amount which is kept where fresh blood from outside keeps 
coming in, contributing to the orga nization and going out. The 
IIS and CSS will be on the genuine kind of deputation where 
they are expected to be there for a few years and then move 
out, to be replaced by others and postings to be done by the 
Ministry, etc. We do not see any dichotomy at a ll; we do not see 
any problem at all. This is a smoothly functioning arrangement in 
all Government Corporations”. 
  
39. In repl y to a question, the Ministry stated that the employees 
belonging to I ndian Information Service and Central Secretariat Service will 
be on deemed deputation (not on deputation).   As the reply of the Ministry 
contradicts the provisions made under the amending Bill, the Committee 
sought clarifications.  In reply, the witness during evidence stated: 
“I want to give one clarification so  that there is no 
misunderstanding. It will ensure that they do not make another 
fresh demand tomorrow. These gentlemen who are sent from 
the Indian Information Service and the Central Secretariat 
Service will not be entitled to deputation allowance. That is 
because we want to balance the emoluments of the people who 
are there and these people”. 
 
 
(vii) Status of Work Charged Employees 
 

 
 
40. The explanation to the proposed Section 11(2) substituting Section 11 
of the Prasar Bharati Act clarifies that the sta tus of deemed deputation shall 
not apply to persons engaged or appointed on daily wages, casual, ad hoc or 
work charged basis. 
 
41. The Employees/Staff Association who appeared before the Committee 
and submitted written memorandum has stated that a big sec tion of Civil 
Construction Wing employees of All India Radio, have not figured in the 
proposed Bill.  However, these employees are full fledged government 
employees with retirement benefits.  Therefore they requested that this 
section of employees may be included in the Bill. 
 
42. Asked to comment upon the suggestion of the Association, the Ministry 
in the  written reply has stated that the work charged employees are not 
regular employees.  A proposal for regulation of these employees is under 
consideration in the Ministry.   About the steps being taken by the Ministry 
to regularize the service of these employees, the representative of the 
Ministry during the course of oral evidence stated: 
“….......Now, „work charged‟ by its very definition means 
employees, who are kept against the requirements of a 
particular work.  That is why they are kept.  By their very 
nature, the employment of a work charged employee should 
finish when the work finishes.   That is why they are called work 
charged.  They are charged on the work. That is where the 
salary comes from.........  The cadre is being managed by the All 
India Radio. They have been asked to identify the equivalent and 
matching regular posts, which are vacant in the All India Radio 
and Doordarshan against which the  regularisation of these work 
charged staff could be considered.  We are awaiting this 
information.  There are about 11,000 posts vacant in Prasar 
Bharati.  The minute these vacant posts can be adjusted, the 
minutes we get an equivalent posts from there, t hese people 
would be adjusted against those posts, and this category of work 
charged employees would cease to exist ...........Anybody who is 
entitled to get pension automatically is falling into the same 
category in which the deemed deputation employees ar e falling.  
So, they would also move into the deemed deputation category.” 
 
43. As per the information furnished by the Ministry the number of 
employees in Civil Construction Wing is 1457.  

 
 
(viii) Financial viability of Prasar Bharati 
  
44. The Committee asked as to why the employees were vehemently 
opposed to be the employees of Prasar Bharati and have been demanding to 
continue as regular government employees.  In reply, the Ministry stated 
that Prasar Bharati has been receiving grants -in-aid for meeting the entire 
expenditure for plan projects and operating expenses to the extent of 50  per 
cent.   Prasar Bharati has not been able to generate adequate internal 
resources to meet its expenses for salary, allowances to its employees 
besides other expenses. Therefore, the employees of Prasar Bharati have an 
apprehension that they may not get their salaries on regular basis, if this 
situation continues and the Government at any point of time in future 
decides not to sanction grants to Prasar Bhara ti. In view of this, they have 
been demanding to continue as regular Government servants.   
 
45. During the course or examination of the Bill, the staff Association who 
submitted written views and appeared before the Committee stated that on           
29 August, 2005 Government of India had filed an affidavit in the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court admitting that Prasar Bharati is financially unviable and will 
remain so in foreseeable future on account of public obligations.  It was also 
brought in the notice of Committee that it has become the regular practice in 
Prasar Bharati that employees at various stations are receiving their salary 
after 7 to 10 days of salary day since January, 2009.  Besides, welfare 
measures like reimbursement of medical bills, training; TA/ DA, Overtime 
Allowance for performing additional duties etc. are hampered due to the lack 
of fund in Prasar Bharati.  The Associations also brought to the knowledge of 
the Committee the issues related to non -maintenance of infrastructure of 
Prasar Bharati due to fund constraints.   
 
46. Therefore, a suggestion was made to ensure salary, perks and pension 
of these employees, maintenance and development of infrastructure are met 
from Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
47. On being asked to comment on this aspect, the Ministry has stated the 
affidavit has been filed in the year 2005 on behalf of Prasar Bharati.  

 
 
 
48. In so far as the issue of financial viability of Prasar Bharati is 
concerned, the Committee have been informed that a Group of Ministers was 
constituted in the year 2006 to look into various issues relating to Prasar 
Bharati including the issue of Capital and Financial restructuring of Prasar 
Bharati.  The agenda was considered by the newly constituted GoM in its 
meeting dated 16 April, 2010.  The GoM has  recommended 50 per cent of 
the annual operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be borne by Prasar 
Bharati from its internal Extra Budgetary Resources and the remaining 50 
per cent will henceforth be met by non -plan grants -in-aid by the 
Government  In r egard to the Government support to Prasar Bharati, it was 
recommended that the level of 50% non plan support by Government may 
be maintained for the next 5 years i.e. 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 and the same 
will be reviewed thereafter in order to scale down the qu antum of non-plan 
support by Government to Prasar Bharati.  As regards, plan funding by 
Government to Prasar Bharati, the GoM recommended that henceforth the 
plan support by Government to Prasar Bharati may be in the form of grants -
in-aid and not in the form of loan.  
 
49. The Ministry has informed that the GoM while recommending that 50 
per cent of the operating expenses will be borne by Government of India, 
has taken into consideration the present pattern of expenditure in Prasar 
Bharati.   
 
50. In this context the representative of the Ministry during the course of 
evidence submitted as under:    
“Regarding 50 per cent, we did tend to get bogged down and as 
I mentioned right at the beginning, the Group of Ministers took 
this decision of 50:50 bas ed on data which was provided, and 
the data was projections made by Prasar Bharati about their 
expectations of income. Now, the Group of Ministers, on that 
basis, said: “Let us maintain 50:50 ratio for the next five years, 
and we can thereafter meet and se e what view needs to be 
taken”. 
 

 
 
51. When specifically asked whether Prasar Bharati is in a position to bear 
50 per cent of the annual operating expense of the organization, CEO, Prasar 
Bharati during oral evidence stated: 
“.........it is not actually corr ect to look at Prasar Bhar ati as a 
commercial entity which is driven to us earlier. We were 
conceived of as a creation of the statute which would perform 
public service. And the responsibility by the Parliament was cast 
on the comment to give such adequate  revenue as is found fit 
for Prasar Bharati to be enabled to perform its function. That was 
the concept under which the Prasar Bhar ati came into being.  
Over the years, this thing also has been evolved that we should 
also try to make revenue and towards th at we have been 
striving.” 
 
52. As desired by the Committee during evidence, the Ministry furnished 
the statement indicating the actuals/projections of contribution of Prasar 
Bharati and Government of India which has been given in Annexure -4.  The 
analysis of the data furnished by the Mi nistry indicates that the percentage 
share of Prasar Bharati towards operating expenses which include salary and 
establishment expenses, additional expenditure on account of new 
recruitment, replacement and augmentation of capital assets, service tax, 
programme related expenses and other administrative expenses during the 
year 2006-07 and 2007-08 was 47 per cent.  During the year 2008-09 it was 
48 per cent.  During the year 2009 -10, Prasar Bharati‟s contribution has 
been shown as 55 per cent.  The projected  contribution of Prasar Bharati 
during the years 2010 -11 to 2013 -14 has been indicated as 48 per cent.  
The operating expenses does not include spectrum and space segment 
charges which have been included in the funds given/to be given from 
Government of India funding.   
 
(ix) Absorption of Employees in Organisation like MTNL/BSNL 
53. During the course of the deliberations held at the sitting of the 
Committee on       20 October, 2010, the Members of the Committee had 
referred to handling the issues of servi ce conditions by MTNL/BSNL when 
these organizations were corporatized.  The replies furnished by the Ministry 
indicates that the Committee of Secretaries in its meeting held on 7 May, 
2007 had also recommended the Ministry of I&B to work out a strategy for  

 
 
absorption of employees by offering appropriate incentives by examining the 
methodology adopted in organizations like MTNL, BSNL and Airport Authority 
of India etc..  Accordingly, Prasar Bharati suggested that an offer be made to 
Prasar Bharati employees.  Subsequently, in the agenda item of the GoM, it 
was brought out that it was not feasible to work out such a strategy as 
Prasar Bharati is totally different from cash rich organizations like MTNL, 
BSNL etc. which have a regular source of revenue generatio n while Prasar 
Bharati is largely dependent on Government for funding its operations.   
54. The representative of the Ministry during the course of oral evidence 
further added as under: 
“They are certainly not in the same league as MTNL and BSNL. 
Even BSNL  and MTNL, when it comes to absorption of 
employees, with great difficulty they have managed to do Group 
C and D. In Group B they have even more difficulty and in Group 
A they have still not managed to resolve the problem. This is the 
case with even those people who are making hundreds of crores 
of profit. Here, it is a different ball game altogether.” 
 
(x) Comprehensive Review of „The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990‟  
55. The Standing Committee have consistently been recommending for 
organizational and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati.  The Standing 
Committee have also been expressing concern over the non -implementation 
of various provisions of the Bill which include constitution of a Parliamentary 
Committee and Broadcasting Council in spite of the fact t hat the word „shall‟ 
has been used in the Act.  The Committee have been emphasizing to bring 
comprehensive amendment to the Act.  The Ministry in this context has 
informed the Committee that GoM in their meeting on 17 June, 2010 has 
recommended to make such amendments as are required to be made in the 
Prasar Bharati Act in the light of developments over the last 20 years, 
subsequent to the Shunu Sen Committee Report. The Ministry has also 
stated that these proposals would be finalized by 30 September, 2010 and 
placed before the GoM thereafter. From the information furnished by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Prasar Bharati, it appears 
that the provisions have not been finalized. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part-II 
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee note that the Prasar Bharati Corporation was 
established w.e.f. 23 November, 1997 as per the provisions made 
under „The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 
1990‟.  Out of the existing strength of 36675 employees, 33042 
employees i.e. 9 0.09 per cent of the employees were serving in All 
India Radio and Doordarshan prior to the establishment of Prasar 
Bharati and continued serving Prasar Bharati after its establishment.  
Even after 13 years of the operation of the Act, most of the 
important provisions made under the Act which include transfer of 
service of said number of employees to the Corporation (Section 11), 
establishment of Recruitment Boards (Section 10), most of the 
provisions made under Section 33 relating to making regulations, 
constitution of a Parliamentary Committee (Section 13) and 

 
 
establishment of Broadcasting Council (Section 14) were never 
implemented. With the ad -hoc approach adopted by Prasar Bharati 
in implementation of the provisions made under the Act, th e status 
of the employees working in the Corporation remained uncertain. 
The unprofessional way Prasar Bharati dealt with the situation led to 
employees knocking the doors of various Courts. With the 
continuous pursuance of the issue by the Parliamentary S tanding 
Committee in their respective Reports and the deadline given by the 
Supreme Court, some sort of concrete initiatives have been taken by 
the Government to end the stalemate about the status of the 
employees.   Consequent upon the recommendations mad e by the 
various Group of Ministers, the decision in this regard which partially 
addresses to the concerns of the employees has been taken and „The 
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 
2010‟ has been introduced in Rajya Sabha and referred to this 
Committee for examination and report to the House. The Committee 
after detailed deliberations and consultations with employees/staff 
associations could arrive at decisions which have been given in the 
subsequent paras. 
 
PROPOSED STATUS  OF „DEEMED DEPUTATION ‟ TO EMPLOYEES OF 
PRASAR BHARATI 
The proposed Section 11 (1) of the Bill 
2. Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to substitute Section 11 of the 
Principal Act. With the proposed amendment, Section 11 of the 
Principal Act which provides for t ransfer of service of employees 

 
 
who were at the time of establishment of Corporation serving in 
Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation by taking the option 
of the employees has been dispensed with. The proposed Section 11 
(1) provides the status of d eemed deputation to the officers and 
employees recruited for the purpose of Akashvani and Doordarshan 
before the appointed day and in service in the Corporation as on 1 st 
day of April, 2000 till their retirement. From the information 
furnished by Prasar Bh arati, the Committee  find that out of the 
existing 36675 employees, 3 3042 employees i.e . 90.09 per cent of 
the employees fall under this category. During the course of 
deliberations and consultations with the employees/staff 
associations, the Committee hav e observed that the provisions are 
not totally agreeable to them. They have certain apprehensions with 
regard to their status, prospects of promotion, vis -à-vis the 
employees of Prasar Bharati. The Committee observe that the 
apprehensions of the employees to some extent are justified. The 
fundamental reason for such a sorry state of affair is non 
implementation of Section 11 of the Principal Act. The 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati in this regard has informed the Committee 
that said Section could not be implemented  due to the resistance 
from employees. The Committee find that even the proposed 
amendments as per the Bill under consideration are still not totally 
agreeable to the employees and resistance is again there. As rightly 
observed by the Supreme Court, the Government was obliged to take 
a decision one way or the other. The non exercise of the statutory 

 
 
functions by the Government for such a long time has resulted into 
the stalemate about the status of employees of Prasar Bharati. 
Although some attempt has been  made now by way of bringing the 
proposed legislation, it partially addresses to the concerns of the 
employees. Even when the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on          
17 June, 2010 directed Prasar Bharati to finalize the recruitment 
regulations a nd service conditions for all categories of employees 
and the proposal for constitution of the Recruitment Board and place 
the same for the consideration of the Prasar Bharati Board latest by 
31 July, 2010, the said regulations and service conditions could  not 
be finalised by Prasar Bharati till date.   
3. The Committee observe that the main cause of apprehension in 
the mind of the employees is the uncertainty about their recruitment 
regulations and service conditions. Had these regulations been 
finalised before bringing the legislation to Parliament the concerns 
of the employees could have been addressed to some extent. The 
Committee place on record their unhappiness over  the in action on 
the part of Prasar Bharati in implementing the Prasar Bharati Act. 
4. The Committee further note that the word deputation connotes 
temporary status which immediately raises apprehensions about the 
status of employees. As rightly acknowledged by the representatives 
of the Ministry, the proposed status of deemed deputation is not the 
best course and it is a fairly clumsy arrangement. But in the 
circumstances whereby such a long period of 13 years ha s already 
passed and the uncertainty about the status of employees continues, 

 
 
there is an urgent need to address the issue immediately. The 
representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence has 
stated that it is the best arrangement under the possible 
circumstances. Keeping in view the f act that Supreme Court has 
upheld the right of Prasar Bharati to transfer the employees, the 
Committee tend to agree with the proposed amendment. However, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the concerns of said 
category of employees about their promotio nal prospects should be 
taken care of. The Ministry in this regard has informed that 
employees on deemed deputation would continue to be governed by 
the original Recruitment Rules viz. Government Recruitment Rules 
and would be en bloc senior to Prasar Bhar ati employees recruited 
after 5  October, 2007  to the respective cadres.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that in the Recruitment Rules and Service 
Conditions of employees of Prasar Bharati it should be made 
absolutely clear that the employees on deemed dep utation are 
senior to Prasar Bharati employees and it would not affect their 
promotional prospects. The employees associations should be 
assured about their promotional prospects through consultations 
before the Recruitment Rules and Service conditions of Prasar 
Bharati are notified and the amending provisions are put into 
operation.   
THE STATUS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (A) RECRUITED DURING 
THE PERIOD ON OR AFTER THE APPOINTED DATE TILL THE 5 DAY OF 
OCTOBER, 2007 AND (B) RECRUITED AFTER THE 5 TH DAY OF 
OCTOBER, 2007. 
 

 
 
The proposed Sections 11 (2) and 11 (5) of the Bill 
5. The proposed Bill divides the officers and employees recruited 
by Prasar Bharati in two categories (a) all officers and employees 
recruited during the period on or after the appointed day till the 5 th 
day of October, 2007. From the information provided by the Ministry, 
2465 employees for AIR and 273 employees for Doordarshan were 
recruited during this period and (b) all officers and employees 
recruited after the 5 th day of October, 2007. As  per the information 
furnished by Prasar Bharati 895 employees were recruited  after 
October, 2007. 
6. The proposed Bill provides that the officers and employees 
under category „a‟ mentioned above shall be on deemed deputation 
to the Corporation with effec t from 1st day of April, 2000 or the date 
of their joining service in the Corporation, whichever is later. The 
category „b‟ of officers as mentioned above as well as the officers to 
be recruited in future would be governed by such conditions of 
service as may be specified in the regulations. The Ministry has tried 
to justify the differential treatment to the aforesaid two categories 
of officers and employees by stating that the cut -off date is 2007. 
Anybody before that is on deemed deputation and after that  they 
would be Prasar Bharati regular employees. The Committee observe 
that the accounts of Prasar Bharati were separated w.e.f. 1 st April, 
2000. Even some of the Members of GoM  were not in favour of 
treating the offices and employees recruited after 23 November, 
1997 as Government servants.  As such the Committee observe that 

 
 
treating the officers and employees of Prasar Bharati recruited after 
1st April, 2000 differentially is fraught with legal complications.   As 
such the Committee caution the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to see the 
legal implications carefully so as to avoid legal complications and 
court cases in future.  
7. As could be seen from above the status of deemed deputat ion 
is proposed to be provided to (a) all officers and employees 
recruited for the purpose of Akashvani and Doordarshan before the 
appointed day and in service in the Corporation as on 1st day of April, 
2000 (covered under proposed Section 11(1) and  (b) all officers and 
employees recruited during the period on or after the appointed day 
till 5th day of October, 2007  (covered under proposed Section 11(2) 
of the Act) .  For (a) category the deemed deputation status is 
provided till retirement but for (b) category the word „till retirement‟ 
has not been added . The Committee understand from the written 
replies furnished by the Ministry as well as the deliberations held 
during the course of oral evidence that the intention of the 
Government is to provide the statu s of deemed deputation till 
retirement to both said „a‟ and „b‟ categories. The Committee feel 
that without specifying the period of deputation i.e. till retirement in 
case of officers and employees under category „b‟, makes the 
provision vague and can be interpreted differently by Courts. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to add the words „till retirement‟ 
at the end of proposed Section 11 (2) of the Bill so as to make the 

 
 
provision absolutely clear and in consonance with the intention of 
the Government. 
 
 
RECRUITMENT REGULATION S AND SERVICE CONDITIONS OF 
EMPLOYEES OF PRASAR BHARATI 
  
8. As per Section 33 of the Principal Act, Prasar Bharati was 
supposed to make regulations with regard to methods of recruitment 
and conditions of service and the remunerati on and other conditions 
of service including pension, leave and provident fund in relation to 
officers and employees of the Corporation.  Further as per Section 10 
of the Act, Prasar Bharati was supposed to establish Recruitment 
Boards for the purposes of Section 9 which prescribe for the method 
of recruitment of officers and employees and all other matters 
connected therewith.  Even after a lapse of 13 years, the recruitment 
regulations, service conditions and Recruitment Boards are still to 
see the light of the day.  As informed by Prasar Bharati, the 
notification with regard to setting up of Recruitment Boards has now 
been sent to the Government for clearing.  With regard to the 
recruitment regulations, even as on date, out of 190 cadres, the 
work relating to only 88 cadres could be finished.  The CEO, Prasar 
Bharati seems confident to finish the task by 31st March, 2011. 
9. The Committee observe  that human resource is an important 
asset for any organization.  The satisfaction of the officers and 
employees is a prerequisite for the success of the organization.  
Even when Shunu Sen Committee  and GoM emphasized to build up 

 
 
Prasar Bharati‟s own cadre of employees and the deadline to finalize 
the recruitment regulations and service conditions by 31 August, 
2010 was set up by GoM, the recruitment regulations could not be 
finalized as explained above.  The Committee also observe that 
MTNL/BSNL and India n Airlines (now AIR India) after 
corporatization could manage to have their own                                              
cadres.  In case of Prasar Bharati, the status of not only the officers 
and employees who were their employees before it became 
Corporation and continued to be employees after the establishment 
of the Corporation, but the employees and officers recruited by 
Prasar Bharati remained uncertain.  Prasar Bharati is the 
Government broadcaster and the autonomous status of the 
organization ha s continuously been emphasized by various 
Committees and GoM.  The plea that Prasar Bharati is different from 
cash rich organizations like MTNL/BSNL etc. cannot accepted 
particularly when Government support is being provided to Prasar 
Bharati to manage its  affairs since inception.  The Committee are of 
the firm view that Prasar Bharati has failed to perform in a 
professional way which to some extent is responsible for the 
stalemate with regard to the status of the officers and employees of 
the organization.   
10. The Committee are concerned to note that Prasar Bharati was 
not able to fill the critical vacancies as acknowledged by CEO Prasar 
Bharati during the course of oral evidence due to delay in finalization 
of Recruitment Regulations and Service Conditio ns. The data 

 
 
furnished by Prasar Bharati indicates that out of the sanctioned 
strength of 48173, 11498 posts i.e. almost one fourth of the posts 
are lying vacant.   In the Programme Wing, which is the important 
wing of Prasar Bharati, the position is more critical. Out of the 
sanctioned strength of 10679 in programme wing, 3746 posts, i.e. 
35.08 percent of posts are lying vacant. This is absolutely the sorry 
state of affairs in Prasar Bharati. The Committee strongly emphasize 
to set up Recruitment Boards an d finalise Recruitment Regulations  
and Service Conditions without any further delay so that uncertainty 
about the status of employees ends and the critical vacancies are 
filled expeditiously so as to enable the Corporation to work in an 
effective way. 
 
PAY AND ALLOWANCES TO PRASAR BHARATI EMPLOYEES 
11. As per the proposed Clause 11(5) of the amending Bill , the 
officers and employees recruited after the 5 th day of October, 2007 
shall be officers and employees of the Corporation and shall be 
governed by such  conditions of service as may be prescribed in the 
regulations.  The Ministry in this regard ha s informed the Committee 
that they propose to keep the pay scales of Prasar Bharati 
employees on the same level as those of the Government employees.  
The Prasar  Bharati employees may have to be given a package to 
compensate for medical facilities, housing and education.  The 
Committee emphasize to finalise the pay scales and other 
facilities/perks to be provided to Prasar Bharati employees before 

 
 
notifying the provisions made under the amending Bill so as to have 
transparency on the whole issue. Besides, the Committee also 
emphasize to  fix the pay scales and other facilities/perks in such a 
way so that the apprehensions of the officers and employees are set 
to rest and anomalies, legal complications are avoided. 
 
12. The Committee have been informed that the demand of 
employees association (ADASA) for grant of upgraded pay scales on 
par with the 11 categories of programme and engineering staff by 
decision of the Cabinet in the year 1999 was considered by the GoM 
on Prasar Bharati in their second meeting held on 17 June, 2010.  
The GoM has recommended that a Group of Joint Secretari es of the 
Departments of Expenditure, Legal Affairs, Personnel and Training 
and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting may be constituted 
to look into the specific issues relating to disparity in pay scales and 
other related issues for categories of employees that are exclusive 
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting/Prasar Bharati 
arising out of upgraded pay scales granted to 11 categories of 
employees of Prasar Bharati as per the decision taken in 1999. The 
Committee have been informed that Group of Joint Secretaries is 
examining the issues as per the recommendations of GoM. The 
Committee hope that issues relating to disparity would be addressed 
by the Group of Joint Secretaries. With regard to the disparities in 
the pay scales of common admi nistrative categories of employees 
like LDCs, UDCs and other Ministerial Cadres, the Committee have 

 
 
been informed that the Group of Ministers has already taken a view 
that the pay scales of the said employees would not be looked into in 
view of the wide ra nging implications. The Committee note from the 
information furnished by Prasar Bh arati that out of the sanctioned 
strength of 48173 employees, 17382 employees are from the 
administration wing. The issues related to disparities in the pay 
scales of such a high number of employees also need to be looked 
into.  As such the Committee urge the Government to devise some 
mechanism to address the issues related to disparities on the lines 
of  the mechanism of Group of Joint Secretaries for other categories.  
 
13. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the 
officers and employees proposed to be on deemed deputation status 
shall be entitled to pay allowances and other perks on par with 
Government servants. They would be given CGHS, Government 
Accommodation, Pension, admission of wards in Kendriya Vidalyala 
etc. The employees of erstwhile AIR and Doordarshan, on deemed 
deputation to Prasar Bharati, continue to be eligible for allotment of 
General Pool accommodation beyond November, 2007 on the same 
basis as other eligible Government servants. The Committee find 
that in the Bill it has been mentioned that such officers and 
employees proposed to be on deemed deputation shall be entitled to 
the pay scale and all other benefits as admissible to an employee of 
Central Government. As such the Committee emphasize the  Ministry 
to ensure that all the facilities as mentioned above are provided to 

 
 
such employees. The issues like Government accommodation should 
be taken up with the Directorate of Estates in line with the proposed 
stand of the Government in this regard.  The Committee further note 
that Prasar Bharati plans to construct their own houses for the 
residential purpose of Prasar Bharati.  916 staff quarters in four 
metros, i.e. Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai and Kolka ta; 32 number of 
hostel accommodation at Srinagar; and 38 number of staff quarters 
at Guwahati are being constructed by Prasar Bharati.  The Committee 
emphasize for timely completion of the residential quarter projects 
of Prasar Bharati so as to increase th e satisfaction level of officers 
and employees on the issue of getting residential accommodation.   
14. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting had filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court wherein it 
was stated that the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 28 January, 
2009 had approved the draft amendment Bill relating to status of 
officers and employees of Prasar Bharati. The scrutiny of the 
documents furnished by the Ministry indicates that the following 
proviso was added in  the aforesaid Bill placed before the Supreme 
Court which do not find place in the amending legislation:- 
“Provided further that the employees recruited between 
the day of  1 st January, 2004 and 5 th October, 2007 shall 
be covered by the pension scheme publ ished in the 
notification of the Government of India, in the Ministry of 
Finance vide F. No. 5/7/2003 -ECB & PR. Dated the 22 nd 
December, 2003, in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary 
Part 1, Section 1, dated the     22nd December, 2003.” 
 
 The Committee recommend that the aforesaid proviso should 
be suitably inserted in the amending Bill so as to clarify the position 

 
 
about the entitlement of pension of officers and employees recruited 
after                 1st January, 2004 in line with the Government‟s policy 
in this regard.  
 
ISSUES RELATING TO OFFICERS OF INDIAN INFORMATION SERVICE, 
CENTRAL SECRETARIAT SERVICE 
 
15. As per the proposed Section 11 A (1) the provisions of the 
proposed Section 11 (providing the status of deemed deputation) 
shall not apply t o the officers and employees of the Indian 
Information Service, the Central Secretariat Service or any other 
service borne on any cadre outside Akashvani or Doordarshan who 
have been working in Akashvani or Doordarshan before the 
appointed day or in servic e in the Corporation after that day.  It has 
been mentioned that the terms and conditions of their service shall 
be as prescribed. The Committee further note that the statement of 
Objects and Reasons in this regard states that the Group of Ministers 
in its meeting held on 16 April, 2010 considered the issue relating to 
the status of the employees belonging to the Indian Information 
Service, the Central Secretariat Service and other cadres borne 
outside the cadre of Akashvani and Doordarshan and recommended 
that status quo  be maintained in respect of the said employees 
subject to the conditions, inter-alia, that Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati may jointly work out the number of 
deputation posts to be manned by officers from Indian Information 
Service cadre. The Ministry during the course of deliberations have 
clarified that the said employees will be on deemed deputation (not 

 
 
on deputation) and will not be entitled for deputation allowance. 
While appreciating the intention of the Mi nistry for not giving any 
deputation allowance to the officers of Indian Information Service, 
the Central Secretariat Service and other cadres borne outside the 
cadre of Akashvani and Doordarshan so as to have the parity in the 
salary and other allowances being drawn by the officers of Prasar 
Bharati and the deputationists, the Committee do not understand the 
status of deemed deputation proposed to be given to said employees 
as per the rules to be framed by the Government. Moreover, the 
terminology of deeme d deputation contradicts the posts on 
deputation as stated in para  3 of the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of the Bill. The Committee apprehend that it may create 
legal complications and as such recommend that the posts for these 
categories of employees should be on deputation status as stated by 
GoM and incorporated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
the Bill. The Committee also emphasize that the number of 
deputation posts to be manned by officers from Indian Information 
Service and other servic e cadre outside Akashvani and Doordarshan 
should be worked out by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati expeditiously as desired by GoM. 
STATUS OF WORK CHARGED EMPLOYEES 
16. The explanation to the proposed Section 11(2) substituti ng 
Section 11 of the Prasar Bharati Act clarifies that the status of 
deemed deputation shall not apply to persons engaged or appointed 
on daily wages, casual,  ad-hoc or work charged basis. The 

 
 
Committee during the course of deliberations have noted that a 
number of work charged employees are working in Civil Construction 
Wing of All India Radio who do not find any place in the amending 
Bill leading to the status of these employees being vague. W hen the 
issue was taken up with the representatives of Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati, the Committee 
have been informed that the steps are being taken to regularize the 
services of these employees. Further, the Committee have b een 
assured by the representatives of the Ministry that these employees 
would be adjusted against the vacant posts in Prasar Bharati. 
Further, the Committee have also been assured that the said 
employees when regularized would move into deemed deputation 
category. The Committee observe that it would have been 
appropriate for the Government to regularize these employees 
before bringing the amendments and then put the status of these 
employees into the deemed deputation category in the proposed Bill. 
The Comm ittee express serious concern over the ad -hocism with 
which the issue of status of officers and employees has been 
addressed by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati in the amending Bill. The 
Committee strongly recommend that All India Radio and 
Doordarshan should b e asked to identify the equivalent and 
matching posts within the stipulated time frame and the services of 
all these employees should be regularized after adjusting them 
against the existing vacancies.  
 

 
 
FINANCIAL VIABILITY OF PRASAR BHARATI 
17. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry in the 
year 2005 had filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court of India on 
behalf of Prasar Bharati whereby it was stated that Prasar Bharati 
was financially unviable and would remain so in foreseeable future 
on ac count of public obligations. The Committee observe that the 
main reason for insecurity in the mind of officers and employees of 
Prasar Bharati is Government‟s own admission of Prasar Bharati 
being financially unviable before none other than the highest judicial 
body of the country i.e. the Supreme Court of India. From the data 
made available by Prasar Bharati, the Committee note that during 
the year 2006 -07 to 2008 -09, as per the actuals 47 per cent (2006 -
07 and 2007 -08) and 48 per cent (2008 -09) operating expenses 
were contributed by Prasar Bharati. The said operating expenses 
although do not include spectrum and space segment charges . The 
future projections with regard to Prasar Bharati contribution 
towards operating expenses have been indicated by Prasar Bharati 
as 48 per cent. During the course of deliberations, the Committee 
have been informed that GoM in its meeting held on 16 April, 2010 
has recommended that 50 percent of the annual operating expenses 
of Prasar Bharati should be borne by Prasar Bharati  from its internal 
extra budgetary resources and the remaining 50 percent will 
henceforth will be met by non-plan grants-in-aid by the Government.  
18. The Committee observe that almost one fourth of the 
sanctioned posts of Prasar Bharati at present are ly ing vacant. The 

 
 
operating expenses with the filling up of the vacant posts would lead 
to substantial increase in the operating expenses of Prasar Bharati. 
In these circumstances, the Committee fail to understand as to how 
Prasar Bharati would meet the 50 p ercent of operational expenses. 
While reiterating the recommendations made by the Committee in 
their earlier Reports, the Committee strongly emphasize that Prasar 
Bharati should find out ways and means to mobilize funds to reduce 
dependence on Government‟s  grants to meet the operational costs. 
The Committee are of the firm view that Prasar Bharati can definitely 
increase their revenue substantially by taking the benefit of their 
wider coverage in the country. The capital and financial 
restructuring of Prasa r Bharati is long due. There is an urgent need 
to take the decision in this regard which would further help Prasar 
Bharati to raise up their earnings. 
19. Keeping in view the aforesaid scenario, the Committee while 
emphasizing for self dependence of Prasar  Bharati are also 
conscious of the fact Prasar Bharati is the Government‟s broadcaster 
and the revenue by way of advertisement can be earned as per the 
directions/policies of the Government. While fixing the percentage 
of operational expenses as 50 per cen t to be met by Prasar Bharati 
would definitely put pressure on the organization to take the desired 
initiatives to increase its earnings, at the same time showing 
projections as less than 50 per cent raises further questions as to 
how the difference betwee n the mandate of Prasar Bharati and the 
actual earnings would be met. There is an urgent need to  have sort 

 
 
of mechanism to review the initiatives taken by Prasar Bharati in a 
year to  increase its earnings and recommending to the Government 
to meet the gap between the 50 per cent i.e. the mandate minus the 
actual earnings of Prasar Bharati. Such gap would be met by 
Government grant -in-aids. Such a mechanism would definitely 
assure the officers and employees of Prasar Bharati that the 
organization is capabl e of meeting the expenditure on their salaries 
and allowances. This would boost the morale of officers and 
employees and they would put their best for the organization 
thereby increasing the revenue of Prasar Bharati. 
 
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF „THE PRASAR BHARATI ACT, 1990‟  
20. The Standing Committee have consistently been recommending 
for organizational and financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati.  The 
Standing Committee have also been expressing concern over the 
non-implementation of various provisions of The Prasar Bharati A ct 
which include constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and 
Broadcasting Council in spite of the fact that the word „shall‟ has 
been used in the Act.  The Committee have been emphasizing to 
bring comprehensive amendment to the Act.  The Ministry in this  
context has informed the Committee that GoM in their meeting held 
on 17 June, 2010 has recommended to make such amendments as 
are required to be made in the Prasar Bharati Act in the light of 
developments over the last 20 years, subsequent to the Shunu Se n 
Committee Report. The Ministry has also stated that these proposals 
would be finalized by 30 September, 2010 and placed before the 

 
 
GoM thereafter. The Committee find that till date the proposal s have 
not been finalised. While expressing serious concern o ver non -
implementation of the important provision s of the Prasar Bharati 
Act, 1990, the Committee strongly recommend that the                               
provisions should be reviewed comprehensively and the new 
legislation/modifications to the existing Act after addressing the 
concern expressed by the Committee in their various Reports is 
brought to Parliament without any further delay. 
21. The Committee have made various 
recommendations/observations after exhaustive examination of 
various provisions mad e in „The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010‟ in the light of various 
documents procured, deliberations held with the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Prasar Bharati 
and consultations held with the representatives of employees/staff 
associations. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
suggestions made in the report should be given due attention before 
the amending Bills is taken up for consideration by Parliament.   
  
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
 8   December, 2010 Standing Committee on 
 17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
****** 
APPENDIX-II 
STATEMENT INDICATING THE HISTORY AND BACKGROUND OF THE BILL AS 
FURNISHED BY THE MINISTRY OF INFORAMTION AND BROADCASTING 

 
 
 
 Prior to the creation of Prasar Bharati, All India Radio and Doordarshan 
were attached offices of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The 
employees on the strength of All India Radio and Doordarshan, were 
Central Government employees. 
 
 Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation' of India) Act, 1990 was 
enacted, by which Prasar Bharati Corporation came to be established.  
 
 The Central Government issued a notification under Section 3(1) of the 
Act on 22nd July 1997 in which it was stated tha t the Act shall come 
into force on 15 th September 1997. On 23rd November 1997, the 
Central Government issued another notification stating that the 
Corporation has been established with effect from 23 rd November 
1997.  
 
 Section 11 of the Act states that it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government to transfer any of the officers or other employees, from 
Central Government to the Corporation. However, the Central 
Government had to first ask such officers or other employees their 
option and if the officers an d employees intimates their unwillingness 
to become an employee of the Corporation, then such transfer shall 
not be given effect to. 
 
 As the transfer of the employees as contemplated under Section 11(1) 
of the Act has not taken place, they continued as government servants 
on deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati and the provisions of Rule 37 
A of the CCS (Pension) Rules; 1972 are applicable to them.  
 
 After the constitution of Prasar Bharati the employees continue to be 
governed, in matters of promotion by th e same Government rules 
applicable to them earlier since the employees continue to  be 
government  servants on deemed deputation with Prasar Bharati. 
 
  In all there were 163 categories of employees in AIR and Doordarshan 
collectively and each cadre was governed by a separate set of Rules. 
 
 After the formation of Prasar Bharati steps were taken to finalize the 
Recruitment Rules and   service conditions so that the Central 
Government employees working on deemed deputation could exercise 
their options in terms of Section 11 of the Act. 
 

 
 
 In September 2002, regulations in respect of as many as 122 
categories of employees out of the 163 identified categories were 
notified in consultation with the Central Government.  
 
 At that stage various associations of employee s disagreed with the 
regulations and categorically stated that the said regulations were not 
acceptable to them. 
 
 A joint memorandum of understanding was signed on 18 th September 
2002 by the Corporation with the Joint Forum of Akashvani and 
Doordarshan Eng ineering Employees to the effect that the said 
regulations would be reviewed before implementing the same. 
 
 Four different Committees for reviewing the said issue were 
constituted by the Government and despite all efforts , no consensus 
could be arrived at. 
 
 The committees looking into the issue submitted their reports with 
draft regulations covering various identified categories. However, the 
Employees were not satisfied even with the said regulations. 
 
 On 18 th September 2002, another order was issued; stat ing that the 
services of all Government servants of' Akashvani and Doordarshan 
are placed on deemed deputation basis to Prasar Bharati without 
deputation allowance w.e.f. 1st April, 2000 and further stated that this 
order shall remain in force till the sai d employees are transferred to 
the Corporation in accordance with Section 11 of the Act. This situation 
continues till date. 
 
 Since the establishment of the Corporation w.e.f. 23 rd November 1997 
Corporation has passed orders transferring employees of opera tional 
and administrative staff to various parts of India as per requirements. 
 
 The legality of such transfer orders were challenged by certain 
employees before CAT,Chandigarh Bench on the ground that the 
Corporation does not have the power to transfer the employees.  
 
 By an order dated 6.10.2000, the said transfer orders were quashed 
by CAT, Chandigarh Bench. 
 
 Aggrieved by the said judgment, the Corporation filed Writ Petition in 
2001 (CWP No. 10856-CAT/2001) before the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana which was dismissed by the said High Court on 26.7.2001. 

 
 
Aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the Corporation 
filed a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court in 2002. 
 
 
 Since the matters concerning Prasar Bharati were considered to be of 
grave public importance, the Central Government constituted a Group 
Of Ministers on 7 th March 2006 to take d ecisions on the issues 
concerning Prasar Bharati. The following were the terms of reference 
of the GOM:  
(a) Capital structure and funding pattern for Prasar Bharati,  
(b) Restoration of Section 22 of the Act,  
(c) Continuation of facilities of accommodati on, health and education 
to the employees until they join Prasar Bharati,  
(d) Financial package and service conditions to be offered to the 
employees for joining Prasar Bharati,  
(e) Filling up of essential category posts in AIR and Doordarshan,  
(f) Amen dments, if any, to Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 in the light of 
working of the Act,  
(g)Transition to commercial audit 
 
 On 21st November 2006 and the Supreme  Court observed that the 
hearing of the main appeal would be proceeded with and directed 
impalement of Union of India as a party and issued notice to the Union 
of India. Union of India was directed to file its affidavi t within a period 
of three weeks.  
 
 Accordingly, Union of India filed its affidavit before this Hon'ble Court 
on 13th December 2006. 
 
 In the said affidavit it was stated that in order to seek options from 
employees, the terms and conditions of service of t he said employees 
are to be determined and that is an issue which has a vital linkage 
with the financial structure and viability of Prasar Bharati. It was 
further stated that a GOM has already been constituted by the Central 
Government in this regard. It was also informed that the said GOM has 
already held three sittings.  
 
 The appeal filed by the Corporation was allowed by a judgement of the 
Supreme Court on 2nd February 2007. 
 
 In the said Judgment dated 2 nd Februarv 2007 the Supreme Court 
while upholding the right of Prasar Bharati to transfer its employees 
directed Union of India to take a firm decision in terms of Section 11 of 
the Act regarding the status of Prasar Bharati employees to end the 
uncertainty regarding their service conditions within six months.  

 
 
 
 Meanwhile, employees of the Corporation launched agitations all over 
India demanding that their status as Government servants should be 
maintained and all facilities like Government accommodation, health 
facilities under CGHS and admission of their  wards to Kendriya 
Vidyalayas should be continued. 
 
 On 27th September 2007, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with the 
employees of Prasar Bharati belonging to the programming and 
engineering w ing. In the said meeting, the issue with regard to the 
status of employees of Prasar Bharati was deliberated at length and  
the following was agreed to: 
 
(a)  On behalf of the Government, if was agreed that in the GOM 
meeting to be held on 5th October 2007 , Ministry would put forward 
the proposal that the employees of Prasar Bharati who are 
Government employees, will continue to be Government employees. 
However since they have been placed at the disposal of the Prasar 
Bharati, they will be on deemed deputation with Prasar Bharati  under 
Rule 37 A of CCS Pension Rules.        
  
( b)   It was further agreed that a committee chaired by   Secretary 
(I&B) would be constituted by the Government which would include 2  
or 3 representatives from the employees side al ong with management 
representatives to consider and recommend amendments to the Prasar 
Bharati Act to find a permanent solution. The recommendations of the 
Committee would be submitted by 30.11.2007.  
 
(c)  Prasar Bharati and Ministry of I&B after scrutini zing the 
recommendations would place the same before the GOM for their 
perusal and approval in consultation with the concerned Ministries.  
 
(d)   On receiving approval from GOM further necessary action in the 
matter will be taken up.  
 
 The GOM met again on 5.10.2007. In the said meeting a firm, decision 
was taken to continue the employees on deemed deputation till their 
retirement with all the benefits available to Government servants. It 
was also decided to seek Cabinet approval on the said 
recommendation of the GOM including approval for required 
amendments to Section 11 of the Act and Rule ,37 A of the CCS 
(Pensions) Rules, 1972 to enable the employees to continue on 
deemed deputation till their retirement instead of only till such tim e as 
their services are  transferred to the Corporation.  
 

 
 
 The employees unions/associations were initially agreeable to the 
option of deemed deputation, subsequently started demanding that 
they should be treated as regular government   employees. The 
employee unions continued their agitations. 
 
 After several meetings with representatives of the  employees at the 
level of Secretary(I&B) and the Minister for Information & 
Broadcasting, a Committee  was constituted on 26.10.2007 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, I &B for finalizing the draft amendments to 
the  Act as well as the CCS (Pension) Rules, so that the decision of the 
GOM could be implemented. The said Committee had five 
representatives from the employees belonging to the programming 
and engineering wing.  
 
 The employees emphasized that the future appointees should also be 
Government servants. They felt that if this is not agreed to 
simultaneously two categories of employees would be created 
governed by different service conditions doing the same wo rk. They 
also expressed their reservations about promotional avenues. . 
Secretary cautioned that NFADE should limit its scrutiny to 
safeguarding the service interests of present employees and wider 
policy issues must remain the prerogative of the Prasar Bh arati Board 
and its CEO who have to restructure the Organization to meet the new 
challenges ahead. 
 
 27.02.2008:   NFADE in its letter to the Ministry stated that they reject 
the proposed amendments as it will create three categories of 
employees in Prasar Bharati. In the said letter it was stated that they 
had earlier demanded the repeal of Prasar Bharati Act, but after 
regular meetings with the GOM and Ministry of I&B, they had agreed 
for the proposals for amendments in the Act in order to retain the 
employees and the assets of AIR and Doordarshan with the 
Government while granting functional autonomy to Prasar Bharati. 
 
 Special meeting of the GOM was held on 26.09.2008. 
 
The GOM decided as follows:-  
 
(i) The decision dated 05.10.2007 with respect to governmen t 
employees working in Prasar Bharati on the appointed date i.e. 
23.11.1997 was confirmed. They shall continue to serve in 
Prasar Bharati on deemed deputation with all facilities at par 
with Central Government employees.  

 
 
(ii) Persons recruited after the appointed dated i.e. 23.11.1997 and 
serving in Prasar Bharati on the date of decision of GOM i.e. 
05.10.2007 will also be treated as government employees on 
deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati  and  will enjoy all 
facilities  at par with  Central Government employees.  
(iii) All employees recruited  after 5.10.2007 will be Prasar 
Bharati employees. 
(iv) The issue of IIS officers may be further deliberated upon and a 
suitable proposal may be brought in consultation with ministry of 
Law and justice at the next meeting of GOM. 
  
 The next meetings of the newly constituted GOM was held on 
16.4.2010 and again on 17.6.2010. 
 
 The  GOM on Prasar Bharati  in their meeting on 16.4.2010 
considered the issue regarding the status of IIS, CSS, CSSS etc. 
officers and has recommended as under:  
1) Status quo may be maintained in respect of the scheme of 
posting of IIS officers to Prasar Bharati, subject to the following 
conditions: 
(a) Ministry of I&B and Prasar Bharati may jointly work out the number 
of deputation posts to be manned by officers from the IIS cadre. 
 
(b) Deputation may be for a period of three to five years without 
deputation allowance. 
 
(c) Prasar Bharati may be allowed to fill up the remaining posts. Prasar 
Bharati will frame Recruitment Regu lations and Service Conditions for 
recruitment through Recruitment Boards set up by Prasar Bharati as 
per the provisions of the Act. These actions should be taken by Prasar 
Bharati without further delay. 
 
2) Status quo may be maintained in respect of the p osting of Central 
Secretariat Service (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographer Service 
(CSSS) and Central Secretariat Clerical Service (CSCS) cadre officers 
and staff in Prasar Bharati. Posts of Deputy Director (Admn .) which at 
present are being filled on d eputation basis with deputation allowance 
should also be filled on deemed deputation basis to bring them at par 
with other officers and staff of these cadres.   
 In the next meeting of the GOM held on 17.6.2010 the following 
additional recommendations were made: 
 
(a)   The Ministry of I & B should have a comprehensive look in the 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act and recommend such 
amendments as are required in the light of developments in the last 
twenty years subsequent to Shunu Sen Committee report. These 

 
 
proposals would be finalized by the Ministry of I & B by 30.9.2010 
and placed before GOM thereafter.  
 
(b)   With respect to demands of employee organizations like 
NAFADE, ADASA, it was decided that a committee of four joint 
Secretaries may be constituted look  into the specific issues relating 
to disparity in pay scales and other related issues for categories of 
employees exclusive to ministry of I & B , Prasar Bharati arising out 
of upgraded pay scales granted to 11 category of employees of 
Prasar Bharati as per the decision taken in 1999. GOM also felt that 
the demand of NAFED to repeal Prasar Bharati Act does not fall 
within the purview of mandate given to GOM.  
 
 Based on the above recommendations of the GOM the Cabinet has 
approved the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) 
Amendment Bill, 2010. The same has been introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on 31.8.2010.  
 
 
***** 
  

 
 
APPENDIX-III 
Statement indicating the sanctioned strength and vacancies in 
Prasar Bharati Corporation as furnished by Prasar Bharati 
 
S. No. Wing Sanctioned 
Strength 
Vacancies 
1. Programme wing 10679 3,746 
2. Engineering wing 18,262 3,998 
3. Administration Wing 17,382 3,489 
4. News  Wing 393     94 
5. Civil Construction wing 1,457    171 
Total 48,173 11,498 
 
***** 
  

 
 
Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 20 th October, 2010 from 1100 hours to 
1250 hours in Committee Room No. „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh -- Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
8. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
9. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
10. Shri Abdul Rahman 
11. Shri Prem Das Rai 
12 Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13. Shri C. Sivasami 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
15. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
16. Shri Salim Ansari 
17. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
18. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
19. Shri P. Rajeeve 
20. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj - Additional Director 
 
 
List of Witness  
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
 
1. Shri Raghu Menon  Secretary 

 
 
2. Shri Rajiv Takru  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar  Joint Secretary 
 
List of Witness  
Prasar Bharati 
 
1. Shri B.S. Lalli  Chief Executive Officer  
2. Ms. Noreen Naqvi  Director General (AIR) 
3. Smt. Aruna Sharma  Director General (Doordarshan) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting 
of the Committee on Information Technology constituted for the year 2010 -
11 and congratulated them on their nomination to the Committee. 
3. xxxxx                xxxxx                 xxxxx                  xxxxx                 
xxxxx. 
4. The Hon‟ble Chairman thereafter informed the Committee that Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)Amendment Bill, 2010 has been 
referred by the Hon„ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 8 September, 2010 for 
examination and report within 2 months i.e. by 7 November, 2010.  He also 
informed that the list of points seeking the detailed information in 
connection with the aforesaid Bill was sent by the Secretariat to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting on  17 September, 2010 and the replies 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati were 
received by  18 October, 2010 in the Secretariat.  The Employees 
Associations/Federations of AIR and Doordarshan have also been requested 
to furnish the Memoranda to the Secretariat which are still awaited.  The 
Committee after deliberations unanimously decided to have consultations 
with Employees Associations/Federations of AIR and Doordarshan for in 
depth examination of the Bill keeping in view the fact that the legislation 
seeks to settle the long pending issues of the status of employees working in 
Prasar Bharati.  As such, the Committee decided that Hon‟ble Speaker might 
be requested to give extension of time for presentation of the report on the 
aforesaid Bill till the last week of Winter Session of Parliament. 
 
xxxx      Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
[The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar 
Bharati were then called in for briefing on the ‘Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010’] 
 
5. The Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati and invited their attention to 
direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding the 
confidentiality of the deliberations till the report on the Bill is presented to Parliament.  
The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting thereafter brief ed the 
Committee about the history and background of the proposed amending Bill .  He also 
explained in detail the provisions made in the aforesaid Bill.  The Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and CEO, Prasar Bharati responded to the queries of 
Members of the Committee in the context of examination of the aforesaid Bill during 
the course of deliberations.   
 
The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
  

 
 
Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 th October, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1720 hours in Committee Room No. „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh -- Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Dr. Charles Dias 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
8. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
9. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
10. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee -- Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra -- Director 
3 Shri H.R.Kamboj -- Additional Director 
 
  
 
 
 
11. Shri M.P.Achuthan 
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Salim Ansari 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
15. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 

 
 
 xxxxx                xxxxx                 xxxxx                  xxxxx                 
 xxxxx. 
2. xxxxx                xxxxx                 xxxxx                  xxxxx                 
 xxxxx. 
3. In connection with examination of the Prasar Bharati (Br oadcasting 
Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010, the Committee then took 
evidence of the representatives of the following two staff/employees 
associations of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as per the time 
indicated against each:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the staff/employees 
association 
From To 
1. Akashvani & Doordarshan Administrative 
Staff Association (ADASA) 
 
1530 hrs. 1555 hrs. 
2. National Federation of Akashvani and 
Doordarshan Employees Association 
(NFADE) 
1555 hrs.  1630 hrs. 
 
4. Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee, the 
Chairman welcomed them and drew attention of each of the witnesses to the 
provisions of Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
5. The representatives of the staff/employees  Associations explained 
their views/suggestions on the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of 
India) Amendment Bill, 2010 which seeks to settle the long pending issues 
about the status of the employees working in Prasar Bharati.  While 
responding to t he various queries of the Members, they also placed before 
the Committee their suggestions on some of the provisions made under the 
aforesaid Bill. 
6. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the staff/employees 
associations for appearing before th e Committee and furnishing information 
which the Committee desired in connection with examination of the Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill, 2010. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee, then, adjourned. 
***** 

 
 
Confidential 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd November, 2010 from 1600 
hours to 1750 hours in Committee Room No. „62‟, First Floor,Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh -- Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Dr. Charles Dias 
4. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
5. Shri Tufani Saroj 
6. Dr.  Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee -- Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra -- Director 
3 Shri H.R.Kamboj -- Additional Director 
 
  
8. Shri M.P.Achuthan 
9 Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
10. Shri Salim Ansari 
11. Shri P. Rajeeve 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 

 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
1. Shri Rajiv Takru Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Joint Secretary (B) 
3. Shri V.K. Bhardwaj Director  BA (E) 
 
 PRASAR BHARATI 
1. Shri B.S. Lalli CEO 
2. Shri V. Shivakumar Member (P) 
3. Ms. Noreen Naqvi DG (AIR) 
 
2. The following representatives from the Ministry of Law & Justice were 
present to assist the Committee:- 
 
Ministry of Law & Justice 
 
Department of Legal Affairs 
 
 Shri R.L. Koli Additional Secretary  
 
Legislative Department 
 
 Shri P.B. Singh Joint Secretary & LC 
 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take  oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati in connection with 
the examination of „The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) 
Amendment Bill,2010‟.    
  
[The witnesses were then called in] 
 
4. The Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, Prasar Bharati and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
5. The representatives of the Ministry, thereafter, briefed the Committee 
about the various provisions of the Bill.  They also replied to the various 
demands/apprehensions, which the Staff/Employees Associations, had 

 
 
expressed on the proposed Bi ll.  The Members sought clarifications on various 
issues relating to the proposed amendments and the representatives of the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati responded to the same.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 