 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)  
 
50 


 
 
 
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)  


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1-7 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
8-23 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
24 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
25-27 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
28-32 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth  sitting of the Committee held on 13th December, 2013 
 
33-34 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in their Forty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
35 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
10. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
11. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  B.K. Hariprasad 
27. Shri Basavaraj Patil  
28. Dr. Kunwar Deep Singh 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
30. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
31.  Vacant 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director  
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee  on Information Technology (2013-14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fiftieth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Obser vations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’ of 
the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Forty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
30th April, 201 3. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-fifth Report on 5th August, 2013.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
13th December, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Forty-fifth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
     RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                                            Chairman, 
13 December, 2013                                                                                         Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the  
Committee contained in their Forty -fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands 
for Grants (2013 -14)‟ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Forty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid  in Rajya Sabha on the 
30 April, 2013. It contained 21 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21   
 Total 14 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 3 and 8   
 Total 02 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the reply of 
the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  10, 11, 12, 14 and 16    
 Total 05 
 Chapter V 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action 

2 
 
 
 
taken replies to the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-
V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.   
 
A. Revenue Receipts  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4) 
 
6. In their Forty-fifth Report, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that „Revenue Receipts‟ are an account of sale of 
postal articles, commission on money orders and Indian Postal Orders, 
receipts from other premium services, remuneration for Savings Bank, 
Saving Certificates, etc. The Committee note that the revenue receipts 
of the Department show a gradual increase. The revenue receipts of 
the Department of Posts dur ing 2009 -10 was `6266.70 crores which 
increased to ` 6962.33 crore in 2010 -11. The Revenue Receipts in 
2011-12 were `7899.35 crore. During 2012-13, the revenue receipts at 
BE stage were Rs. 7793.31 crore which improved at RE stage to                      
` 8762.75 crore and the actual upto January, 2013 has been `7342.92 
crore. For the year, 2013 -14, the Receipts have been projected at Rs. 
9101.81 crore. While the revenue from „PRC on Ordinary Services‟ and 
„Sale of Postage Stamps‟ shows a sharp decline, th e areas where the 
revenue receipts of the Department show an upward trend include 
Speed Post and SB/CC Remuneration. The Committee feel that the 
Department should take steps to increase its revenue receipts in order 
to meet the increasing working expenditu re. Further, on analysis of 
cost and revenue from the various postal services, it is observed that 
out of 18 services, only 3 services viz. Competition Postcard, Letters 
and Insurance are net revenue generating services. The Committee do 
not feel contend w ith this and would like the Department to focus on 
bringing more products and services in the net revenue generating 
category. Further, the Department should focus on Schemes envisaged 
in the Twelfth Plan which include implementation of new and improved 
processes that are efficient and cost effective, integration and 
interlinking of applications, network access, etc. which will also help 
the Department to retail products and services of other service 
providers.  The Committee may be apprised of the action t aken in this 
regard” 
 
7. The Department of Posts in the action taken note has stated as under:- 
 “The revenue receipts from Postal Operation and Savings Bank  is as follows: 
(i) 2008-09     -  ` 5862.3cr 
(ii) 2009-10     -  ` 6266.7cr 
(iii) 2010-11     -  ` 6962.3cr 
(iv) 2011-12     -  ` 7899.4cr 
(v) 2012-13     -  ` 9357.3cr  

3 
 
 
 
Thus the revenue growth of 2012-13 in comparison to 2008-09 is 
59.6%. 
As regards working expenditure it is pointed out that DOP has 1,55,000 
post offices Which have to be physically manned and hence 92% of 
DOP cost is on staff of the 1,55,000 Locations,1,30,000  are  Gramin  
Post offices. Thus just to maintain physical locations, the expenditure 
on  staff is mandatory. 
 
Though the department has a wide basket of services, the services 
which generate maximum revenue is POSB and mails. 
 
The marketing and product management efforts of  India Post have 
resulted into a consistent growth Speed Post of more than 20% for the 
past three financial years.  Revenue generated through Speed Post 
during last 3 years is as follows : 
 
Year Revenue (`in cr) Percentage 
increase in 
revenue 
2010-11    748.82 22.00% 
2011-12    889.63 18.80% 
2012-13*(provl fig)  1261.48 41.80% 
 
*Figures for 2012-13 received up to IInd Supplementary 
 
Revenue receipts of the Express Parcel services have been showing an 
increasing trend in the previous years.  Department has initiated action 
to automate and mechanise the parcel handling and delivery so as to 
reduce the working expenditure, increase output and revenue, reduce 
per parcel handli ng cost thereby resulting into net profit from the 
parcel business. 
 
Department has already initiated rationalization exercise for parcel 
service considering the market demands, offering from the competitors 
and with a view to increase the customer satisfa ction level and market 
share from the parcel business. 
 
During 12 th Five Year plan it is proposed to establish more parcel 
centers, provided with mechanized handling solutions, mechanized 
delivery solution etc.  These steps will definitely help the department 
to generate more revenue and decrease its revenue deficit.” 
 
8. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14), the 
Committee had noted the gradual increase in the revenue receipts of the 
Department. However, an upward trend in revenue receipts of the 
Department was only on few items like Speed Post and SB/CC.  To increase 
revenue receipts, the Committee had desired the Department to bring 
more products and services in the net revenue generating category and 
focus on schemes envisaged in the Twelfth Plan which include 
implementation of new and improved processes  that are efficient and cost 

4 
 
 
 
effective and integration of applications etc. The Committee, however, are 
constrained to note that the reply of the Department is silent on these 
aspects of the recommendation although the Department has taken some 
initiatives for rationalising its parcel services by establishing more parcel 
centres having mechanized handling and delivery services so as to 
generate more revenue. The Committee have been consistently 
recommending that the Department should take steps to increase its 
revenue receipts through greater application of technology and better 
utilisation of manpower. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to bring more products and services in the net revenue 
generating category and focus on sche mes envisaged in the Twelfth Plan 
which include implementation of new and improved processes that are 
efficient and cost effective, integration and interlinking of applications, 
network access, etc. The steps initiated by the Department to mechanise 
and au tomate the parcel handling and delivery system and proposal for 
establishing of more parcel centres s hould also be implemented with due 
promptitude so as to generate more revenue and decrease revenue deficit. 
The Committee hope that the Department would si ncerely implement the 
measures as recommended and keep the Committee informed of all the 
progress made in this regard.  
 
B. MAIL OPERATIONS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No.  2.9) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee note that Mail Operations is an important scheme of 
the Department with the objective to streamline mail operations, 
keeping in view the emerging needs of various customer segments, 
with special emphasis on the business mail segment and speed y 
transmission of mails. Some of the important plan schemes under Mail 
Operations slated for Twelfth Plan are Mail Network Optimization 
Project; setting up of AMPCs upgradation of Speed Post Centres; 
development of road transport network; providing bicycle s to Postmen 
for delivery of mail etc. The Department had proposed an amount of           
` 821.20 crore against which an amount of `567.95 crore was 
approved. The Committee are unhappy to find under utilisation of fund 
in the scheme during the first year of the Twelfth Plan. During 2012-13, 
` 77.60 crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced to `51.20 
crore at RE stage and the actual utilization upto January, 2013 was 
only ` 35.32 crore. The Committee find that the main reason for under 

5 
 
 
 
utilization was non-approval of the plan schemes during 2012 -13. The 
Department is hopeful that almost all the schemes would be approved 
by the competent authorities in the first to second quarter of the 
financial year 2013 -14. Since many of the plan schemes under Mail  
Operations are logical continuation of programmes contained in 
Eleventh Plan, the Committee feel that it is high time that the 
Department should start implementing the schemes at the earliest. 
The Committee while expressing their concern over the sluggish  
approval process, recommend that all necessary approvals for 
implementation of various schemes and some of which are pending 
with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission, may be 
finalized at the earliest so as to ensure meaningful utilization of `92.15 
crore allocated for Mail Operations during 2013 -14. The Committee 
also recommend that the Government may undertake a review of their 
approval process so that the activities planned during the first year of 
the Five Year Plans do not suffer on acc ount of delay in approvals from 
various quarters. 
 
10. The Department of Posts in the action taken note has stated as under:- 
 
“The observation of the Committee has been taken note off.  Approved 
outlays for XIIth Plan was communicated by Planning Commissi on, by 
Sept./October of the first year of plan period.  Approval/appraisal of 
schemes cannot be initiated for any scheme for want of approved 
outlay which results in delay in obtaining the approval/appraisal of 
schemes.  Although the preliminary work of pr eparation of EFC/SFC 
memo, detailed reports are ready on hand, due to non -availability of 
approved outlays, there is delay in obtaining approvals of competent 
authority and thereby in implementation of activities and utilization of 
funds.  However, all efforts are being made by department to complete 
the approval process of all schemes by the end of 1 st quarter of 2 nd 
year of plan period so that there is no further delay in implementation 
of the schemes in coming years.” 
 
11. The Committee had noted that un der-utilisation of fund under Mail 
Operations during 2012 -13 was mainly due to non -approval of the plan 
schemes during 2012 -13. The Committee had accordingly recommended 
for finalization of all necessary approvals for implementation of various 
schemes so a s to ensure meaningful utilization during 2013 -14. The 
Committee had also recommended for undertaking a review of the 
approval process so that implementation do not suffer an account of delay 
in getting approval from various quarters. From the Action Taken  Note 
furnished by the Department, the Committee note that all efforts are being 
made by the Department to complete the approval process of all schemes 
by the end of 1st quarter of 2nd year of the plan period. However, the Action 
Taken Note is silent on one of the very important aspects of the 

6 
 
 
 
recommendation relating to the review of the approval process. The 
Committee are of the view that the main reason for the under utilistion of 
funds and delay in the implementation of various schemes of the 
Department is mainly due to various processes involved in obtaining 
approval of schemes and it has become a recurring phenomenon. The 
Committee are concerned to note that even though many of the plan 
schemes under Mail Operations are logical continuation of programmes 
contained in Eleventh Plan, it could not be implemented due to delay in 
getting approval of various schemes even during Twelfth Plan also. In view 
of the fact that various processes involved in g etting approval of plan 
schemes are coming in the way for speedy implementation, the Committee 
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation for review of the 
approval process so that the activities planned during the first year of the 
five year plans do not suffer on account of delay in approvals from various 
quarters. The Committee desire the Department to explore various means 
to make the approval process less complex and apprise the Committee of 
the action taken in this regard.  
 
 
C. Introduction of new products under PLI/RPLI 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.18) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the objective of Postal Life Insurance (PLI) is 
to provide insurance schemes for the benefit of Government 
employees which includes the Central and State Government 
employees, personnel of local bodies, Government aided Educational 
institutions, Universities, Nationalized Banks, autonomous and financial 
institutions and PSUs of Central and State Governments. The 
Committee also note that the objective of Rural Postal Life Insurance 
(RPLI), which was introduced in 1995, is to provide i nsurance coverage 
to the people living in rural areas with special emphasis on weaker 
section and women workers. However, from the information furnished 
by the Department, the Committee finds that in PLI and RPLI, there are 
no specific term -insurance plans. Since the products under PLI & RPLI 
offer insurance-cum-investment benefits, their premiums are relatively 
higher in comparison to „pure insurance‟ or „term -insurance‟ plans, the 
Committee feel that introduction of low premium products such as 
term-plans would help the Department in offering life -insurance cover 
to economically weaker sections of the society thereby achieving the 
desired objectives of the scheme.  Such plans, owing to their lower 
premium, would also help the Department to increase its mar ket share 

7 
 
 
 
in the life insurance sector by bringing in more customers. On plans to 
introduce term -insurance in PLI and RPLI, the Committee note that 
term-insurance plans under PLI and RPLI are presently under 
examination by Consulting Actuary. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that apart from the existing products, the Department 
should also explore introduction of lower premium products such as 
term-insurance plans so as to make the PLI and RPLI schemes more 
affordable and accessible to women and economic ally weaker sections 
of society.” 
 
13. The Department of Posts in the action taken note has stated as under:- 
“Devising the new products under PLI/RPLI including the term 
insurance plans is under examination of consulting Actuary.  Once the 
products design is received from Actuary, the same will be sent to 
IRDA for vetting as per directions of Ministry of Finance.” 
 
 
14. The Committee in their Original Report while taking note of the fact 
that the introduction of low premium products suc h as term plans would 
help the Department in offering life -insurance cover to economically 
weaker section of the society besides helping the Department to increase 
its market share had recommended introduction of such low premium 
products. The Committee have been apprised the matter is under the 
examination of the Consulting Actuary  and the same will be sent for IRDA 
for vetting as per directions of Ministry of Finance.  The Committee would 
like to Ministry to introduce lower premium products including term 
insurance plans at the earliest and desire that Consulting Actuary may be 
asked to expedite and furnish their comments with regard to devising the 
new products under PLI/RPLI. T he Committees may be apprised of the 
conclusive action taken in this regard.  
 
 
 
  

8 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Statement of the Minister under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Gross Expenditure 
 
The Committee find that year after year, there has been a gradual increase in the Gross 
Expenditure of the Department of Posts. It has risen from ` 13346.94 crore in 2009 -10 to 
`15,231.24 crore in 2012-13 at RE stage and the actual expenditure was ` 12,791.65 crore upto 
January, 2013 and might have further increased by the closing of the financial year. It has been 
projected at `16876.17 crore in 2013 -14. According to the Department, the increase in 
expenditure is mainly on account of payment of salary of i ts regular employees and Gramin Dak 
Sewaks and Pensionery charges of the retirees. Both the components, which constitute more 
than 92 per cent of the Gross Expenditure, are subject to increase due to annual increment, 
enhancement in DA and MACP. Increase i n the cost of materials, services, AMC, petrol, oil and 
fuel also factors in the increase of Gross Expenditure of the Department. In this regard, the 
Committee note that to contain the expenditure within the BE 2013 -14 provision, the 
Department is reviewin g it on month to month basis. While the Committee are aware of the 
constraints being faced by the Department in controlling the expenditures under Revenue 
Section, the Committee desire that the Department should focus on efficient utilization of the 
available resources and identify areas where introduction of technology can bring in the desired 
efficiency in curtailing  the expenditure. The Committee also desire that all possible steps to be 
taken to use the existing manpower and resources to their optimum utilization in expanding its 
activities. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department 
in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While the increase in revenue expenditure may be attributed to increase in the pay and 
allowances of the staff from time to time due to periodical increments, MACP and increase in 
the Dearness Allowance as well as Dearness Relief on the pension, the Department is making all 
out efforts in containing the expenditure by adopting suitable austerity and economic measures 
as elicited below : 
 
1.   There are prescribed/fixed norms for sanction of establishment to any big or small office 
of the Department.  Based on these norms, periodical review of the establishment of each of 
the office is carried  out and savings in one office are being diverted and redeployed in the 
other/needy offices from time to time in order to ensure optimum utilization of the manpower 
available in the Department. 
 
2.  The staff is being trained and retrained  in new services  and developments through 
various Postal Training Centres (PTCs).  Apart from these PTCs, Zonal Training Centres and 
Workplace Training Centres have been opened in the country as a whole in order to impart 
training and refresher courses to the various cate gories of employees and officers, during the 

9 
 
 
 
year as a whole, in order to bring efficiency in the manpower and utilize the human resource 
effectively with increased output. 
 
3.  Apart from Administrative offices, computerization of the post offices as well  as Mail 
Offices is also going on steadily which is resulting in effective and efficient utilization of 
manpower.  This measure is cost effective as well.  The Department is able to get more and 
improved output from its employees by use of technology in it s administrative as well as 
operative offices. 
 
4.    However one fact which is important to note that 1,55,000 post offices have to be 
physically manned by staff. To even operate the computer, staff is required. Hence there can be 
no further staff reducti on unless there is a reduction in the number of post offices. However 
optimum utilization of staff has always been the effort of the Department and with IT   the 
quality of service is to improved. 
 
5. The vacancy which arises out of retirement, death, tran sfer etc. are filled up promptly 
by DPCs/Examinations subject to maximum of sanctioned strength in the respective cadres.  Till 
the filling up of vacancies by regular personnel, the work of the vacant posts are managed by 
attaching the work with other staf f, engaging people on temporary basis, posting of staff from 
other offices etc.  This is done with the objective to ensure that the work does not suffer and 
public interest/their aspiration are taken care of. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of  Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Recoveries 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Posts are paid agency charges for the 
services rendered by them on behalf of other Departments/Organizations. Th e Committee find 
that the recoveries of the Department have marginally increased from Rs. 438.94 crore in 2009 -
10 to ` 485.72 crore in 2010 -11 and then reduced to `458.64 crore in 2011 -12. The recoveries 
during 2012-13 upto January, 2013 are ` 425.97 crore only as against Rs. 665.05 crore at the BE 
stage which was reduced to `623.03 crore at RE stage. As regards the reasons for low recovery 
in the year 2012 -13, the Department has stated that a major source of revenue by way of 
recovery is the Postal Life Insurance sector and the revenue from PLI & RPLI business during the 
year 2012 -13 is estimated to the tune of ` 496.25 crore apart from the recovery of `126.78 
crore from the other sources. The Committee also note that the estimated recoveries during 
2013-14 on account of PLI/RPLI operations is Rs.  ` 576.58 crore. While the Committee 
appreciate the increase in recoveries from PLI/RPLI, there is a concern that the efforts made by 
the Department in increasing recoveries from other heads particularly the commiss ion from 
WUMTS are not bearing the desired results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department needs to intensify their efforts to stem the decreasing trend in recoveries from 
other areas in general and money remittances in particular and the Committee may be apprised 
of the new initiatives taken in this regard. The Committee also note that in the Railway Budget 
(2012-13) Speech delivered on 14 March, 2012, there was a mention of a proposal for sale of 

10 
 
 
 
PRS tickets through 151 Post Offices. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress, 
if any, made on this proposal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Posts earned a revenue of (i) ` 3562cr from  Post Office Savings Bank 
for 2010-11. (ii) `4304cr revenue earned for 2011-12. (iii)`5030 cr revenue earned for 2012 -13. 
The total revenue from postal operation earned by DOP is `7899 cr. 
  
The Committee has recommended that the Department needs to intensify its effort to 
strengthen the decreasing trend in recoveries from other areas, in g eneral, and money 
remittance in particular.  In case of International Money Remittance apart from Western Union, 
the department has tied up with Money Gram Payment Systems Inc. for money remittances 
product.  Further, for both Western Union and Money Gram services, department is working to 
increase the number of locations offering the services.  Besides this, various promotional 
activities are undertaken such as conducting publicity and promotion about the services 
through road shows and media advertising, which will help increase the number of transactions 
thereby increasing revenue.  
 
           Further the Department has also introduced the Instant Money Order service which 
caters for instant domestic money transfers.  The tariff for this product has been  rationalized, 
keeping in mind the competitive environment, so as to popularize the product and increase  
business thereby  yielding  more revenue on this account. Targets are allotted 
to Circles to encourage them to build business in the service 
 
 No proposal from Ministry of Railways (MOR) for sale of PRS tickets through 151 Post 
Offices has been received.  However, as and when received the proposal for opening of PRS 
centre from Circles, VIP/VVIPs, the same is forwarded to Ministry of Railways with the a pproval 
of Department of Post.  When MOR approves the case, the service starts at the proposed 
center. 
 
 At present (Upto march 2013) PRS service is being provided through 237 Post Offices 
across the country and nearly 650 proposals are pending with MOR fo r approval of PRS centres 
in Post Offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
Revenue Deficit 
 
The Revenue Deficit of the Department is the difference between the net expenditure 
and the revenue receipts. The revenue deficit of the Department in 2009 -10 was `6641.30 
crore which was reduced to `Rs. 6345.62 crore in 2010 -11. It further reduced to ` 5805.92 
crore in 2011 -12. In 2012 -13, the revenue deficit at BE stage was `5921.35 crore which 
increased to `5935.46 crore at RE stage. The actual deficit upto January, 2013 was `5022.76 

11 
 
 
 
crore. Appreciating the efforts made by the Department to reduce the de ficit, the Committee 
hope that the Department would make all efforts to maintain the positive trend of reduction in 
revenue deficit. The Committee trust that the Department would follow two pronged strategy 
to curtail the deficit viz. reduction in gross ex penditure coupled with increase in revenue 
receipts to reduce the gap between the two as much as possible. The Committee hope that the 
thrust areas during the Twelfth Plan i.e. IT Induction and Modernization and introduction of 
Financial Services (Savings Bank and Remittances) would help in achieving the desired objective 
of reduction in revenue deficit. The Committee would accordingly like the Department to 
continue the efforts in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department is contributing more than 50% of the revenue generated by the 
Department and is continuing its efforts to increase more revenue which will help in reducing 
deficit of the department. 
 
The Department has taken a series of initiatives under Mail Network Optimisation 
Project in order to improved the quality of mail services.  The Department is also trying to 
upgrade the infrastructure and optimised network are expected to result in better quality of 
service. 
 
The Department is putting their continued efforts in implementation of the IT  
modernisation project which includes the provision of Financial Services (Saving Bank and 
remittances).  The implementation of IT modernization Project is in progress and the current 
status of the various RFPs of the project is given below : 
 
RFP Name Vendor Summarized Status 
Data Center Facility M/s Reliance Primary Data Center completed and handed over  to 
Department for usage on 03.04.13. 
Network 
Integrator(NI) 
M/s Sify  
Physical link deployed on 119 CBS Pilot locations and 
825+ locations of Phase 1.  Wan roll out started in Pos.  
Financial system 
Integrator (FSI) 
M/s Infosys (i)Customization of Core Banking Solution to POSB 
requirements ongoing 
Change 
Management (CM) 
M/s. TCS i.  1st Change Readiness & Assessment Survey 
    conducted.  Around 19000 feedback received. 
ii. 30 Change Management workshops completed. 
iii. Stakeholder analysis in progress 
Core System 
Integrator (CSI) 
M/s TCS Contract signed with M/s. TCS on  15th April 2013 and 
project implementation has started. 
Rural Hardware (RH)   RFP  floated  on12.7.13 
Rural System 
Integrator (RSI) 
M/s. Infosys Contract signed with M/s Infosys on 28th Feb 2013. 
Presently on hold, on account of non-on boarding of RH 
vendor. 
Mail Operations 
hardware (MOH) 
 Re-tendering done.  Tender evaluation ongoing 
PM Tools RFP  Technical Evaluation is under process. 

12 
 
 
 
Department has been continually engaged in providing greater impetus to business 
activities of the Department and formulating/organizing and implementing various policies 
keeping in mind the market considerations of its products and services.  Further, BD & M 
Directorate is working on exploring new business areas by way of customizing its existing 
services/introduction of new services.  For eg : as a value addition to the Speed Post service and 
with a view to build the business in e -commerce market.  Department is working towards 
Speed Post Cash on Delivery (SP -CoD)  which software is under testing at CEPT Mysore.  The se 
initiatives will help the Department to increase its revenue outcomes and control the deficit. 
 
Revenue receipts of the Express Parcel Services have been showing an increasing trend 
in the previous years.  Department has initiated action to automate and  mechanise the parcel 
handling and delivery so as to reduce the working expenditure, increase output and revenue, 
reduce per parcel handling cost thereby resulting in net profit from the parcel business. 
 
Department has already initiated rationalization exercise for parcel service’s considering 
the market demands, offering from the competitors and with a view to increase the customer 
satisfaction level and market share from the parcel business. 
 
During 12 th Five Year Plan it is proposed to establish more pa rcel centres with fully 
automated/mechanized handling solutions, mechanized delivery solution etc.  These steps will 
definitely help the department to generate more revenue and decrease its revenue deficit. 
 
Department of Post has tied up and in the proces s of new tie ups with various 
organizations for sale of various products/services through Post Offices.  The existing tie ups 
under Retail Post are also being extended depending upon the commercial viability and 
customer needs. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Capital Section 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that there is persistent underutilization of funds 
allocated to the Department under the Capital section. During the year 2012 -13, the allocation 
at BE stage was ` 615.77 crore which was reduced to ` 207.60 crore at the RE stage while the 
actual utilization upto January 2013 is just `73.97 crore which is a mere 12 per cent of the 
Budget Estimates. When asked about reasons for such low utilization of funds during 2012 -13, 
the Department submitted that being the first year of the Twelfth Plan period, no new scheme 
could be implemented du e to delay in approval of Plan schemes. The actual utilization is on 
account of ongoing schemes and to meet spillover payments of previous year. However, the 
Committee note that underutilization of allocated funds under the Capital section is a perennial 
problem. The Committee are of the strong opinion that under utilization of funds meant for 
capital section has a direct bearing on improving the desired infrastructure for better 
performance in Department schemes. Such severe underutilization indicates some serious flaws 
in the planning and execution of the projects undertaken by the Department. The Committee 
strongly feel that there is an urgent need to have a relook at the planning and execution 

13 
 
 
 
processes followed by the Department in implementation of the  various projects that leads to 
significant underutilization of the allocated funds. The Committee hope that such a step would 
enable the Department in ensuring that allocation of funds of Rs. 433.23 crore for the year 
2013-14 meant for capital expenditure are prudently and optimally utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
`5 cr. has been allocated to circles under the Plan scheme for embedding cash chests at 
12500 Rural BOs during 2013 -14.  The circles have also been requested to ensure 100% 
utilization of fund and achievement of physical targets within the financial year 2013-14.   
 
During 2012 -13 Department has allotted ` 5.34 Crs. to Technology Division for 
computerization of remaining Departmental Post Offices and out of this fund `4.22 crs was 
allotted  to circles for computerizing remaining Departmental Post Offices. 
 
Action has already been initiated by the Department to obtain the approval/ appraisal 
of the plan schemes of XIIth Plan by end of 2 nd  quarter of 2013 -14.  So far out of 36 
components of a to tal 74 components of 10 schemes of XII Plan have been approved by the  
competent authority and the remaining are in pipeline.  It is anticipated that by end of 
September, 2013 most of the remaining components shall be approved. Once the schemes are 
approved implementation of process will commence immediately.  Thereby it can be 
anticipated that department will be in a position to utilize the funds allocated to full extent 
during 2013-14. 
 
Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
Review of Plan Schemes  
 
The Committee note that there has been under -spending of Plan Outlays by the 
Department during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Out of ` 4180 crore which was the total 
approved outlay for the Plan Schemes during the  Eleventh Plan, the total budgetary allocation 
at BE stage was `2995 crore out of which `. 1593.63 crore had been the actual utilization. The 
Committee find it surprising that the Department could utilize about half of the allocated outlay 
during the entire Eleventh Plan. For the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -17), against proposed 
outlay of `12000 crore, `5527 crore has been approved by the Planning Commission. While 
observing that for the Twelfth Plan, there is massive gap between the proposed allocation by 
the Department and the amount allocated by Planning Commission at BE stage, the  Committee 
are dismayed to note that the utilization of funds during the first year (2012 -13) of the Twelfth 
Plan is quite low. The Department has informed that the low utilization of funds during the first 
year of the Plan-period is owing to pending approvals for a number of schemes. A case in point 
is IT Induction and Modernization scheme, which h as been allocated ` 3046.75 crore for the 
entire Twelfth Plan period out of total allocation of ` 5527 crore for all the schemes. The BE of 
`516.00 crore of this Scheme for 2012 -13 was reduced to `109.36 crore at RE stage and the 
actual utilization in the scheme upto January 2013 has been shown as Rs. 16.19 crore only. 

14 
 
 
 
During the evidence, the Secretary, Posts had informed the Committee that the projects were 
not able to move forward because they we re at various stages of approval and funds were 
provided only for ongoing schemes and to meet spillover payments of previous year. With the 
approval of Twelfth Plan outlay/projects, the Committee expect that the Department  would 
make concerted efforts to streamline the approval system of the schemes and steps would be 
taken to ensure that schemes are approved expeditiously and the funds allocated are fully 
utilized. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action has already been initiated by the Department to obtain the approval/ appraisal 
of the plan schemes of XIIth Plan by end of 2 nd  quarter of 2013 -14.  So far, approval for 
`3438.66 crores out of total XIIth Plan outlay of `5527 crore  has been obtained from the  
competent authority which consist of 36 components of a total 74 components of 10 schemes 
and the remaining are in pipeline.  It is anticipated that by end of September, 2013 most of the 
componets shall be approved.  Once the schemes are approved implementation of process will 
commence immediately.  Thereby i t can be anticipated that department will be in a position to 
utilize the funds allocated to full extent during 2013-14. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
Franchisee Outlets 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Posts have been implementing two 
commission based schemes i.e. ‘Franchisee Outlets’ in the urban and upcoming urban areas 
and ‘Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra’ (PSSK) in the rural areas for expan ding the postal 
network. As per its mandate, Franchisee Outlets are opened where there is a need and 
justification for opening of Post Offices but the Department is not in a position to open the 
same due to departmental norms. There was a proposal for open ing of 10,000 Franchisee 
Outlets during the Eleventh Plan which was reduced to 8100 Franchisee Outlets and only 463 
could be opened during the entire Eleventh Plan. In contrast, during the Twelfth Plan, there is a 
proposal of opening 1050 Franchisee outlet s while there is no proposal to open any new PSSKs 
during the 12 th Plan period as the PSSK scheme was not found to be effective. As on 
31.03.2012, there are 1670 Franchisee Outlets functioning in the country. The Committee also 
note that against the physic al target of opening 250 new Franchisee Outlets during 2012 -13, 
205 Outlets have been opened upto 28 February, 2013. The Committee appreciate the proposal 
of the Department for expansion of the range of services to be offered by the franchisees, 
extension of the area of activity of franchisee scheme and for provision of additional 
commission beyond the prescribed amount of transactions under the franchise scheme. The 
Committee are of the view that the concept of Franchisee Outlets is a novel idea for the 
expansion of postal network in the expanding urban areas as it do not add to the establishment 
cost of the Department. Therefore, initiatives should be taken by the Department to increase 
the Franchise Outlets in areas that are currently not covered by the p ostal network and 
measures should be taken to ensure that the targets of opening new Franchisee Outlets during 
the Twelfth Plan are fully achieved. 

15 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During last financial year 2012-13, 255 Franchisee outlets have been opened against  the 
target of 250 Franchisee Outlets.  The physical target for opening 200 Franchise Outlets during 
current financial year 2013 -14 and fund allocation for this purpose have already been given to 
Circles.  The circles have also been requested to ensure 100 % utilization of funds and 
achievement of physical targets within the financial year 2013 -14.  RB Division will monitor the 
timely utilization of fund by circles and will ensure that allotted fund is fully utilized by the 
Circles during 2013-14.  The Circles have also been requested to ensure 100% utilization of fund 
and achievement of physical targets within the financial year 2013 -14.  RB Division will monitor 
the timely utilization of fund by Circles and will ensure that allotted fund is fully utilized b y the 
Circles during 2013-14.   
 
Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
Setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres 
 
The Committee note that the setting up of ‘Automated Mail Processing Centres’ 
(AMPCs) is one of the major activities which have been continued from the Eleventh Plan. The 
objective of the Scheme was to extend the AMPCs facility to more cities to enhance th e mail 
handling capacity, reducing the cost of operations and improving the quality of the service. The 
financial outlay approved for this scheme was ` 40 crore during 2012 -13 and `20 crore during 
2013-14. The Committee have been informed that AMPC set up in 1993 is still functional in 
Mumbai. Besides, two new AMPCs have been set up in Delhi and Kolkata in 2012. The mail 
handled by these centres in comparison to the total mail handled by the Department is 5.44 per 
cent. The Department has also informed the Committee that it is also proposed to replace the 
existing AMPC in Mumbai and Chennai and set up new AMPC in Bangalore and Hyderabad. The 
Committee note that one of the main issues involved in setting up of AMPCs is availability of 
land. The Committee are however dismayed to find that even when land has been allotted in 
Hyderabad and Mumbai and finalized for Bangalore, the proposal for setting up AMPCs at these 
places is yet to be sent to the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission for their 
approval as the same is still under preparation for consideration of the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). The Committee deprecate such a lackadaisical attitude of the Department 
towards the implementation of such an important scheme. In view of the important function 
performed by AMPC in streamlining the mail operations and speedy delivery of mails, the 
Committee  strongly recommend that the proposal for setting up AMPCs may be prepared and 
submitted to EFC without any further delay so that the subsequent appr oval of the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission can be obtained at the earliest. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department  should set up a specific time frame for implementation of 
the entire project. The Committee may be apprised of the pr ogress made in this regard after 3 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
  

16 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The land for establishment of AMPC in Hyderabad, Bangalore and Mumbai has  been 
allotted, but the evaluation of lease value by C.P.W.D from Chennai an d Mumbai ordered by 
Civil Aviation Ministry is awaited.  At Hyderabad, discussions are going on with the State 
Government.  At Bangalore, discussions are going on with Bangalore International Airport Ltd. 
(BIAL) for purchase/allotment of land on long term lease.  The EFC memo on the plan scheme 
has been sent to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.  A time frame for 
implementation of the project has been prepared. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
Training of officials and Agents 
 
The Committee note that training related to Financial Services including marketing of 
Financial products is critical in improving the performance of the Postal employees and feel that 
efforts to improve the skills and capabilities of employees through training and  strategic 
collaborations with leading service providers in banking and insurance sectors are necessary to 
equip the workforce with the knowledge of financial products and services offered/proposed to 
be offered by DoP and should be taken up on a priority basis. The Committee also feel that 
since the domain of Banking and Insurance offers specialized products, a basic knowledge of 
the diverse range of products is a necessary pre -requisite to improve the productivity of the 
employees. In this regard, the Department has informed the Committee that training related to 
Financial Services including marketing of Financial Products is part of the overall training being 
imparted to the employees of various categories from Group ‘C’ and above through Work Place 
Computer training Centres, Postal Training Centres and Staff college of Department of Posts. 
The Committee note that during 2011 -12, around 50,000 employees were trai ned through 
these institutions. During Twelfth Plan, the Department has planned to train all Group ‘C’ and 
above employees in overall IT Project related activities which also includes Financial Services. 
For implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS), a round 18,000 staff at various levels will be 
trained by Financial Services System Integrator during 2013 -14. The Committee feel that since 
Department of Posts is a service oriented entity having a large workforce of 4.74 lakh 
employees, proper emphasis on training requirement of the human resource should be a 
priority area. While appreciating the existing efforts of the Department to meet the training 
requirement of its large workforce, the Committee stress upon the need to focus on training 
requirements of such a large workforce particularly in the area of Financial Services including 
marketing of Financial products and the related IT tools. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Presently,  training on Banking Insurance and financial services is being imparted by the 
Department in -house.    Training to all personnel involved in “across -the-counter” and “back 
office” banking  and insurance activities is imparted using Standard Trai ning Package (STP) 
developed by the Department.  Training is  also conducted at the six Postal Training centres at 
Mysore, Vadodara, Madurai, Saharanpur, Gawahati and Darbhanga, both as Induction Training 

17 
 
 
 
and In-Service Training . Work Place Training Centr es (WTCs) and all the categories of operative 
staff are covered during all Mid Career training in a phased manner. 
 
Under the new IT Modernization Project, the implementation of multiple solutions and 
new processes will significantly impact the way employe es work across India Post today.  
Training will be organized in a manner so as to prepare and support the workforce to 
understand, learn and adapt the new way of working to fully realize the potential benefits of 
this change.  To manage this large scale im plementation, which will impact almost all the 
employees, a comprehensive and well structured training has been planned in all the functional 
areas. This training  will be given at the time of roll out of the new banking and Insurance 
Software. 
 
On the Core Banking system (CBS) and Postal Life Insurance (PLI) applications under the 
India Post Project, about 4000 trainers (Departmental officials) will be trained by the vendor 
(Infosys) and these trainers will in turn train all the employees on CBS and PLI ap plications.  The 
entire CBS and PLI training management, scheduling, effectiveness and evaluation will have 
very professional approach as it will be overseen and co -ordinated by the Change Management 
Vendor (TCS). 
 
The training will be imparted in PTCs and  WTCs.  To bring the training closer to their 
workplace, opening of 100 new WTCs has been planned during 2013-14. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) 
The Committee note that Postal Life Insurance (PLI) is amongst the few services offered 
by the Department that makes significant contribution to the revenue of Department of Posts. 
During the evidence, it was identified by the Secre tary of Posts as amongst the areas of work 
where the Department is going to focus in order to improve its revenue receipts. The 
Committee are, however, unhappy to find that although the overall subscription to PLI Schemes 
is rising, the year-on-year number of policy procurement shows a decline for both PLI and RPLI. 
In PLI, the number of Policies procured during 2009 -10 was 5,97,234, during 2010-11 it reduced 
to 5,40,482 and during 2011 -12 it further reduced to 4,82,423. The trend is an indicator of 
waning popularity of the Postal Life Insurance schemes amongst the subscribers. When viewed 
in light of the fact that PLI contributes significantly towards the revenue of the Department of 
Posts, it assumes even greater significance. There is also a simultaneous increase in the number 
of policy surrender/withdrawal in RPLI. In RPLI, the total number of surrender(withdrawal) of 
policies during 2009-10 was 16,295, during 2010 -11 it increased to 22,118 and during 2011 -12, 
it further increased to 28,776. The trend of declining policy procurement coupled with 
increasing surrender/withdrawal compounds the problem and presents a bleak outlook for a 
scheme that contributes significantly to the revenue of Department of Posts. The Committee 
trust that the Department would take immediate measures to stem the decline in subscriptions 

18 
 
 
 
and focus on initiatives to popularize the Postal Life Insurance Schemes amongst the intended 
beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Over the past few years, emphasis has been to increase revenue in the shape of 
premium income by procuring high value policies rather than merely increasing number of 
policies.  PLI premium income has registered a growth of 24.77%, 22.56% and 25.89% 
respectively in 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively over preceding financial year with an 
average growth of about 24% each year.  In RPLI there were 99.25 lacs, 122.02 lacs and 135.47 
lacs policies as on 31 -03-10, 31 -03-2011 and 31 -03-2012 and out of these policies the 
percentage surrender was 0.16%, 0.18% and 0.21% r espectively in 2009-12, 2010-11 and 2011-
12. 
 
In order to increase the business of PLI/RPLI in terms of number of policies the following 
steps are being initiated : 
 
i.   Coverage of newly expanded clientele base of PLI such as employees of commercial 
 banks, joint ventures, credit co-operative societies, deemed universities etc. 
ii.   Aggressive marketing and publicity of PLI/RPLI products through electronic, outdoor 
 and print media. 
iii.  Raising the outer sum assured limit of PLI and RPLI.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
Online viewing and payment of premium of PLI/RPLI policies 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that the Department of Posts has been unable 
to meet the long pending demand for facility of online viewing and payment of premium of 
PLI/RPLI policies by the customers. The Committee had also taken up the issue in their Twenty -
fourth Report of Demands for Grants (2011 -12). However, t he facility to view and pay the 
premium online is yet to be rolled out for the benefit of PLI/RPLI customers. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note that the Department is presently in the process of 
restructuring/computerizing all operations of PLI/RPLI unde r the Financial Services Integration 
Project. Under the project, comprehensive software is being developed by M/s Infosys which 
will handle all aspects related to issue of policy bond, collection of premium through post office 
or online, surrender of polic ies and sanction of loans etc. This software is slated to roll out in 
Pilot Phase, Phase -I & Phase -II and the Phase -I rollout is scheduled for July, 2013. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should make sincere efforts to facilitate 
introduction of online view and pay facility for its PLI/RPLI customers to make the Postal Life 
insurance products more accessible and user -friendly. The Committee may be apprised about 
the outcome of the efforts made by the Department in this regards. 
 

19 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Financial Services Integration Project of the Department which is at Software 
Development stage there is already a provision of facility of viewing PLI/RPLI policy status 
online.  This is expected to be rolled out within a period of one year. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION 
 
The Committee note that IT Induction and Modernization is an important scheme of the 
Department that got maximum Outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore for the entire Twelfth Five Year 
Plan. The Committee also note that the Scheme is a continuation from the Eleventh Plan with 
some additions and changes in its scope and objectives. The new initiatives to be implemented 
under this schemes includes supply of Mail Office Hardware; Development and deployment of 
Rural ICT solutions and Banking and PLI solutions; setting up of Data Centre and Disaster 
Recovery system; Network Integration, etc. The Secretary, Posts, while deposing before the 
Committee acknowledged the importance of the scheme to the Department. Under this 
Scheme, the Department had floated 8 Requests for Propo sals (RFPs) which are at various 
stages of finalization. There were plans to computerize all the Departmental Post Offices by 
31st March, 2013. It is also proposed that all the Departmental Offices would be electronically 
networked by December, 2013. As re gard setting up of National Data Center and Disaster 
Recovery Center, the Committee note that the Data Center has been set up at the Vendor’s 
space and DRC would be set up at CEPT Mysore. The Committee have been repeatedly 
emphasizing the need for computer ization of Post Offices since a number of core activities of 
the Department such as implementation of Core Banking Solution, setting up of Post Bank of 
India and delivery of Financial Services are reliant upon computerization of Post Offices. 
However, the Committee are perturbed to note that despite being continued from the Eleventh 
Plan, the objective of computerization of Post Offices is yet to be achieved. As per information 
furnished by the Department, 24,969 Departmental Post Offices have been computer ized so far 
and out of this 23,552 computerized post offices have internet facility. While noting that being 
the first year of the Plan period, projects under the scheme are at various stages of approval, 
the Committee find gross under utilization of allocations in such an important scheme is a cause 
for concern. The Committee find that for 2012 -13, an amount of `516.00 crore was allocated at 
BE stage which was reduced to `109.36 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization upto 
January, 2013 was only `16.19 crore. The Committee while observing that IT induction and 
modernization is an all encompassing Scheme that will improve the performance and efficiency 
of the Department in all its functional areas are of the opinion that  any delay in 
implementation of this Scheme is likely to have a cascading effect on other areas as well. 
Therefore, the Committee urge the Department to give due importance to the Scheme and 
ensure that the various projects are completed in a time -bound manner while making optimum 
utilization of the allocated funds. The Committee also recommend that the appropriate 

20 
 
 
 
monitoring mechanism is also put into place for ensuring the time bound implementation of 
the planned physical and financial targets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department is putting their best efforts in implementation of the IT Modernisation 
Project.  The Department is regularly monitoring the progress of IT modernization project.  Duly 
approved Project Governance Structure has been put in place for monitoring the 
implementation of the project (both physical and financial targets).  It will also ensure that the 
various projects in IT modernization project are completed in a time bound manner with the 
optimum utilization of the allocated funds. 
 
(Ministry of Communication s & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT 
The Committee note that out of a total of 1802 vacant plots available with the 
Department of Posts in all the 22 circles, 243 p lots (i.e. 13.49 per cent of the total plots) are 
under encroachment. The situation becomes more worrisome when it is taken into account 
that the Department is operating from rented accommodation in these 22 circles and has 
incurred expenditure of Rs. 69.4 0 crore, Rs. 74.66 crore and Rs. 67.48 crore for the years 2009 -
10, 2010-11 and 2011 -12 respectively. During the evidence, the Department had informed the 
Committee that a special allocation of Rs. 45 crore has been made this year for construction of 
boundary walls on the vacant plots to prevent further encroachment. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that while the plots in possession of the Department are lying vacant and 
prone to encroachment, the Department is incurring huge expenditure by way of opera ting 
from rented accommodation. In some of the States such as Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, both the number of 
vacant plots as well as the number of Post Offices operating from rented accomm odation are 
quite high. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department needs to focus on such 
States to convert these vacant plots into productive assets by construction of its own buildings 
thereby reducing its reliance on rented accommodation while  cutting down on rental 
expenditure at the same time. The Committee feel that such a measure would help the 
Department in curtailing its increasing expenditure and also prevent the encroachment of its 
vacant plots in the 22 Postal Circles. The Committee wo uld like to be apprised of the efforts 
made by the Department in this regard.  
(Para 2.21 of the 45th Report) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding encroachment of Departmental plots, it is submitted that necessary 
instructions have already been issued to all the Heads of Postal Circles that eviction of 
unauthorized personnel from the encroached land of the Department may be done after 
seeking assistance of the law enforcing agencies for all the plots of Department of Posts, 
which have been encroached upon. 

21 
 
 
 
  It is proposed to construct 175 boundary walls for an outlay of `15 Crs. in the first 
phase of the 12th Plan.  Additional funds, if any,  for construction of more boundary walls 
will be sought after utilization of allotted funds at “Mid -Term review” sta ge to enable the 
Department to construct boundary walls on   the remaining Departmental vacant plots, 
where there is no boundary wall/barbed -wire, as per the directions of Standing Committee 
on Information Technology (2011 -12) on „Demands for Grants (2012 -13)‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology – Department of Posts, vide para 
24 of 33rd Report.  
 
Further, in view of approved outlay provided for 12th Plan and the estimated cost for 
construction of building projects projected by the Postal Engineering Wing,  it is proposed to 
construct 73  Post Office buildings (including 1 lift project), 5 Administrative Office buildings 
(including 1 lift project) and 10 staff quarter projects besides implementation of other 
proposed Plan activities, subject to approval of „EFC‟ for 12th Plan. 
 
(Reply to Para 2.21 of the 45th Report) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
The Committee also note that ‘Preservation of herita ge buildings’ is an important 
activity under the Estates Management Scheme that got an allocation of `2.00 crore during 
2012-13 with a physical target of preservation of 10 heritage buildings while for the year 2013 -
14, there is an allocation of `2.00 crore for preservation of 5 heritage buildings. The Committee 
feel that there is a need to identify heritage buildings owned by the Department of Posts and 
steps should be taken to preserve their heritage character. The Committee may be apprised 
about the initiatives taken in this regard.  
 (Para 2.22 of the 45th Report) 
 
The Department  has 38 Heritage Buildings, which have tremendous architectural value. 
It is the policy of the department to preserve of these invaluable assets. These buildings have 
been declared as Heritage Buildings in the light of instructions issued by ‘INTACH’ (Indian 
National Trust For Art and Cultural Heritage). Thus, special efforts are being made to preserve 
these heritage buildings through Plan funds.  
 
The Plan activity “Pre servation of Heritage Buildings” has already been included in the 
“EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee) Memorandum” under the Plan scheme “Estates 
Management” for 12th Five Year Plan and the issue is under examination with Planning 
Commission and Department  of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) and the same is likely to be 
finalized shortly. 
  
During the year 2012 -13, no funds under the Plan sub head “Preservation of Heritage 
Buildings” could be incurred due to non -finalization of ‘EFC’ for 12 th Plan.  In the  current 
financial year (2013-14), an outlay of Rs. 1 Cr. has been provided for preservation of 3 Heritage 
Buildings. In view of demand projected by the circles for preservation of Heritage buildings, 
funds will be allotted to the concerned circles after the approval of ‘EFC’ for 12th plan. 
 
(Reply to Para 2.22 of the 45th Report) 
 

22 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
Issues pending with Ministry of Finance 
 
The Committee note that some of their recommendations made in the previous Reports 
which were taken up by the Department with the Ministry of Finance were long pending. These 
issues included providing autonomy to the Department of Posts on the issue of rat es of interest 
provided under various Small Saving Schemes, increasing the ceiling of Deposits in Single and 
Joint Accounts of the Postal Savings Bank, starting of new schemes under Small savings 
schemes, in terms of policy matters with regard to insurance  activities of DoP and positive 
consideration in fixing the rate of remuneration provided to DoP for various agency services, 
etc. In this regard, the Committee are pleased to note that the ceiling in Single and Joint 
Accounts has been removed by the Ministry of Finance and that the Department is now revising 
interest rates of Small Savings Schemes every financial year. However, revision of the rate of 
remuneration for Zero Balance Accounts is still pending with the Ministry of Rural Development 
for decisio n. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should pursue the 
same with the Ministry of Rural Development so that the rate of remuneration for Zero Balance 
Accounts can be appropriately revised. The Committee may be apprised about the progre ss 
made in this regard.  
  
Reply of the Government 
An expert group was constituted by Ministry of finance to consider the issue of 
remuneration to the Department of Posts for POSB work. The Expert Group has recommended 
remuneration of `175 per account per annum for 2013 -14.  Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance has intimated that the issue relating to suitable remuneration to 
Department of Posts for disbursal of MGNREGA wages needs to be taken up by Department of 
Posts with Min istry of Rural Development.  Subsequently, Ministry of Rural Development 
agreed to pay an amount not exceeding Rs.80/ per active account to Department of Posts.  
Department of Posts raised the claim for Rs. 566.47 Cr. Vide letter dated 5.11.12.   
  
However, MORD has released an amount of `184.99 crores towards reimbursement of 
administrative expenses incurred by the Department of Posts for disbursement of MGNREGS 
wages through Post Offices for the financial years 2009 -10 to 2011 -12. An amount of `566.47 
crores is yet to be paid by MoRD to Department of Posts for the same period. Department of 
Posts is pursuing the matter for payment of balance amount with MoRD. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
Implementation of UIDAI Project by the Department of Posts 
The Committee note that the Department has signed MoU with UIDAI for enrollment 
and dispatch/delivery of Aadhar letters. The Department has informed that a total of 4665 Post 
Offices are provided with the facility of collection of data for UID Card. Accord ing to UIDAI 
portal, the Department of Posts has done 93,01,084 successful enrolments of UID cards and as 
on 25 March, 2013, the Department has delivered a total of 19.01 crore UID cards. The data 
reveals that share of Department in delivery of UID cards f ar exceeds its share in enrolment. 
Out of total number of UIDAI Aadhar Speed Post Letters, as on 25 March, 2013, 98.14 per cent 
were delivered successfully, 1.20 per cent were returned back to UIDAI due to reasons such as 
addressee leaving the address, inc omplete address, pin code, etc. and 0.66 per cent were in 
mail flow pipeline. The Committee were informed that due to non -receipt of Enrolment Agency 
wise, State/UT wise and month wise details of successful enrolment from UIDAI, the 
Department is unable to  settle accounts with all enrolment agencies. Further, UIDAI has 
unilaterally reduced the amount paid to the Department for each successful enrolment from 
`50/- to `40/-. The Department has taken up both the issues with UIDAI. The Committee 
appreciate the significant role played by the Department in successful delivery of 19.01 crore 
Aadhar letters. The Committee, feel there is a lot of scope for further increasing the enrolment 
for UID cards through Post Offices. The Committee recommend that the Department  should set 
up more Enrolment Centres to increase the enrolment and take measures to further improve 
timely delivery of Aadhar letters. The Committee desire that they may be apprised of any 
difficulties being countered by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Posts is working as Registrar of UIDAI for Aadhar enrolments through 
Post Offices.   India Post has completed the first phase successfully and the UID enrolment work 
was stopped in February, 2012 as per instruction of UIDAI. 
 
Second phase of UID enrolment is being carried out in 8 States/UTs presently.  A total of 
356 enrolment stations are active currently. 
 
The issue of non receipt of EA wise, State/UT -wise and Month-wise details of successful 
enrolment from UIDAI, redu ction of the amount being paid to the Department for each 
successful enrolment from `50/- to `40/- is being pursued with the UIDAI. 
 
At present UIDAI has started posting of Aadhar letters as first class franked mail from 
January, 2013 as an interim measure.  The Department is not facing any major difficulties in the 
same. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 

24 
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
Revenue Receipts 
  
The Committee note that ‘Revenue Receipts’ are an account of sale of postal articles, 
commission on money orders and Indian Postal Orders, receipts from other premium services, 
remuneration for Savings Bank, Saving Certificates, etc. The Committee note tha t the revenue 
receipts of the Department show a gradual increase. The revenue receipts of the Department of 
Posts during 2009 -10 was `6266.70 crores which increased to `Rs. 6962.33 crore in 2010 -11. 
The Revenue Receipts in 2011-12 were `7899.35 crore. During 2012-13, the revenue receipts at 
BE stage were Rs. 7793.31 crore which improved at RE stage to ` 8762.75 crore and the actual 
upto January, 2013 has been `7342.92 crore. For the year, 2013 -14, the Receipts have been 
projected at Rs. 9101.81 crore. While  the revenue from ‘PRC on Ordinary Services’ and ‘Sale of 
Postage Stamps’ shows a sharp decline, the areas where the revenue receipts of the 
Department show an upward trend include Speed Post and SB/CC Remuneration. The 
Committee feel that the Department s hould take steps to increase its revenue receipts in order 
to meet the increasing working expenditure. Further, on analysis of cost and revenue from the 
various postal services, it is observed that out of 18 services, only 3 services viz. Competition 
Postcard, Letters and Insurance are net revenue generating services. The Committee do not feel 
contend with this and would like the Department to focus on bringing more products and 
services in the net revenue generating category. Further, the Department should  focus on 
Schemes envisaged in the Twelfth Plan which include implementation of new and improved 
processes that are efficient and cost effective, integration and interlinking of applications, 
network access, etc. which will also help the Department to reta il products and services of 
other service providers.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The revenue receipts from Postal Operation and Savings Bank  is as follows: 
 
(i) 2008-09     -  `5862.3cr 
(ii) 2009-10     -  `6266.7cr 
(iii) 2010-11     -  `6962.3cr 
(iv) 2011-12     -  `7899.4cr 
(v) 2012-13     -  `9357.3cr  
           Thus the revenue growth of 2012-13 in comparison to 2008-09 is 59.6%. 
 
 As regards working expenditure it is pointed out that DOP has 1,55,000 post offices 
which have to be physically manned and hence 92% of DOP cost is on staff of the 1,55,000 
Locations,1,30,000  are  Gramin  Post offices. Thus just to maintain physical locations, the 
expenditure on  staff is mandatory. 
 

26 
 
 
 
Though the department has a wide basket of services, the services which generate 
maximum revenue is POSB and mails. 
 
The marketing and product management efforts of  India Post have resulted into a 
consistent growth Speed Post of more than 20% for the past three financial years.  Revenue 
generated through Speed Post during last 3 years is as follows : 
 
Year Revenue (`in cr) Percentage increase 
in revenue 
2010-11    748.82 22.00% 
2011-12    889.63 18.80% 
2012-13*(provl fig)  1261.48 41.80% 
 
*Figures for 2012-13 received up to IInd Supplementary 
 
Revenue receipts of the Express Parcel services have been showing an increasing trend 
in the previous years.  Department has initiated action to automate and mechanise the parcel 
handling and delivery so as to reduce the working expenditure,  increase output and revenue, 
reduce per parcel handling cost thereby resulting into net profit from the parcel business. 
 
Department has already initiated rationalization exercise for parcel service considering 
the market demands, offering from the compet itors and with a view to increase the customer 
satisfaction level and market share from the parcel business. 
 
During 12th Five Year plan it is proposed to establish more parcel centers , provided with 
mechanized handling solutions, mechanized delivery solution etc.  These steps will definitely 
help the department to generate more revenue and decrease its revenue deficit. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  8 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
MAIL OPERATIONS 
 
The Committee note that Mail Operations is an important scheme of the Department 
with the objective to streamline mail operations, keeping in view the emerging needs of various 
customer segments, with special emphasis on the business mail segment and speed y 
transmission of mails. Some of the important plan schemes under Mail Operations slated for 
Twelfth Plan are Mail Network Optimization Project; setting up of AMPCs upgradation of Speed 
Post Centres; development of road transport network; providing bicycle s to Postmen for 
delivery of mail etc. The Department had proposed an amount of ` 821.20 crore against which 
an amount of `567.95 crore was approved. The Committee are unhappy to find under 
utilisation of fund in the scheme during the first year of the Twe lfth Plan. During 2012 -13, ` 

27 
 
 
 
77.60 crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced to `51.20 crore at RE stage and the 
actual utilization upto January, 2013 was only ` 35.32 crore. The Committee find that the main 
reason for under utilization was non -approval of the plan schemes during 2012 -13. The 
Department is hopeful that almost all the schemes would be approved by the competent 
authorities in the first to second quarter of the financial year 2013 -14. Since many of the plan 
schemes under Mail Operation s are logical continuation of programmes contained in Eleventh 
Plan, the Committee feel that it is high time that the Department should start implementing the 
schemes at the earliest. The Committee while expressing their concern over the sluggish 
approval process, recommend that all necessary approvals for implementation of various 
schemes and some of which are pending with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission, may be finalized at the earliest so as to ensure meaningful utilization of `92.15 
crore allocated for Mail Operations during 2013 -14. The Committee also recommend that the 
Government may undertake a review of their approval process so that the activities planned 
during the first year of the Five Year Plans do not suffer on account of de lay in approvals from 
various quarters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation of the Committee has been taken note off.  Approved outlays for XIIth 
Plan was communicated by Planning Commission, by Sept./October of the first year of plan 
period.  Approval/appraisal of schemes cannot be initiated for any scheme for want of 
approved outlay which results in delay in obtaining the approval/appraisal of schemes.  
Although the preliminary work of preparation of EFC/SFC memo, detailed reports are ready on  
hand, due to non -availability of approved outlays, there is delay in obtaining approvals of 
competent authority and thereby in implementation of activities and utilization of funds.  
However, all efforts are being made by department to complete the approv al process of all 
schemes by the end of 1 st quarter of 2 nd year of plan period so that there is no further delay in 
implementation of the schemes in coming years.   
 
Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  11 the Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Providing bicycles to Postmen for delivery of Mails 
 
The Committee note that providing bicycles for delivery of mails is an important activity 
under the ‘Mail Operations including International Mails and Global Business’ Scheme as a part 
of the new Schemes/Projects initiated during 2012 -13. Under t his activity, `11.50 crore has 
been allocated during 2013 -14 for providing 30,000 bicycles to postmen for delivery of mails. 
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that the Scheme could not be approved till 
December, 2012 and only recently, the Competent Authority has accorded the approval and the 
action has been initiated. The Committee feel that the mobility of Postmen is critical in ensuring 
timely delivery of Mails in the villages located in the rural and far flung areas. To deliver the dak 
from the post offices to the villages, which are not connected with the motorable roads, the 
bicycles are the best options in such areas to overcome the problem of last mile connectivity. 
The Committee while finding the delay in approval of the scheme to prov ide bicycles to 
postmen for delivery of mails is quite disheartening are of the opinion that this Scheme should 
be given utmost attention by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all 
steps must be taken by the Department for ensuring tim ely implementation of the Scheme so 
that delivery of mails, especially in far-flung and rural areas is not hampered and the mobility of 
the postmen is ensured. The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this 
activity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The plan scheme stands approved by the Standing Finance Commission (SFC).  The 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for procurement of bicycles has also been prepared and would be 
brought out soon.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
Centralized Banking for Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) 
 
The Committee note that the Department plans to implement core banking in all the 
Departmental Post Offices by September, 2014.  This includes setting up of ATMs, Circle 
Processing Centres, Call Centres and issue of debit cards to customers. The 1.3 lakh B ranch 
Offices are also proposed to be covered by deploying the Core Banking Solution (CBS) mobile 
application in hand held devices that are to be supplied to these offices.  As per Annual Plan 
2012-13, there was a target of setting up 4000 ATMS. However, u pto December, 2012 not a 
single ATM was opened. The Department informed that during 2012 -13 no ATM could be 

29 
 
 
 
installed since it was the first year of the Twelfth Plan and the appraisal of the scheme was 
under process. The Committee are unhappy to note that the scheme for Centralised Banking for 
POSB is pending for a long time.  The Committee feel that computerization of Post Offices and 
implementation of centralized Banking for POSB are inter -linked since computerization and 
networking of Post Offices is a n ecessary pre -requisite for implementation of Centralized 
Banking for Post Office Savings Bank (POSB).  Despite the issue being repeatedly highlighted by 
the Committee in their previous reports, the Department is yet to achieve full computerization 
and netw orking of its Post Offices.  The Committee are also dismayed to note that while full 
computerization of all the Post offices is still a distant dream, the Department has proposed 
new schemes such as setting up of Post Bank of India that would require compu terization and 
networking of Post Offices for its smooth functioning.  Such oversight on the part of 
Department is a cause of concern.  Since all these schemes are inter -dependent, failure to 
achieve the objectives in one scheme can have cascading effect o n the performance of other 
schemes as well. The Committee exhorts the Department to focus on implementation of 
computerization of Post Offices so that the other Schemes such as Centralized Banking for POSB 
and setting up of Post Bank of India do not suffer  on account of under -achievement in the 
ongoing schemes. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Infosys is providing the core banking solution for Post Office Savings Bank. The user 
Acceptance Test of c ustomized Core banking service is ongoing in Chennai by a team of 40 
officials. After UAT is completed the software will be rolled out in the pilot locations. The 
computerisation of   25145 departmental offices has been completed. The tender provision of 
hand held devices for Gramin Post Offices has been reissued as the vendor selected by the 
earlier tender did not provide PBG. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Creation of Anti -Money Laundering (AML)/Combating Financing of Terrorism 
(CFT) Compliance structure 
 
The Committee note that since June 2009 Department of Posts is a regulated entity 
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act and the provisions of the Act relating to 
Customer Due Diligence, Record Keeping and Reporting are now mandatorily applicable to all 
financial activities undertaken by the Department. In addition, any new provisions have to be 
kept updated with reference to changes in law, rule and government sanctions. The Scheme 
‘Creation of Anti Money Laundering (AML) /Combating of Financial of T errorism (CFT) 
Compliance Structure’ being initiated by the Department during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 aims to 
provide all logistical modifications and support required to meet the changing needs of 
AML/CFT under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act is part o f the IT 2012 Project being 
implemented and rolled out from 2014 onwards and EFC approval for physical storage facilities 
in the circles is to be obtained in 2013 -14 for implementation during Twelfth Plan. The 
Committee note that a financial outlay of `22 crore was approved during 2012 -13 for 

30 
 
 
 
implementation of this Scheme. When asked about the implementation of AML/CFT 
compliance structure in a total of 22 circles which was targeted to be completed during 2012 -
13, the Committee were informed that AML/CFT co mpliance structure is part of the IT 2012 
Project being implemented by the Department. In addition, physical infrastructure for 
preservation of records has also been planned. In view of the contemporary threats posed by 
Money Laundering and activities rela ted to Financing of Terrorism, the Committee strongly feel 
that the Department should ensure timely implementation of AML/CFT compliance structure in 
all the 22 circles on a priority basis to ensure that guidelines under Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act and its provisions relating to Customer Due Diligence, Record Keeping and 
Reporting are fully adhered to in all the financial activities conducted by Department of Posts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
AML is a part of Core Banking implementation of IT modernisation project of the 
Department of Posts. The project has been kicked off on 28 th Sept, 2012, and the UAT is 
ongoing in chennai.  The Department is regularly monitoring the progress of the CBS project 
and also keeping a check on the implementation timelines of the project.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Post Bank of India 
 
The Committee note that the objective of creation of Post Bank of India is to provide full 
banking services primarily to the rural people who still do not have the privilege of modern 
banking facilities and have to depend on the informal sector for their credit requirements. The 
Department of Posts, with its vast network of 1,55, 000 Post Offices across the country and a 
formidable presence in rural areas is well equipped to fulfill the objective of Financial Inclusion 
by offering full fledged banking services  to fulfill the financial requirements of the large rural 
population which is as yet outside the purview of formal banking sector and have to depend on 
informal sources for their credit requirements. The Department is already offering Small 
Savings Schemes through the Post Offices Savings Bank (POSB) to a large population as a n 
agency function on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, in their Thirty -
third Report presented to Lok Sabha on 2 May, 2012 recommended that the Department may 
work out the details including finalisaiton of EoI/RFP to engage a consultant so that the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) for the project is completed at the earliest. 
 
(Para 2.15 of the 45th Report) 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Consultant has submitted DPR on setting up of Post Bank in May2013 .The 
department of Posts has applied for a license  for Post Bank to the  Reserve Bank of India 
 
(Reply of Para 2.15 of the 45th Report) 
 

31 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
In this regard, the Committee note that after receipt of inputs/comments from the 
Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India on the study Report of the Administrative Staff 
College of India on this project the Department on the direction of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Techn ology in February, 2012 has initiated the process of 
selection of consultant for preparing a Detailed Project Report (DPR). The Committee note that 
the Expression of Interest (EoI) was floated on 26th April, 2012 for eligible firms and Request 
for Proposal (RFP) was issued to successful bidders on 4th September, 2012. The Committee are 
happy to find that the successful bidder was selected as Consultant on 23rd November, 2012 
and the contract for carrying out DPR has been signed on 15th February, 2013. The C ommittee 
have also been informed that the Consultant is scheduled to submit the report in January, 2013 
and an outlay of Rs. 502 crore for the Twelfth Plan has been earmarked for setting up of Post 
Bank of India. The Committee urge the Department to speed up the process of setting up of 
Post Bank of India as it would act as a milestone in bringing a large population specially in the 
rural areas under the fold of formal banking domain and will go a long way in achieving the 
objective of  financial inclusion. 
(Para 2.16 of the 45th Report) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Consultant has submitted DPR on setting up of Post Bank in May 2013 .The 
department of Posts has applied for a license  for Post Bank to the  Reserve Bank of India. 
  
(Reply of Para 2.15 of the 45th Report) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
Introduction of new products under PLI/RPLI 
 
The Committee note that the objective of Postal Life Insurance (PLI) is to provide 
insurance schemes for the benefit of Government employees which includes the Central and 
State Government employees, personnel of local bodies, Government aided Educational 
institutions, Universities, Nationalized Banks, autonomous and financial institutions and PSUs of 
Central and State Governments. The Committee also note that the objective of Rural Postal Life 
Insurance (RPLI), which was introduced in 1995, is to provide i nsurance coverage to the people 
living in rural areas with special emphasis on weaker section and women workers. However, 
from the information furnished by the Department, the Committee finds that in PLI and RPLI, 
there are no specific term-insurance plans. Since the products under PLI & RPLI offer insurance -
cum-investment benefits, their premiums are relatively higher in comparison to ‘pure 
insurance’ or ‘term -insurance’ plans, the Committee feel that introduction of low premium 
products such as term -plans would help the Department in offering life -insurance cover to 
economically weaker sections of the society thereby achieving the desired objectives of the 

32 
 
 
 
scheme.  Such plans, owing to their lower premium, would also help the Department to 
increase its market share in the life insurance sector by bringing in more customers. On plans to 
introduce term-insurance in PLI and RPLI, the Committee note that term -insurance plans under 
PLI and RPLI are presently under examination by Consulting Actuary. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that apart from the existing products, the Department should also explore 
introduction of lower premium products such as term-insurance plans so as to make the PLI and 
RPLI schemes more affordable and accessible to women and economic ally weaker sections of 
society. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Devising the new products under PLI/RPLI including the term insurance plans is under 
examination of consulting Actuary.  Once the products design is received from Actuary, the 
same will be sent to IRDA for vetting as per directions of Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2013-Bgt(PA)/45th Report 
dated 26-06-2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  14 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
13 December, 2013  Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)         Information Technology 

33 
 
 
 
  Annexure-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 13th December, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agrawal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
9. Shri Abdul Rahman  
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Joy Abraham 
11. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
12. Shri Salim Ansari 
13. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
14. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Garg  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 

34 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra Agrawal, a 
Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitting in accordance with Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee……xxxxx….. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration two Draft 
Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) relating to the Department of 
Posts and …..xxxxx…..(Ministry of Co mmunications and Information Technology). The 
Committee adopted the same without any modification. The Committee, then, authorized 
the Chairman to finalize and present the reports to the House during the ongoing Session 
of Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee al so placed on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance provided by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee in 
drafting of the Report.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****  Matter not related to Report.  

35 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FIFTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21  
 Total 14 
 Percentage 66.66 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 00.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 3 and 8   
 Total 02 
 Percentage 09.54 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  10, 11, 12, 14 and 16   
 Total 05 
 Percentage 23.80 
 
 
 
 
  
 