 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
41 


 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-21 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
22-47 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
48-50 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
51-63 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
64-68 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 13th December, 2012………. 
 
69-70 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their T hirty-first Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
71 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
 3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
10. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
11. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
12. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13. Shri Tapas Paul 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
  29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Committee Officer 
3. Shri Abhishek Sharma - Executive Assistant 
    
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (201 2-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty-first 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) on ‘ Demands for Grants 
(2012-13)’ of the Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology). 
 
2. The Thirty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   
2 May , 201 2. The Departm ent of Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken Notes on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty -first Report on 3 August, 2012 and 
replies to Recommendation Serial Nos. 3, 26, 27 and 28 on 22 November, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was con sidered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
13 December, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-first Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
17 December, 2012                                                                               Standing Committee on 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‗Demands for Grants                   
(2012-13)‘ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Thirty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
2nd May, 2012. It contained 34 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Department of Telecommunications and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 30 and 31  
 
 Total 21 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 7 and 29  
 Total 02 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 6, 9, 19 and 33    
 Total 05 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl ies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  11, 14, 17, 22, 32 and 34  
 Total 06 
 Chapter V 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be give n to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken 
replies to the Recommendations /Observations contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 

 
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
 
A. Under Utilization of allocations made under IEBR and GBS Components 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee note that for the year 2012 -13, the Department have been 
allocated a Plan Outlay of ` 15231.39 crore which comprises of ` 10,431.39 
crore as Internal and External Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and ` 4,800 crore 
as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS). The Plan allocation is ` 4649.70 crore 
lesser than the outlay allocated at Budget Estimates stage of the previous 
year. The analysis of the data further reveals that th e Plan allocation to the 
tune of ` 19881.09 crore allocated at Budget Estimates stage during the year 
2011-12 was reduced to ` 11878.07 crore at Revised Estimates stage. The 
Department could utilize only ` 4949.22 crore i.e. 41.67 per cent of the 
allocations upto February, 2012. If the percentage utilization of IEBR and GBS 
components during the year 2011 -12 is analyzed, the Committee find that 
under IEBR, BSNL and MTNL have performed badly. Whereas the percentage 
utilization with regard to RE under IEBR du ring the year 2011 -12 has been 
stated as 32.57 per cent, BSNL‘s financial achievement is 33.67 per cent. 
MTNL has performed in a worst manner whereby the financial achievement is 
just 15.97 per cent. With regard to GBS performance during the year 2011 -12, 
the percentage utilization has been stated to be 87.98 per cent. 
 
While reviewing the financial achievement of the Department during the 
Eleventh Plan as a whole which has come to a close on 31st March, 2012, the 
Committee find under utilization in both IE BR and GBS components. During 
the five years, the allocations under IEBR and GBS components were made for 
` 101228.78 crore at BE stage which were reduced to ` 75556.45 crore at RE 
stage and the utilization is ` 50003.68 crore which indicates that almost 5 0 
per cent of the allocations made at BE stage remained unutilized. If the 
performance under IEBR and GBS components separately is reviewed, the 
allocations under IEBR component during the Eleventh Plan were made to the 
tune of ` 94664.78 crore at BE stage , the expenditure reported to be ` 
46821.97 crore which is lesser than 50 per cent of the BE allocations. Under 
GBS component, total Eleventh Plan allocations at BE stage were ` 6564 crore 
and the utilization was ` 3181.71 crore. Another repetitive trend n oticed is 
huge variation between BE, RE and actual during each year of the Eleventh 
Plan. The allocations made at BE stage have considerably been reduced at RE 
stage and even the reduced allocations could not be utilized resulting into 
under-spending during each of the years. 
 
The Committee have consistently been raising the issue of variation of 
allocations at various Estimate Stages as well as under -spending of the scarce 
resources. In spite of that the trend is repetitive during each of the years. With 
regard to the reasons, the Department is repetitively stating fiercely 
competitive market as well as mid -term corrections depending upon the 
market needs and changing scenario as reasons for under -spending under 
IEBR. Another reason subscribed for low utili zation under IEBR by BSNL is 
delay in completion of the procurement process under various projects and 
delay in completion of the various ongoing projects. With regard to under -
spending under GBS component, the problems with the major schemes i.e. 
Defence Service Network, A&N project have been cited. The aforesaid 
scenario clearly indicates unrealistic projections made by the Department. Not 
only that there are serious problems with the Public Sector Undertakings. The 
projections for the bigger projects are  being made unrealistically without 
analyzing the bottlenecks coming in the way of implementation and huge 

 
 
resources are being blocked, particularly when the important projects of the 
Government are starving for funds. 
 
The Committee deplore the way the pr ojections are being made by the 
Department under both IEBR and GBS components. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the allocations for the major projects should be projected 
only when all the preliminary work for implementation has been done, 
clearances are in place thereby not repeating the situation of blocking scarce 
resources of the Government. The Committee caution the Department to keep 
into consideration the aforesaid observations of the Committee while 
projecting allocations for the projects during the Twelfth Plan.‖ 
 
7. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken notes have stated as 
under:- 
 ―MTNL:  
 
The financial performance of MTNL during the last five years since 2007 -08 to 
2011-12 is given below:- 
                                                                          
      (Rs. in Crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Budget Estimates 2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 1204.10 1145.46 
Revised 
Estimates 
1692.33 1304.28 1352.01 1281.84 792.25 
Actual utilization  932.46 871.12 1194.70 1257.07 167.94 
Percentage  of 
utilization w.r.t. 
Revised 
Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 88.36% 98.07% 21.20% 
 
MTNL is operating only in Delhi and Mumbai which are the most fiercely 
competitive markets characterized by high saturation and low ARPU (Average 
Revenue Per User) and having more than 150% tele -density. In view of the 
rapid developments / changing scenari o in the fiercely competitive telecom 
sector it is very difficult to forecast the exact requirements well in advance. 
Therefore, the plans are very dynamic in nature and require not only 
continuous review but midterm corrections depending upon the market 
needs, future demand and changing scenario.  
 
At the time of initial planning, provision of funds have also to be kept for the 
new and upcoming projects likely to come in future. However, the projects do 
not come up or are delayed due to unavoidable circums tances. In such cases 
the funds allotted against such projects remain unutilized and results in lower 
expenditure as compared to outlay. In case of some projects, although 
equipment has been installed and is in commercial use, full payment could 
not be released due to some pending points / features to be demonstrated. 
 
MTNL has been continuously making conscious efforts to make plans with 
realistic and achievable targets as well as to minimize the gap between 
planned outlay & expenditure. Due to conscious e fforts, the percent utilization 
of funds for the year 2010 -11 has progressively increased to 98% (Planned 
outlay: Rs 1281.84Cr, Expenditure: Rs 1257.07Cr) from 88.36% during 2009 -
10 &  67% & 55% during 2008-09 & 2007-08 respectively.  
 
The expenditure during the year 2011-12, however, has been low (21.20%). In 
this context, it is submitted that currently MTNL is passing through severe 
cash flow problem and is borrowing money to meet its day to day 
requirements. Therefore, it becomes important for MTNL not o nly to 
continuously review its spending but also ensure that funds are utilized 
judiciously.  Since enough capacity is available the plan size was reduced at 

 
 
RE stage and further expenditure has been made as per the requirement. 
However, none of the schemes have been affected due to low expenditure.  
 
It is further submitted that all the services which are being provided by MTNL 
to its‘ customers are available on demand and there is no waiting list for any 
of the services. MTNL generates the required funds through its internal 
resources / arrangements and does not get any assistance from the Govt. The 
money is withdrawn as and when needed for a project and hence there is no 
unspent balance available at the end of each financial year and funds 
available / unutilized continue to remain invested as per DPE guidelines. 
 
MTNL has drafted its 12th five year Plan taking into consideration the 
experience it had gained during the previous years. Meetings were held with 
the units to review the progress of the ongoing p rojects. Further, the status of 
the new / upcoming projects to be taken up during the next 5 years were 
reviewed and provision of funds have been made based on the expenditure 
likely to be booked under various heads.  
 
BSNL: 
 
The revised IEBR component in respect of BSNL during Eleventh Five Year 
Plan was Rs. 65218 Crores. The aggregated expenditure is Rs. 42947 Crores 
which works out to 66%. Since BSNL does not receive any General Budgetary 
Support (GBS) from Government, all projections are funded out of i nternal 
accruals / external sources funding. 
 BSNL Management is very much concerned about the shortfall in the 
utilization of allocation under IEBR and is committed to address the issues 
which contribute to under utilization of Outlay on continuous basis. 
 
BSNL has examined the reasons for shortfall in utilization of allocation outlay 
and has initiated corrective actions to address the same as given below: 
 
(i) Delay in tender finalization has been one of the main reason attributed 
to underutilization of outla y. To address the same, BSNL has started 
inviting all centralized tenders through e -tendering which has not only 
improved transparency with the vendors but also has speeded up / 
reduced the time in finalization of tender.  
(ii) Earlier the requirement of fund w as projected on yearly basis which 
used to undergo changes because of many reasons including the delay 
in finalization of tenders. To obviate the same, the requirement of fund 
will now be made, project wise, on quarterly basis spanning various 
milestones o f the project. This projection will be suitable fitted in the 
annual plan for giving BE and RE based upon actual project 
performance, which will also be reviewed on quarterly basis. 
   
It is expected that with the aforesaid initiatives, BSNL will be in a position to 
formulate a realistic plan where it intends to spend a significant percentage of 
plan outlay for the achievement of its physical targets.‖ 
 
8. The Committee had found under utilization by the Department in both 
IEBR and GBS components during th e Eleventh Plan. Deploring the way the 
projections were made by the Department under IEBR and GBS, the 
Committee had recommended that the allocations for the major projects 
should be projected only when all the preliminary work for implementation 
has been done. The Committee regret to note that in their reply the 

 
 
Department has furnished the oft repeated reasons such as  fiercely 
competitive telecom sector, delay of projects due to unavoidable 
circumstances in the case of MTNL, and delay in tender finalizati on in the case 
of BSNL as the main reasons for the under utilization of outlay. The Committee 
are surprised to note that MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem 
and is borrowing money to meet its day to day requirements when it is still 
unable to overcome the problem of under utilization of plan outlay under IEBR 
and GBS. The Committee are of the view that problem of under utilization of 
plan outlay of the Department under IEBR and GBS will remain a perennial 
issue unless the Department carry out a  comprehensive review of the various 
plan schemes as to ensure that the budgetary resources provided for various 
schemes are effectively utilized and the schemes are implemented in a proper 
way.  
 While expressing their displeasure s that the Department had done 
precious little to implement the recommendation, the Committee reiterate the 
recommendation that allocations for major projects should be projected only 
when all the preliminary work  for implementation has been done. In this 
context, the Committee recommend a thorough review of the performance of 
Ministry’s various plan schemes including that of MTNL and BSNL and the 
Committee apprised accordingly.  
 
B. Broadband expansion in the country 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee observe that whereas the Department has exceeded the 
targets of telecom connectivity, the progress with regard to broadband 
expansion has not been to the desired level as could be seen from the data 
furnished by the Department. There are 13.54 million broadband connections 
by February, 2012 against the target of 20 million broadband subscribers by 
2010. The broadband penetration is just 1.44 per cent when compared to the 
impressive teledensity of 78.10 pe r cent. The major initiative proposed to be 
taken during the Twelfth Plan to address to the problem of broadband 
connectivity particularly in the context of rural areas is the National Optical 
Fibre Network (NOFN) for providing broadband connectivity to 2. 50 lakh 
village Panchayats. The Committee feel that with the implementation of the 

 
 
aforesaid project, the constraint of non-availability of backhaul connectivity up 
to the villages would be addressed. The other constraints enumerated by the 
Department are non-availability of content in vernacular languages, low 
English literacy, affordability of customer premises equipment (CPE), Right of 
Way (RoW), International bandwidth prices, affordability of broadband, low 
level of digital literacy etc. To address the  various issues the Department 
need to act in coordination with respective Union Departments as well as the 
State Governments. The coordination with the State Governments is utmost 
necessary to address the issue of Right of Way (RoW). With regard to the 
constraint of content in vernacular languages, the Department should take up 
the matter with the sister Department i.e. Department of Information 
Technology and the research organizations like C -DAC and C -DoT. On the 
issue of low English literacy, low level of digital literacy certain schemes are 
being implemented by the various Departments including the Department of 
Information Technology. There is an urgent need to look into the matter on 
affordability of computers as well as on affordability on broadband.  The 
initiatives need to be taken with the private sector service providers as well as 
with the private industry as a whole. More emphasis need to be given to R&D 
so as to make the computer equipments and maintenance of computers 
cheaper. The Committee wou ld like the Department to take up the various 
issues with the respective Ministries/State Governments/Industry as an 
integrated approach need to be taken to address the various issues. The 
Committee exhort the Department to take the desired initiatives dur ing the 
Twelfth Plan so as to address the constraints so that the broadband 
connectivity scenario in the country improves and the growth matches to the 
impressive telecom growth in urban areas of the country.‖ 
 
10. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken notes have stated as 
under:- 
―MTNL:  As far as MTNL is concerned, it is providing broadband on both 
wireline as well as on wireless. Wire -line connections are currently being 
provided by MTNL using ADSL 2+ technology on its existing legacy  fixed line 
copper network. The wireless broadband connections are provided by MTNL 
through its 3G network. MTNL has presently, over 1.05 million broadband 
connections on landline against a deployed capacity of over 1.6 million line. 
Further for wireless s ervices MTNL has enable all its 2G customers for 3G 
services Broadband services which means that any customer having a 3G 
handset can have access to wireless Broadband services. The Broad Band 
services both through land line & wireless are available to the  customers on 
demand. 
 
To meet the ever increasing demand for the bandwidth, achieve higher level 
of customer satisfaction and providing wide range of services to its customers 
MTNL is aggressively laying and extending the reach of optical fiber in its 
network and is deploying GPON based FTTH network. It is a centrally managed 
network designed to provide reliable fiber routes to cover all possible 
destinations within MTNL. This will help in meeting the increased bandwidth 
requirement for both data and video applications.  
 
In the Greenfield areas MTNL is laying fiber to provide the broadband band 
connectivity. However in the areas of existing legacy network MTNL has 
planned to provide high speed broadband using VDSL (Very High Data Rate 
Digital- Subscriber L ines) technology where copper loop length will be 
reduced. With these initiatives the quality of Broadband services will improve 
and also MTNL will be able to provide higher bandwidths (20 Mbps +) to its 
customers. 
 
USOF: 
 
For expansion of Broadband Services in rural and remote areas of the country, 
USOF has adopted a two pronged strategy i.e. launching of scheme for 

 
 
provision of broadband to the end users (such as Wireline/ Wireless 
Broadband Schemes) as well as augmentation of OFC backhaul media for 
carrying the broadband traffic from rural areas to the core network. 
Accordingly, for rural and remote areas, the following schemes have been 
undertaken by USOF: 
 
1. Rural broadband Schemes: undertaken/planned by USOF  
 
The Indian Telegraph Rules have been amen ded, and stream IV has been 
added under the title ―Provision of broadband connectivity to villages in a 
phased manner‖ to bring provisioning of broadband connectivity to the rural 
areas under the purview of the USOF.The rural broadband connectivity will 
cover Institutional Users, such as Higher secondary schools, Public Health 
Centres etc., as well as Individual Users, located in the villages. The Schemes 
are as under:  
 
a)    Ongoing Scheme: Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme  
 
Brief and background note: For providing broadband connectivity to 
rural & remote areas, USOF has signed an Agreement with BSNL on January 
20, 2009 under the Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme to provide wire -line 
broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas by leveraging the existing 
rural exchanges infrastructure and copper wire -line network. This scheme is 
being implemented at pan -India level. The objective is to make the rural and 
remote areas broadband enabled by facilitating the service providers in 
creating Broadband 
 The speed of each of the broadband connections shall be at least 512 
kbps always on, with the capability to deliver data, voice and video services in 
the fixed mode. The rural broadband connectivity will cover Institutional 
Users, such as Gram Panchayats,  Higher Secondary Schools and Public Health 
Centres, as well as Individual Users, located in the villages.  
Under this scheme, BSNL will provide 8, 88,832 wire -line Broadband 
connections to individual users and Government Institutions and will set up 
28,672 Kiosks over a period of 5 -years, i.e., by 2014. The subsidy 
disbursement is for (i) broadband connections, Customer Premises Equipment 
(CPE), Computer/Computing devices (ii) setting up of Kiosks for public access 
to broadband services. The estimated subs idy outflow is Rs. 1500 crore in 5 
years time that includes subsidy for 9 lakh broadband connections, CPEs, 
computers/computing devices and Kiosks. 
 
Present Status:  Under this scheme, as of April 2012, a total of 3,60,966 
broadband connections have been provided.   
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates:  The scheme has an overall target to 
provide 8, 88,832 wire-line Broadband connections by 2014.  
 
 
b)  Planned Schemes: Rural Wireless Broadband Scheme  
 
 USOF is working on a scheme for providing financial assistance by way 
of  subsidy for building up the wireless broadband infrastructure such as Base 
Stations by utilizing the existing infrastructure available with the Telecom 
service providers. This scheme  envisages to  provide broadband coverage to 
about 5 lakh villages at a speed of 512 kbps. This scheme is envisaged to 
provide Broadband in all states of India.   
 
 The scheme has been approved by the competent authority and the 
draft tender document has b een prepared and uploaded in the public domain 
for comments/suggestions of stakeholders on 21.04.2011. The stakeholders 

 
 
have raised some issues and DoT has been requested to give directions to 
resolve the policy issues raised by stakeholders. 
 
Present Status:  The Scheme has been put on hold due to roll out obligations 
of 3G/BWA operators 
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates : The planned scheme has an overall 
tentative target to cover 5 lakh villages   
 
2. General Infrastructure Augmentation  - Optical Fibre Net work 
Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District SDHQ -DHQ OFC 
Network for backhauling  
 
Salient Features of the Schemes: 
 
 For provision of broadband in rural areas, sufficient back -haul capacity 
is required to integrate the voice and data traffic from the access network in 
the rural areas to their core network by strengthening the OFC network. 
Accordingly, this scheme conside rs OFC Network augmentation between the 
blocks' HQ and Districts' HQ to begin with. The States  of Assam, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, & Nagaland have been taken 
up for implementation.   
 
 This OFC Schemes would be undertaken on  BOO model, i.e. build, 
operate & own basis, and accordingly, the Telecom Service Providers, 
implementing the schemes would  build, operate, own and manage all the 
equipment/infrastructure for the execution of the scheme.  
 
 All locations shall be connecte d on physical OFC Ring Route(s) with the 
DHQ node ensuring the cable route diversity and ring capacity of at least 2.5 
Gbps, with the capability to efficiently transport various protocols, including 
TDM, IP, Frame Relay, etc., for integrated voice, data an d video signals in all 
the specified districts.  
  
The following Optical Fibre Network schemes have been taken up:  
 
a)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of 
Intra-District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in ASSAM‖ 
 
Brief and background not e:  The State of Assam has been taken up first for 
implementation. As per the outcome of the tender for implementation of this 
scheme in Assam, BSNL has been declared the successful bidder at a subsidy 
quote of Rs. 98.89 Crore, and subsequently, an Agreeme nt has been signed 
with them on 12.02.2010 in this regard. This Scheme is envisaged to be rolled 
out in a phased manner during the current Five Year Plan (2007-2012). 
This OFC Scheme would connect 354 total locations in Assam in total 27 
Districts within 1 8 months from the date of signing of the Agreement. The 
Agreement shall be valid for a period of seven years from the effective date  
At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, 
shall be shared with the licensed service pro viders in the area of ASSAM at a 
rate not more than 26.22 % of the current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
Present Status: As of April 2012, about 190 nodes have been installed so far 
(Out of 354). 
Roadmap ahead with target dates: The scheme has an overall target t o install 
354 nodes in Assam.  

 
 
b)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of 
Intra-District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in NE -I Circle (comprising states of 
Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura),‖  
 
Brief and background note:  The States of Meghalay a, Mizoram & Tripura have 
been taken up for OFC augmentation in this scheme. As per the outcome of 
the tender for implementation of this scheme, Agreement has been signed 
with M/s RailTel Corporation of India Limited at their subsidy quote of Rs. 
89.50 Crore on 16.01.2012.   
  
 This OFC Scheme would connect 188 locations in 19 Districts within 24 
months from the date of signing of the Agreement. The Agreement shall be 
valid for a period of eight years from the date of signing of agreement i.e. 
16.01.2012. 
  
 At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the 
scheme, shall be shared with the licensed service providers in the area at a 
rate not more than 12% of the current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
  
Present Status: Network roll out is yet to start. 
Roadmap ahead with target dates:  This OFC Scheme would connect 188 
locations in 19 Districts within 24 months from the date of signing of the 
Agreement. 
 
c)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of 
Intra-District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in NE -II Circle (comprising states of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland),‖  
 
Brief and background note:  The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & 
Nagaland have been taken up for OFC augmentation in this scheme. As per 
the outcome of the tender for implementation of this scheme, Agreement has 
been signed with M/s RailTel Corporation of India Limited at their subsidy 
quote of Rs. 89.50 Crore on 16.01.2012.  
 
 This OFC Scheme would connect 407 locations in total 30 Districts 
within 30 months from the date of signing of the Agreement. The Agreement 
shall be valid for a period of eight years from the date of signing of agreement 
i.e. 16.01.2012. 
 
 At least 7 0% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the 
scheme, shall be shared with the licensed service providers in the area at a 
rate not more than 27% of the current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
 
Present Status: Network roll out is yet to start. 
Roadmap ahead with target dates : This OFC Scheme would connect 407 
locations in total 30 Districts within 30 months from the date of signing of the 
Agreement. 
 
3. National Optical Fibre Network 
 
Brief and background note:  The optical fibre presently has predomina ntly 
reached state capitals, Districts and blocks and there is plan to connect all the 
2,50,000 Gram  Panchayats in the country through optical fibre utilizing 
existing fibre of PSUs viz. BSNL, RailTel and Power Grid and laying incremental 
fibre wherever n ecessary. Size of the incremental network is Approx. 0.5 
million km. Dark fibre network thus created will be lit by appropriate 
technology thus creating sufficient bandwidth at GPs level. This will be called 
National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN). Thus prev ailing connectivity gap 
between GPs and Blocks/Districts will be filled. Non -discriminatory access to 
the network will be provided to all the telecom service providers.  Further the   
broadband connectivity to 2.5 lakh GPs for various applications like e -health, 
e-education and e -governance etc. will be provided by NOFN as closed user 

 
 
group. The network is proposed to be completed in 2 years‘ time. The project 
will be funded by Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). The project will be 
executed by a Spec ial Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which will be a company 
incorporated under Indian Companies Act 1956 and initially will be fully owned 
by Central Government, with equity participation from Government and 
interested Central Public Sector Units (CPSUs) (BSNL, Rail tel, Powergrid,). The 
cabinet Note for the same has been approved and the Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) named Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) has been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012 to execute the project.  
 
Present Status: The Network roll out is yet to start. 
Roadmap ahead with target dates: The network proposed, under the scheme, 
is to be completed in 2 years‘ time. 
  
With regard to Right of Way (RoW), it is stated that the draft tri -partite MoU 
for RoW, to be signed between GoI/DoT, State Government s/UTs and BBNL, 
has already been sent to all the State Governments/UTs. Letters have also 
been written by Hon‘ble MOC&IT to CMs of States and from Secretary 
(Telecom) to Chief Secretaries of States. All efforts are being made to 
complete the process in a time bound manner.‖ 
  
 
11. The Committee had brought out that while the Department had 
exceeded the target of telecom connectivity, the progress with regard to 
broadband expansion has not been to the desired level. Having observed that 
the broadband penetration is just 1.44 per cent when compared to the 
impressive teledensity of 78.10 per cent, the Committee had urged the 
Department to take the desired initiatives during the Twelfth Plan so as to 
address the constraints so that broadband connectivity scenario in the country 
improves. The Committee observe from th e Action Taken Note that the 
Department is implementing numerous scheme under USOF for expansion of 
broadband services in rural and remote areas of the Country. However, the 
performance of the schemes is  far from satisfactory.  As against the overall 
target of providing 8,88,832 wireline broadband connections by 2014  under 
Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme , as of April 2012 a total of 3,60,966 
broadband connections have been provided.  Even the Plan Schemes of Rural 
Wireless Broadband Scheme which envisages t o provide broadband coverage 
to about 5 lakh villages at a speed of 512 Kbps has been put on hold due to roll 
out obligations of 3G/BWA operators.  The Committee are further 
disheartened to note that National Optical Fibre Network which will address 
the problem of broadband connectivity in rural areas  and provide connectivity 

 
 
to 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats is yet to be rolled out.  With the half -hearted 
effort of the Government, it is not su rprising that there are only 13.54 million 
broadband subscribers by Fe bruary, 2012 as against the target of 20 million 
broadband subscribers by 2010.  With the present pa ce of progress, the 
Committee are apprehensive that the Twelfth Plan Target of providing 
broadband connectivity especially to the rural and remote areas wil l remain a 
far cry.  The Committee are of the view that India being a major telecom 
market in the world, there is a huge potential for broadband penetration which 
has not been fully realised due to poor presence of physical infrastructure.  In 
this regard, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department 
to the finding of survey by World Bank according to which every increase of 10 
percent in broadband connectivity leads to a growth of GDP by 1.38 percent .  
The Committee are of the view that  once physical infrastructures are created 
for broadband expansion, other extraneous factors cited by the Departments, 
such as, non -availability of content in vernacular  languages, low English 
literacy, affordability of customer premises equipment (CPE), R ight of Way 
(RoW), International bandwidth prices, affordability of broadband, low level of 
digital literacy etc., will not be major bottlenecks.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate the ir recommendation to take the desired initiatives during the 
Twelfth Plan so that broadband connectivity scenario in the Country improves 
and matches impressive telecom growth. 
 
C. National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for broadband connectivity to 
village Panchayats  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee find that out of ` 8600 crore allocated at Budget Estimates 
stage for the year 2012 -13, the major component of BE i.e. ` 8000 crore has 
been proposed for the scheme creation of National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) for broadband connectivity to 2.50 lakh village Panchayats of the 
country. Out of ` 3,000 crore USO allocation made during the year 2011 -12, ` 
2547 crore have been allocated for this scheme. The overall approval of ` 
20,000 crore for the project has already been accorded The Committ ee find 

 
 
that the aforesaid scheme would bridge connection gaps between Gram 
Panchayats and Blocks. The Committee further note that project is envisaged 
to be completed within two years. From the information furnished by the 
Department, the Committee find t hat although the scheme has been 
approved by the Cabinet, the bid for the project would be by September, 2012 
and the award of work would then commence from September, 2012 onwards. 
While appreciating the ambitious programme of the Department, the 
Committee have their own doubts about the completion of the project within 
two years particularly when the award of work would commence from 
September, 2012. Nevertheless, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should take all the initiatives so that  the allocations made for the 
project are meaningfully utilized for the year 2012-13.‖ 
 
13. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken notes have stated as 
under:- 
 
The SPV named Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) has already been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012 to execute the project. Amendment to Indian 
Telegraph rules has been notified in order to fund the project by USOF. 
Currently, each of the 3 CPSUs (BSNL, Railtel and Power Grid) is conducting 
pilot project in one Block to understand th e issues which may arise during the 
execution of the main project. All initiatives are being taken to complete the 
project within the stipulated period of 2 years. 
 
14. The Committee had found that during the year 2012 -13, out of Rs. 8600 
crore allocated at BE stage, Rs 8000 crore had been proposed for the scheme 
creation of National Optical Fibre Network which will provide broadband 
connectivity to 2.50 lakh village Panchayat s of the Country.  The overall 
approval of Rs 20,000 crore for the project has al ready been accorded.  
Expressing doubts about the completion of the project within two years 
particularly when the award of work would commence from September 2012, 
the Committee had strongly recommended that the Department should take all 
the initiatives for meaningful utilization of funds for the year 2012 -13.  The 
Committee are, however, dismayed to note from the Action Taken Note that 
little efforts have been made by the Department for the implementation of this 
scheme with the seriousness it deserve s.  The apprehension of the Committee 
regarding the timely completion of the project within two years has been 
confirmed from the fact that pilot project in one Block is being conducted by 3 
CPSUs (BSNL, Railtel and Power Grid ) to understand the issues whic h may 
arise during the execution of the main project.  The Committee are unable to 
understand as to how the Depa rtment would be able to ensure meaningful 

 
 
utilization of plan outlay of Rs. 8000 crore allocated for the project in 2012-13 
with this pace of wo rk. Accordingly, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to take all initiatives so that the allocations made for the 
project are meaningfully utilised during the year 2012-13.   
 
 
D. Performance of PSUs, BSNL and MTNL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee find from the information furnished by the Department that 
more and more subscribers are preferring private service providers over the 
public service providers. The growth of private sector during each year of the 
Eleventh Plan is higher than the growth in the public sector. The share of 
public sector under wireless category is gradually declining. Not only that the 
public sector is also losing their place in the wireline segment predominantl y 
occupied by them earlier. What is more disappointing is the fact that MTNL 
and BSNL could not take the benefit of mobile number portability scheme of 
the Government which is evident from circlewise data with regard to porting 
out and porting in with rega rd to BSNL telephone connections. The analysis of 
the data indicates that in all the circles excepting Jammu and Kashmir, 
Odisha, Kerala. Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu including Chennai, the porting 
out is more than the porting in. 
 
The Committee are const rained to observe that issues related to 
unsatisfactory performance of BSNL and MTNL when highlighted by the 
Committee during the course of deliberations, the Secretary instead of 
enumerating the measures taken so far tried to justify the position by givin g 
various reasons. The reasons enumerated by him include high cost of the staff 
which is 50 per cent in case of PSUs as compared to 4 to 5 per cent in case of 
private companies Rs. 28000 crore paid by BSNL and MTNL for 3G spectrum 
and the issues related to  delay in procurement. The justifications given by the 
Secretary are totally unacceptable. The Committee may like to highlight that 
besides the problem of growing losses, the PSUs have not been able to 
leverage the support provided by the Government throug h GBS and various 
policy initiatives. The allocations provided through GBS component remained 
underspent due to the internal problems of PSUs. Not only that the recent 
request of BSNL for partial surrender of BWA spectrum speaks volume of the 
inability of the Public Sector Organisations to leverage the Government 
support. Allocation of 3G spectrum much before the auction to the Public 
Sector Organisations which could have provided them an edge in the market 
and lured the customers have proven to be a liabil ity as stated by the 
Secretary according to whom Rs. 28,000 crore was paid by BSNL and MTNL in 
spectrum and there is a little business case for that Rs. 28,000 crore. To add 
to the problem of the Public Sector Undertakings their profits have shrunk 
over the years and the companies are now on losses. 
 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that both the PSUs BSNL 
and MTNL are ailing from various types of maladies. There is an urgent need 
to take immediate initiatives to reenergize these organizat ions. Moreover, the 
PSUs are working in a typical Government set up which has become their 
main impediment limiting their ability to compete in the market. The PSUs 
have not been able to provide quality services to their customers in spite of 
having huge t rained workforce. The trained workforce which could have been 
their asset have now converted into liability. Moreover, the Committee are not 

 
 
able to comprehend the system of purchases whereby purchase orders could 
not be placed for the last four years as e xplained by the representatives of 
the Department during the course of deliberations in the context of setting up 
of towers in strategic area of Sikkim The Public Sector Undertakings MTNL and 
BSNL fails under the administrative jurisdiction of the Departme nt of 
Telecommunications and as such the Department has the great responsibility 
to reenergize these organizations. The system of working of PSUs need to be 
reviewed immediately followed by certain concrete corrective actions. There 
is an urgent need to re form the system of acquisition/procurement in the 
Department. The system need to be made simple, transparent, e -enabled and 
decentralized. Besides, there an urgent need to fix the accountability for delay 
in purchases. Above all, the working of the staff of these organizations need to 
be reviewed. There is an urgent need to sensitize and motivate the huge 
workforce of PSUs through periodic reviews and the system of incentivizing 
the good performing staff. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
urgent initiatives as suggested above should be taken by the Department and 
Public Sector Org so as to improve their financial position as well as their 
place in the telecom industry.‖ 
 
 
16. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken notes have stated as 
under:- 
MTNL: 
 
Some of the reasons for the under performance of MTNL vis -a-vis private 
players are as under:- 
 
1. MTNL is operating telecom services only in two cities of Delhi and 
Mumbai and does not have a PAN India presence therefore it becomes 
difficult for MTNL to match the various service / tariff  packages as can 
be done by a Pan India Operator. 
2. MTNL is confined to Delhi and Mumbai and is not able to operate in 
Tier-II and Tire -III cities where maximum growth is taking place.  This 
restriction on ser vice area also impacts MTNL in another way.  While 
it‘s competitors having Pan India presence can offer discount on calls 
to their network elsewhere in the country, MTNL cannot offer similar 
discounts being restricted to Delhi and Mumbai service areas.   
3. Being a Public Sector Company, MTNL has to follow the Govt. 
guidelines on the procurement for new equipment and expansion / up 
gradation of existing equipment. This results in multiplicity of vendor 
for the same kind of equipment leading to inter operabili ty/integrations 
issues thus resulting in delay in commencing. Further, since technology 
is changing very fast in the telecom sector and new applications / 
services are being developed very frequently, it is not possible for 
MTNL to induct the new developme nts due to absence of price 
reference in the tender.  
 
MTNL had to pay Rs 4533.97 cr towards one time spectrum fee for BWA 
spectrum based on auction prices received by the Govt. Since the one time 
amount of spectrum charges BWA spectrum as a result of the auctions were 
unexpectedly high, to pay   such unexpectedly large amounts, short term 
loans had to be taken by MTNL. In comparison to the spectrum charges of WA 
Services, the potential revenue is low because of low tariffs due to cut throat 
competition.   
 
MTNL is the only operator who had been allotted the spectrum only for Delhi & 
Mumbai Metros after matching the highest bid for these two cities.   Other 
Telecom operators who have a Pan India presence have purchased the 
Spectrum for these two cities along  with other telecom circles also. This way 
they are able to average out the exorbitant high cost of spectrum for these 
two cities.  

 
 
 
The BWA spectrum has not been put to use by MTNL. The expression of 
Interest (EOI) floated by MTNL twice to identify franch isee on revenue share 
basis, could not result in any suitable party being identified. In fact in the 
second EOI, no bid was received as the market found it to be a week business 
case requiring very deep pockets whereas MTNL is cash stripped. As a result 
MTNL is now serving heavy debt without receiving returns out of the BWA 
Spectrum. 
 
Delhi and Mumbai are the most competitive telecom licence service areas. In 
Delhi, there are 15 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators 
whereas in Mumbai, there are 14 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic 
operators.  
 
The subscriber base for the MTNL‘s various services for the past 5 years is as 
under:  
 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Total Wire -line 
Connections                     
(including WLL fixed 
connections) 
38,07,081 36,94,970 36,23,110 35,81,148 35,65,896 
Total Wireless 
Connections including 
WLL mobile 
34,02,767 43,60,748 49,67,660 53,61,827 57,24,231 
Broadband on landline 5,70,591 6,95,500 8,15,830 9,42,317 10,40,191 
 
Although there is some decline in the MTNL‘s market share for different 
services but it can be seen that the number of customers are growing for 
MTNL‘s Mobile and Broadband services which means that the growth of MTNL 
is less compared to its competitors in absolute terms.  
 
It is submitted that even though there is continuous growth in MTNL‘s wireless 
subscriber base, however, due to increase in competition & number of service 
provider in Delhi &  Mumbai, there is marginal decline in market share. 
Further, with entry of new players, market share of existing operators get 
shared and market share of some of our competitors has also declined.  It is 
submitted that due to continuous efforts, MTNL has b een able to reduce the 
net churn of its wireless customers under MNP from 9,256 in April 2011 to 
2,153 in March 2012.  
 
To further increase the market share the strategy conceived are as under:  
 
 Accelerate the pace of expansion of Data services and Mobile services with 
up-gradation of technology.  
 Use triple play (Voice, video and data) as an instrument of retention of fixed 
subscribers and revenue growth. 
 Make services more customer- friendly.    
 Leverage data services to increase customer's base and revenues. For this 
purpose adopt two types of strategies .One to provide higher bandwidths 
using wire line network Secondly provide data capabilities to mobile 
subscribers using 3G,Wi-Max etc technologies. 
 Expanding the reach of fiber network near to the customer premises 
particularly in apartment complexes through FTTH in order to meet the ever 
increasing bandwidth requirement for both data and video applications.  
 Phasing out of old technology.   
 To improve customer care by reducing fault rate, upgrade Sanchar Haats, 
stream lining billing / delivery and to take other measures to improve 
customer convenience and satisfaction to achieve international best practices. 
 Strengthening of franchisee model for  giving connectivity in the last mile & 
meeting customer requirements, provision of value added services including 
contents & marketing on fixed & mobile networks. 

 
 
 MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of 
land line conn ections. Present day fixed line network does not support many 
value added services like video call etc whereas the same are available in the 
GSM.   This is one of the reasons for the churning of the landline subscribers. 
To  revert this trend MTNL is plann ing to introduce Class V NGN / IMS based 
services in its fixed line network which will enable it to provide all the various 
types of values added services.  
 
 
Future Plans of MTNL  
 
MTNL is giving major thrust on the expansion of capacity for GSM and 
Broadband to cater the further demand. Following actions are being taken to 
generate fresh demands by providing quality services, customer care & 
satisfaction, introduction of new service s / schemes and innovative marketing 
strategies.  
 
(i) Expansion / augmentation of existing 3G network to (High Speed 
Packet Access (HSPA+): At present MTNL‘s 3G network is HSDPA (High Speed 
Data Packet Access) with download speeds up to 3.6 Mbps and uploa ds speed 
upto 384 Kbps. After upgradation download speed upto 21.1 Mbps and upload 
speed upto 5.76 Mbps will be supported by the network.  
 
(ii) Deployment of new technology state of art exchanges and Next 
Generation Networks (NGN)/ IP Multimedia Subsystem  (IMS) : MTNL has 
planned to replace its TDM (Time Division Multiplexing) Fixed line switches 
with NGN / IMS switch in phased manner during 12th Five year plan. 
Introduction of NGN / IMS based services will not only help MTNL in saving 
Opex, space but also  enable MTNL to offer all data / video centric services 
which are currently enjoyed by Mobile subscribers to the fixed line subscribers 
also ultimately leading to convergence of fixed and mobile services. 
 
(iii) To bring optical fiber near / to subscriber‘ s premises by introducing 
FTTC (Fibre to the Curve) and reaching homes thereafter with FTTH (Fibre to 
the Home) on PON (Passive Optical Network) technology: MTNL is adding 
optical fibre in its access network and is deploying FTTH based on GPON 
(Gigabit Passive Optical Network). This will enable MTNL to provide access to 
this latest technology to its‘ esteemed customers with very high bandwidth. 
 
(iv) Expansion of broadband network to provide bandwidth on demand by 
deployment of ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subs criber Line) / VDSL (Very High 
Data Rate Digital Subscriber Line) , MLDN (Managed Leased Data Network) / 
PON etc. Introduction of more broadband services such as video on demand, 
video conference for public.   
 
(v) Expansion of high capacity IP -MPLS (IP Mu ltiprotocol Label Switching) 
based backbone network to migrate to NGN (Next Generation Network) for 
establishing unified network for speech and data. Introduction of VOIP in the 
backbone and access network. 
 
BSNL: 
 
Initially Govt. had allowed only private operators to enter wireless market.  
Accordingly, only private operators were rolling out wireless network from 
1996 till 2000.  BSNL rolled out its GSM Mobile Services in October, 2002.    
  
Growth of Market Share of private operators is as under: 
 
S.  
No. 
Name of major 
operator 
Market share as on 
31-3-2002 (%) 
Market share as on 
31-3-2012 (%) 
1 Bharti Airtel 21.32 19.70 
2 Vodafone 14.07 16.35 

 
 
3 Idea 11.74 12.25 
4 Aircel   3.87   6.80 
 
 From the above table, it may be seen that market share of most of the 
major PAN India operators has either come down or remained at the same 
level.   Whereas, in case of BSNL, the services were rolled out in March, 2002 
wherein the Market Share was 3.11% w hich stands at 10.71 % as on 31 -3-
2012.   It had gone up to 20.0% in 2006.   However, due to non -augmentation 
of capacity because of cancellation of tenders, the Market Share has come 
down.   Now, the latest 15 Million tender has been finalized and POs hav e 
been placed on successful vendors, which should help in capacity 
augmentation in the network.   
From the above, it can be seen that private operators in wireless market, 
being incumbent operators, have individually lost the market share over a 
period of time and this has been picked up by other operators.  The same 
trend is seen in case of wired segment also where PSUs were incumbent 
operators when the competition was opened, and private sector picked up 
market share. 
 
When MNP (Mobile Number Portability)  was launched in January, 2011, a very 
aggressive marketing was done by private operators to migrate customers 
and also attractive free bees were given, that too selectively for individual 
networks.  Private operators were also blocking the request of cust omers 
porting out from their network. This was brought to the notice of TRAI which 
took action to prevent this subsequently.  Because of this, there was a large 
port out of customers as compared to the port in customers.  However, BSNL 
Telecom Circles took following measures to prevent large scale churning. 
 
(i) Personal address by CGM to all sections of staff and unions. 
(ii) Competition among SSAs (Secondary Switching Areas) to become 
positive on MNP and daily      monitoring of figures. 
(iii) Holding of press conferences and coverage of the same in media to get 
publicity without expenditure. 
(iv) Training to staff through virtual class room sessions. 
(v) Identification of service quality, tariff plan and customer services as 
key areas and continuous monitoring of the same.  
(vi) Briefing to franchisees and retailers and ensuring availability of SIMs at 
all locations. 
(vii) In depth analysis of QoS parameters and corrective actions. 
 
Some of the Circles like Andhra Pradesh had done extremely well right from 
the beginning because of certain i nnovative steps taken by them.  These 
measures were conveyed to other Circles and after following the steps, there 
was an overall positive trend from most of the Circles because of which the 
number of ported out customers, as compared to ported in, reduced .   This is 
evident from the ratio of ported out to ported in which has been gradually 
reduced from July, 2011 onwards and it stands at 1.4: 1 approx.   The reasons 
for large port out were analyzed based on the feedback received from 
customers.  
They are given below: 
(i) Congestion in the network 
(ii) Attractive tariffs given by other operators; and 
(iii) Poor customer service. 
 
Following measures have been taken to address these issues: 
 
(a) Tender for augmenting  the  capacity of  mobile  network  for   15 
Million lines has  been finalized and the orders are placed.   This will 
improve the coverage as well as reduce the congestion in the network; 
(b) New tariff schemes matching with competitors are being launched 
periodically which includes: 
(i) Forgoing porting fees from customers coming into BSNL network 

 
 
(ii) Introduction of aggressive data plans both for GPRS and 3G 
network. 
(iii) Additional incentives were given to sales channels. 
(iv) Publicity is being given through special ring back tones of mobile 
number portability as well as giving Radio Ji ngles specific to MNP.  
SMSs also were given to all the customers. 
(c) 11 call centres have been established to address the customer 
complaints. The customers willing to port out from BSNL network were 
asked the reasons for porting out.   Many of the compl aints of the 
customers were solved during the feedback given by customers which 
prevented the porting out of customers from BSNL network. 
 
All these measures have resulted in positive achievement because of which 
the port out to port in ratio in all Telecom Circles has reduced considerably. 
 
With a view to motivate the BSNL employees and measure their 
performance in the most objective manner, Performance Management System 
(PMS) has been introduced in the organization. PMS has been split into three 
types, na mely, Group Performance Management System (GPMS), Individual 
Performance Management System (IPMS) and Field level Performance 
Management System (FPMS). GPMS aims to measure performance at Group 
level, viz Corporate Office Business Units, Territorial and no n-Territorial 
Circles, SSAs etc. FPMS caters to the BSNL‘s workforce posted in the field units 
across the length and breadth of the country. The objective of FPMS is to 
recognise the performance of employees at SSA level and motivate them to 
work effectively and efficiently.  For this purpose, five job families critical to 
the organisation and covering a large number of employees, have been 
identified. Employees associated with sales in fixed line, as channel 
management team members in mobile business or as  key account managers 
in Enterprise segment are given incentives. Employees working in Customer 
Service Centres, Exchange Operation (indoor as well as outdoor) and Mobility 
Operation are given quasi financial awards like trophies and certificates based 
on performance so that they put in their best efforts to achieve the prescribed 
targets, which are in line with the organisational objectives.‖ 
 
 
17. The Committee had observed that the share of public sector under 
wireless and wireline was gradually declining. Some of the issues related to 
unsatisfactory performance of BSNL and MTNL highlighted were high cost of 
the staff which was 50 per cent in case of PSUs as compared to 4 – 5 per cent 
in case of private companies, paying of Rs. 28000 crore by BSNL and MTNL for 
3G spectrum and the issues related to procurement. The Committee while 
observing the various other types of maladies, i.e. PSUs working in a typical 
Government set up, failure to provide quality services to the customers due to 
non-proper utilization of its huge trained workforce and system of purchases, 
the Committee had recommended that there was a need to reform the system 
of acquisition/procurement and sensitize and motivate the huge workforce of 
PSUs. The Department has stated some of the reasons for under performance 

 
 
of MTNL, such as, MTNL being confined only to Delhi and Mumbai and not able 
to operate in Tier-II and III cities where maximum growth is taking place and 
adherence to Government guidelines on procurement, etc.. The Committee are 
further disheartened to note that MTNL was not able to put BWA spectrum into 
use in no w serving heavy debt without receiving  returns out of the BWA 
spectrum. Even though the number of customers are growing for MTNL’s 
mobile and broadband services, there is marginal decline in market share, due 
to increase in competition and number of service provider s in Delhi and 
Mumbai. 
 
 The Committee are of the view  that MTNL had embroiled itself in deep 
financial quagmire due to various faulty plans and internal problems which are 
best known to them. In view of the above, the Committee are of the view that 
to achieve a turn around, MTNL would require some proactive measures. Now, 
that MTNL has conceived some strategy to increase its market share, the 
Committee hope that urgent steps, such as, accelerating the pace of expansion 
of data services and mobile services with up -gradation of technology, 
introduction of customer friendly service, expanding reach of fiber network to 
the customer, etc. may be initiated at the earliest. Action may also be taken to 
implement some of the future plans of MTNL, such as, 
expansion/augmentation of existing 3G network, expansion of broa dband 
network etc.. 
 
 With regard to the status of BSNL, the Committee observe from the 
Action Taken Note that the declining share of BSNL was mainly due to non -
augmentation of capacity mainly because of cancellation of tenders. Now that 
Department has finalized the tenders and POs have been placed on successful 
vendors, which should help in capacity augmentation in the network . The 
Committee trust that Department would take all necessary efforts for its 
implementation so that there will be capacity augment ation                               

 
 
followed by increase in the market share of BSNL. Observing that precious 
little has been done to improve the performance of BSNL and MTNL, the 
Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation to take urgent 
initiatives so as to improve financial position  of these PSUs . The Committee 
would await conclusive action in the matter.  
 
E. E-waste 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 33) 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee find that handling of e -waste is the major area of concern for 
any of the country. Since the Department of Telecommunications is finalising 
new Telecom Policy, the Committee would like to emphasise that the issue of 
e-waste should be addressed in a comprehensive manner in coordination  with 
the other concerned Ministries like Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology and Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised about the quantum of e -waste in the country during 
each year of the Eleventh Plan.‖ 
 
 
19. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
 
―Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency for policy, 
planning, promoting and coordinating the environmental programmes and is 
involved in enacting laws, guidelines referring to e -waste. DeitY, being the 
nodal Department for issues related to electronics, is involved in the process 
of developing technological solutions to the e-waste management. 
 
Department is interacting with MoEF from ti me to time to get necessary data, 
status of present E-waste Rules etc. The MoEF, however, informed earlier that, 
a survey carried out by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), estimated 
that 1.47 lakh Metric Tons (MT) of e-waste was generated in the country in the 
year 2005, which would reach about 8.00 lakh MT by 2012. 
 
In order to have a structured and sustained mechanism to address various 
issues on e -waste, the Department is in the process of setting up a Working 
Group on e -Waste, involving MoEF, D oT, industry associations like ELCINA, 
MAIT and other possible stakeholders.  
 
20. Taking note of the increasing problem of e -Waste generated in the 
country, the Committee had recommended that the issue of e-waste should be 
addressed in a comprehensive man ner in coordination with the other 
concerned Ministries  like Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology and Ministry of Environment and Forests. The quantum of e-Waste 
generated in the country during each year of the Eleventh plan has also not 
been provided. In its reply, the Department has given the findings of a survey 

 
 
carried out by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), which estimated 
that 1.47 lakh Metric Tons (MT) of e -waste generated in the country in the 
year 2005, would reach about 8.00 lakh MT by 2012. Despite the survey 
indicating the huge increase in the problem of E -Waste generation, the 
Department has been vague in its reply. The Committee exhort the 
Department to address the issue of handling of e -Waste in a comprehensive 
manner in coordination with other Ministries of the Government. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Financial Achievement of the Department with regard to Gross Budgetary support 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee may further like to highlight that under -spending under the Capital 
head particularly under the Plan schemes is a matter of great concern. The Plan schemes in 
the context of the Department of Telecommunications are meant for improvemen t of 
telecom infrastructure, which may result into efficiency and quality in the delivery of 
services to the customers. Under utilization of Plan Outlay under IEBR and GBS as such need 
to be critically analyzed by the Department as well as the two Public S ector Undertakings 
followed by the concrete corrective measures. Moreover, the Ministry should devise a 
mechanism whereby the responsibility for underutilization of resources under IEBR and GBS 
component is put on both the PSUs, MTNL and BSNL. The Committe e exhorts the 
Department to take the desired initiatives and inform the Committee accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
MTNL: 
 
The financial performance of MTNL during the last five years since 2007 -08 to 2011 -12 is 
given below:- 
                                                                          
      (Rs. in Crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Budget 
Estimates 
2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 1204.10 1145.46 
Revised 
Estimates 
1692.33 1304.28 1352.01 1281.84 792.25 
Actual utilization  932.46 871.12 1194.70 1257.07 167.94 
Percentage  of 
utilization w.r.t. 
Revised 
Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 88.36% 98.07% 21.20% 
 
MTNL is operating only in Delhi and Mumbai which are the most fiercely competitive markets 
characterized by high saturation and low ARPU (Average Revenue Per User) and having 
more than 150% tele -density. In view of the rapid developments / changing scenari o in the 
fiercely competitive telecom sector it is very difficult to forecast the exact requirements well 
in advance. Therefore, the plans are very dynamic in nature and require not only continuous 
review but midterm corrections depending upon the market n eeds, future demand and 
changing scenario.  
 
At the time of initial planning, provision of funds have also to be kept for the new and 
upcoming projects likely to come in future. However, the projects do not come up or are 
delayed due to unavoidable circums tances. In such cases the funds allotted against such 
projects remain unutilized and results in lower expenditure as compared to outlay. In case of 
some projects, although equipment has been installed and is in commercial use, full 
payment could not be released due to some pending points / features to be demonstrated. 
 
MTNL has been continuously making conscious efforts to make plans with realistic and 
achievable targets as well as to minimize the gap between planned outlay & expenditure. 
Due to conscious e fforts, the percent utilization of funds for the year 2010 -11 has 
progressively increased to 98% (Planned outlay: Rs 1281.84Cr, Expenditure: Rs 1257.07Cr) 
from 88.36% during 2009-10 &  67% & 55% during 2008-09 & 2007-08 respectively.  
 

 
 
The expenditure duri ng the year 2011 -12, however, has been low (21.20%). In this context, 
it is submitted that currently MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem and is 
borrowing money to meet its day to day requirements. Therefore, it becomes important for 
MTNL not o nly to continuously review its spending but also ensure that funds are utilized 
judiciously.  Since enough capacity is available the plan size was reduced at RE stage and 
further expenditure has been made as per the requirement. However, none of the scheme s 
have been affected due to low expenditure.  
 
It is further submitted that all the services which are being provided by MTNL to its‘ 
customers are available on demand and there is no waiting list for any of the services. MTNL 
generates the required funds through its internal resources / arrangements and does not get 
any assistance from the Govt. The money is withdrawn as and when needed for a project 
and hence there is no unspent balance available at the end of each financial year and funds 
available / unutilized continue to remain invested as per DPE guidelines. 
 
MTNL has drafted its 12th five year Plan taking into consideration the experience it had 
gained during the previous years. Meetings were held with the units to review the progress 
of the ongoing p rojects. Further, the status of the new / upcoming projects to be taken up 
during the next 5 years were reviewed and provision of funds have been made based on the 
expenditure likely to be booked under various heads.  
 
BSNL: 
 
The revised IEBR component in respect of BSNL during Eleventh Five Year Plan was Rs. 
65218 Crores. The aggregated expenditure is Rs. 42947 Crores which works out to 66%. 
Since BSNL does not receive any General Budgetary Support (GBS) from Government, all 
projections are funded out of internal accruals / external sources funding. 
 BSNL Management is very much concerned about the shortfall in the utilization of allocation 
under IEBR and is committed to address the issues which contribute to under utilization of 
Outlay on continuous basis. 
 
BSNL has examined the reasons for shortfall in utilization of allocation outlay and has 
initiated the following corrective actions to address the same: 
 
(i) Delay in tender finalization has been one of the main reason attributed to 
underutilization of outlay . To address the same, BSNL has started inviting all 
centralized tenders through e -tendering which has not only improved 
transparency with the vendors but also has speeded up / reduced the time in 
finalization of tender.  
 
(ii) Earlier the requirement of fund was projected on yearly basis which used to 
undergo changes because of many reasons including the delay in finalization 
of tenders. To obviate the same, the requirement of fund will now be made, 
project wise, on quarterly basis spanning various milestones of the project. 
This projection will be suitably fitted in the annual plan for giving BE and RE 
based upon actual project performance, which will also be reviewed on 
quarterly basis. 
   
  It is expected that with the aforesaid initiatives, BSNL will be in a position to 
formulate a realistic plan where it intends to spend a significant percentage of plan outlay 
for the achievement of its physical targets. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry that Rs. 5 crore 
were allocated for Purchase of Land & Building of TRAI Office during the year 2007 -08 which 
remained unutilized. Again du ring the years 2008 -09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 Rs. 7 were 
during each of the year were allocated.  The total amount remained unutilized during the 
first four years of Eleventh Plan. During the year 2011 -12 no outlay was allocated for the 

 
 
purpose. The Committee have been informed that out of Rs. 26 crore allocated for Purchase 
of Land & Building of TRAI Office during the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 12 were surrendered and 
remaining 14 crore were transferred to Non Lapsable — TRAI General Fund. The Committee 
find that th e problem is being faced with regard to allocating land for the TRAI office. The 
Department has informed that efforts are continuing with the various land owning agencies 
for providing a suitable land/office premises. The Committee express unhappiness over  the 
way allocations were consistently being made even without sorting out the issue of 
availability of land for TRAI office resulting into non -utilization of entire allocations. The 
Committee strongly emphasize that the issue of allocation of land for TRA I building should 
be taken up by DoT with the Ministry of Urban Development so as to expedite allotment of 
land to TRAI office for its Office building. Besides, adequate allocation should be made to 
TRAI for R&D purposes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Efforts made by DoT with Ministry of Urban Development for allocation of land for 
TRAI building 
 
The following efforts have been made so far by TRAI and the Department regarding 
allocation of land for TRAI building:- 
 
  TRAI had registered its requirement of office space of 40,000 sq.ft. in INA General 
Pool Office Complex with the Dte. of Estates in July, 2003 and again in February, 2005.  
 
  Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development informed, vide D.O. letter dated 
02.08.2005 that the request had been noted in the waiting list of General Pool Office 
Accommodation, and it would be considered along with the demands of other 
Ministry/Departments/organizations, when office space at INA Complex becomes available 
for allotment. 
 
  Secretary, Urban Development was agai n requested to ensure general pool office 
accommodation for TRAI INA Complex on 7.3.2006. In response, Ministry of Urban 
Development informed on 10.03.2006 that TRAI may arrange office space by hiring from 
open market due to non-availability of office space with Dte. Of Estates. 
 
  On following up the matter again by TRAI with Ministry of Urban Development, they 
advised for acquiring of office space in NBCC Plaza at Saket through National Building 
Construction Corporation, a PSU under the Ministry of Urban Development. The matter could 
not be finalized due to quoting of higher rate by NBCC and non -availability of adequate 
budget provision for office space with TRAI. 
 
  Ministry of Urban Development was again requested to consider long pending 
requirement of office space of TRAI in October, 2008  In response to the request, the 
Ministry asked for detailed justification vide D.O letter dated 23.12.2008. 
 
  TRAI provided adequate justification and projected a requirement of 68,858 sq.ft. of 
built up office space  vide letter dated 27.02.2009. Since then, the matter has been pending 
consideration with the Dte. Of Estates, Ministry of Urban Development, and is in the process 
of being followed up. Meanwhile, in view of the recognition in DoT of need for providing 
adequate office space to TRAI for its smooth functioning, as since its inception in 1997 TRAI 
has been operating from leased accommodation, and had to shift to various locations, 
Further efforts are continuing within the Deptt., in consultation with TRAI with  the objective 
of locating suitable land/office premises available with PSUs of the Department, for providing 
to TRAI. 
 
  Present space requirement projected by TRAi: Presently, TRAI is occupying about 
49,800 sq. feet space and is operating from three floo rs, a rented accommodation, in 
Mahanagar Doorsanchar Bhavan, Jawahar Lal Nehru Marg since December, 2006. Over the 
period of time which has been elapsed, space requirement projected by TRAI have gone up.  
 
  In their DO letter dated 27.02.2009, TRAI project ed a requirement of 68,858 sq. ft. of 
built up office space. Then in March, 2011, and again on 15th Feb,2012, TRAI has indicated 

 
 
to DoT, its requirement of office space as being about 70,000 sq. feet, likely to increase to 
one lakh sq. feet and had also re quested DoT for providing Office space in Khurshid Lal 
Bhavan, a DoT property, which is at present, occupied by MTNL and TEC. 
 
  The office space occupied by TRAI vis -à-vis its staff and above mentioned revised 
space requirements were thereafter examined by DoT in consultation with TRAI. TRAI further 
informed that its office needs to be centrally located on account of frequent interaction 
meetings with the service providers and other stakeholders. 
    
Further Followup steps taken by DoT:- 
 
  Secretary (T) took up the matter in a meeting with Chairman, TRAI in March, 2012. 
  The possibility of utilizing available vacant space of MTNL in sector 6 of their office 
building in Dwarka, for TRAI was also explored by this Department, (vide letter no. 10 -
36/2011-Restg. Dated 26.04.2012 from Joint Secretary (T) to CMD, MTNL). However, shifting 
TEC from its present premises in Khurshid Lal Bhavan was not found feasible. 
 
  On further follow up by DoT, MTNL, vide letter dated 14.05.2012 then offered office 
space of 20,000 sq. feet & 18,000 sq.ft. Approximately at 6th and 7th floor respectively of 
Mahanagar Doorsanchar Bhavan to TRAI to meet its immediate working requirements. The 
above proposal was conveyed to TRAI for their comments on 28.05.2012. 
 
 TRAI has thereafter informed having agreed to take up the matter further with MTNL 
regarding hiring of vacant space at 6th floor of Mahanagar Doorsanchar Bhavan and for 
finalizing terms and conditions of lease agreement, vide their letter dated 07.08.2012 .  
 
   Thus, in addition to, follow up with Department of Urban Development for allotment 
of land, the matter of arrangements for allotment of adequate office space for TRAI is, at 
present being actively taken up by DoT, by Exploring space options available with other 
PSUs/ organizations of this Department. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated  22.11.2012) 
 
Revenue Receipts of the Department 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee find that re venue receipts of the year 2007 -08 and 2010 -11 includes 
one time entry fee and 3G and BWA auction revenues respectively and as such there is high 
jump in the revenue receipts. If the one time entry fee under the head Licence Fee during 
the year 2007 -08 is deducted, the revenue receipts comes to ` 13593.94 crore. Similarly, 
during the year 2010 -11 if 3G and BWA auction revenues to the amount of ` 106264.73 
crore are deducted, the total revenue receipts during the year 2010 -11 comes to ` 15987.88 
crore. The analysis of the total revenue receipts during each year of the Eleventh Plan, if one 
time revenue receipts are deducted, indicates that there is marginal increase in the revenue 
receipts over the years. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the head/it emwise details of the revenue 
receipts of the Department during each year of the Eleventh Plan so as to understand 
increase/decrease in revenue receipts. Besides the Committee may also like to emphasize 
that initiatives should be taken so as to increase the revenue receipts of the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Head/Item wise details of the Revenue Receipts of Licence Fee and Spectrum Charges 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012): 
 
I. Licence Fee:       (Rs. in Crore) 
Item 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
(i) Telecom Licence 
Fee 
3449.45 3995.69 4000.65 4171.87 5067.33 
(ii) Universal Access 5405.80 5515.14 5777.87 6114.56 6723.60 

 
 
Levy 
Total-Licence Fee 8855.25 9510.83 9778.52 10286.43 11790.93 
 
II. Spectrum Charges      (Rs. in Crore) 
Item 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
CDMA 495.33 368.00 358.98 409.71 342.88 
GSM 2388.84 2880.57 3160.05 2647.45 4513.16 
Com. VSAT 5.27 7.78 8.99 8.87 9.98 
PMRTS 1.25 0.89 1.07 0.90 0.91 
Other 
Services 
165.89 198.03 280.45 368.01 295.03 
Total 3056.58 3455.27 3809.54 3434.94 5161.96 
 
III. LF-One Time Entry Fee & Spectrum Auction Revenue 
  
 (Rs. in Crore) 
Item 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Licence Fee-One 
Time Entry Fee 
12499.43 … … … … 
Spectrum-Auction 
Revenue 
… … … 106264.73 … 
 
(ii) The Spectrum User Charge is collected on self assessment basis in advance as the rate 
prescribed by WPC wing of DOT. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications &  Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
The overall scenario of telecom connectivity in the country 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee appreciate the impressive telecom growth viz. -a-viz. the targets 
during the Eleventh Plan. With regard to network expansion, the growth of telecom 
connectivity has been to the tune of 943.49 million against the target of 600 million. In the 
case of rural telephony also, the targets have been exceeded. The achievement is 324.68 
million against the target of 200 million. With regard to the growth in rural and urban 
teledensity as per the data furnished by the Department, the overall teledensity as on 
February, 2012 has reached to 78.10 per cent. The urban teledensity has reached to the 
impressive level of 169.37 per cent whereas the rural teledensity is 38.53 per cent. The 
Committee appreciate the achievement of the Department with regard to tele com 
connectivity in the country. However, the Committee still feel that there is lot to be done 
with regard to improving rural teledensity particularly when there is huge difference 
between the urban teledensity and rural teledensity. The rural teledensity  is less than one -
fourth of the urban teledensity. The challenges before the Department are to provide 
connectivity to the last person of the society, particularly to those living in difficult terrains 
as well as to sustain the growth in urban areas. The C ommittee hope that more initiatives 
would be taken by the Department during Twelfth Plan particularly in case of the rural 
telephony so that the rural telephony too match the level of growth of the urban telephony. 
More emphasis need to be given to have op tical fibre network for rural areas so as to ensure 
better connectivity in these areas within the stipulated timeframe.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has initiated following measures to increase rural teledensity. 
  
(i) During  the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -13 to 2016 -17), BSNL plans to provide 
64.90 million Mobile Connections, and a good percentage of which shall be 
provided in rural areas 
(ii)  BSNL has initiated process for Upgradation of its C -DOT wireline telecom 
network to Next Generation Network in co -ordination with C -DOT. The 

 
 
Upgradation is expected to reduce various operational issues related to 
maintenance of network by making the core n etwork centralized and will also 
enable delivery of various Value Added Services. 
(iii) Opening new sales channel in rural areas. 
(iv) Implementing agreement with Postal Department to increase rural reach. 
(v) Offering highly affordable services to cater all segment of s ociety, specifically 
in rural areas. 
 
USOF: 
 As per TRAI, the overall tele-density as on 31 March, 2012 is 78.66%.  The urban tele -
density has reached a level of 169.55% whereas rural tele -density is 39.22%.  As far as 
Universal Service Obligation Fund ( USOF) is concerned, various schemes e.g. (i) provisioning 
of Village Public Telephones in inhabited census villages; (ii) provisioning of mobile services 
in specified rural & remote areas; (iii) provisioning of wire -line broadband services in rural & 
remote areas; (iv) a ugmentation, creation and management of Intra -District SDHQ -DHQ 
Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) network in service area of Assam and North East (Tripura, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland) are being implemented with 
financial support from USO Fund which are contributing significantly to increase rural tele -
density.  
 During 12 th Five Year Plan, USOF lays specific emphasis on augmentation of Optical 
fibre Cable infrastructure for carrying the broadband traffic from rural areas to the core 
network. 
 
i)  Creation of OFC Infrastructure : This scheme has been launched in Assam, NE -1 
[Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura] and NE -II [Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland] 
Telecom Circles to provide sufficient backhaul capacity to integrate the  voice and data 
traffic from the access network in the rural areas to their core network by strengthening the 
Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) infrastructure. This scheme considers OFC network augmentation 
between the blocks‘ HQ and Districts‘ HQ to begin with. U SOF, through this scheme, shall 
provide subsidy support for augmentation, creation and management of intra -district SDHQ-
DHQ OFC network on the condition that it will be shared with other operators at the rates 
prescribed in the agreement. 
 
ii) National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) : The optical fibre has predominantly reached 
state capitals, districts and blocks, at present. NOFN is  planned to connect all the 2,50,000 
Gram Panchayats in the country through optical fibre utilizing existing fibre of PSUs viz . 
BSNL, RailTel and Power Grid and laying incremental fibre wherever necessary. Size of the 
incremental network is Approx. 0.5 Million Km. Dark fibre network thus created will be lit by 
appropriate technology thus creating sufficient bandwidth at GPs level . Non-discriminatory 
access to the network will be provided to all the telecom service providers.  These access 
providers like mobile operators, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), cable TV operators, 
content providers can launch various services in rural a reas. Various applications for e -
health, e-education, e-governance etc. will be provided. The project will be funded by USOF 
and initial estimated cost of project is Rs.20,100 Crore in 2 -3 years. The project will be 
executed by a Special Purpose Vehicle (S PV) namely Bharat Broadband Network Limited 
(BBNL), which has been incorporated recently under Indian Companies Act 1956.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Performance of schemes being implemented with USO Fund 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee have consistently been raising concern over shifting of deadlines with 
regard to various schemes being implemented with USO Fund. While reviewing the position 
of USO schemes during the Eleventh Plan, the Committee note that there are further 
slippages under various schemes. VPTs under Bharat Nirman could not be rolled out by the 
target date of 28.02.2012. There are still 239 VPTs to be installed. With regard to VPTs in 
new identified villages, 9969 VPTs are still to be set up where as the targ et date is 
31.08.2012. The Committee have their doubts about achieving the targets with regard to 
new identified VPTs by the stipulated deadline. Under the shared mobile infrastructure 

 
 
scheme, target date was 31.08.2011 which is already over and there are 53 towers still be 
to set up. In connection with the optical fibre network augmentation in area of Assam, the 
target date was 11.08.2012, however, the progress is not even half. The Committee exhort 
the Department to take all the initiatives so as to ensur e that the targets under the various 
schemes are achieved which would certainly improve the status of telecom connectivity in 
the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Regarding VPTs under Bharat Nirman, BSNL [the Service Provider who is 
implementing the scheme] has reported that 62,101 out of the targeted 62,302 VPTs under 
the scheme have already been provided. BSNL has proposed to drop 70 out of the remaining 
201 VPTs for villages being untraceable, duplicate, deserted/uninhabited etc. Rest of the 131 
VPTs are to be provided on DSPT (Digital Satellite Phone Terminal). BSNL has reported delay 
in procurement of DSPTs and requested to extend the rollout period till August 2012.  
 
2. Regarding VPTs in newly identified uncovered inhabited villages as per Census 2001, 
BSNL [the Service Provider who is implementing the scheme] has reported that 52,964 out 
of the targeted 62,443 VPTs under the scheme have already been provided. BSNL has 
proposed to drop 5296 out of the remaining 9479 VPTs for villages being untracea ble, 
duplicate, deserted/uninhabited, submerged, merged with urban area etc. Rest of the 4183 
villages are located in extreme remote, tough terrains and VPTs are to be provided on DSPT 
(Digital Satellite Phone Terminal) in many of these villages. BSNL has reported delay in 
procurement of DSPTs and also delays due to road blockages in Monsoon seasons, 
naxal/insurgency activities etc. and requested to extend the rollout period till August 2012.  
 
 Administrator, USOF reviews the progress periodically and the last review meeting 
was held on 30 th April 2012. BSNL has assured to put in the best possible efforts to achieve 
the targets of above VPTs schemes by August 2012.  
 
3. Regarding installation of mobile towers under Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme, 
it is submitted that 7,311 out of the targeted 7,353 towers have already been set up. 
Remaining 38 towers are to be set up by BSNL in Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland  
and 4 are to be commissioned by M/s Reliance in Kerala. Delay in installation of these towers 
is due to tough terrain, frequent road blockages, bandhs, insurgency activities, delay in 
clearance from Forest Department etc. in the areas, which are beyond th e control of 
Infrastructure Providers. BSNL has assured to put in the best possible efforts to install the 
remaining towers at the earliest. However, liquidated damages are being imposed on the 
respective Infrastructure Provider for the delays as per the t erms & conditions of the 
agreement signed with them.  
 
 A Committee was set up by the Government on 15.07.2011 under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary (Telecom) to consider all aspects of delay in rollout of mobile services under 
Shared Mobile Infrastructure S cheme of USOF and suggest appropriate action that may be 
required to be taken in the facts and circumstances of the case. The Committee has 
submitted its report dated 02.11.2011 and legal opinion of the Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law & Justic e has been obtained on the same. The opinion of Ministry of Law & 
Justice is as below.  
 
―Any unilateral action in alteration of the existing terms & conditions of the contract 
relating to the termination clause appears to be inflicting with the settled 
fundamental principles of contract law. A careful examination of clause 7 of the 
general conditions of the Agreement do not confer wide powers to change or modify 
the existing terms & conditions which may have wide financial implications 
unilaterally. Penal action under contract law is permissible only in the event of non -
performance or discontinuation of service or termination of the contract by the 
Universal Service Provider. Therefore, unless the specific admitted violation or breach 
of license conditions is prima facie established any such action may not be legally 
tenable and do not withstand the judicial scrutiny‖. 
 
 The ‗Report‘ is under examination. 
  

 
 
4. USOF has entered into an agreement with BSNL on 12.02.2010 for the augmentation 
of OFC network between the Districts‘ HQ and Bolcks‘ HQ in Assam, at a subsidy quote of Rs. 
98.89 crore. The scheme envisages to build intra -district self healing rings with capacity of 
2.5 Gbps with 6-8 nodes per ring in a period of 18 months i.e. by August, 2011. 
 Under this scheme, about 354 nodes are to be installed covering 27 districts. As of 
April 2012, 190 nodes have been commissioned.  
BSNL has cited the following reasons for delay in implementation of the scheme:  
(i) Due to heavy rains in Assam, underground cable laying  is not possible from May to 
October (about six month). Even after rainy season is over, it becomes impossible to 
lay underground cable due to subsoil water. Thus, actual time available for execution 
of the project is less than six months in a year. Furthe r, due to frequent bandhs, 
economic blockades, law & order problems etc. the workable time period gets further 
reduced. 
(ii) Limited numbers of contractors are available in Assam for laying of OFC cable. The 
contractors have limited resources and they mostly br ing labourers from outside the 
region. They do not permit contractors of other area / State to take up the work in 
Assam. 
(iii) There is an increased tendency on part of contractors to move to courts to challenge 
the usual tender conditions i.e. eligibility and experience criteria. Despite offering 
best possible defence, the court invariably grants stays which adversely affects the 
time schedule. In this case about 200 Route Kms of was under litigation and as on 
date about 100 Route Kms involving about 5 Rings is still under litigation. 
(iv) About 500 Kms. of cable laying work is involved in North Cachar (NC) Hills District, 
where it is extremely difficult to take up execution work due to law and order 
problems. Even Assam Government is also facing difficulty to take u p any project in 
that area. 
(v) Considerable time is lost in obtaining ‗Right of Way‘ (RoW) permissions. The RoW 
permissions are normally delayed, due to the following reasons:- 
a) The existing procedure takes long time and RoW Estimates from Road authorities 
are received after long delay. 
b) Sometimes the RoW charges proposed by State Government are exorbitantly 
high. Such cases necessitate correspondence and follow up action with PWD, 
which results delay in obtaining the RoW Permission. 
c) RoW permission is denied whe rever road widening is planned. In some of the 
cases though road widening is planned but land acquisition process is not 
complete. RoW permission in such cases is given after completion of land 
acquisition. 
In view of the reasons cited by BSNL, the scheme has been extended by another one 
year i.e. up to 11.08.2012. All efforts are being made to complete the scheme by 11.08.2012  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Implementation of Optical Fibre Connectivity Schemes 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee further find that Right Of Way (RoW) is a major constraint with regard 
to implementation of Optical Fibre Connectivity Schemes. Some initial initiatives to settle the 
issues with the State Governments in connection with the Right of Way seems  to have been 
taken by the Department. The Department had consultations with Chief Secretaries of 
various States in Chief Secretaries Conference dated 3-4.2.2012 organized by Department of 
ARPG and Chief Ministers/State Ministers, during State Ministers co nference on 29.03.2012. 
The Committee find that more such initiatives at the Chief Ministers/State Ministers! Chief 
Secretaries level are required. Besides, there is an urgent need to have coordination with 
the Panchayats to settle the issue of Right of Wa y. The Department has to ensure some 

 
 
structured mechanisms to have coordination with the District level, Block level and village 
level authorities as well as the village Panchayats so as to ensure the effective 
implementation of the Programme. The Committe e recommend that the initiatives on the 
suggested lines should be taken by the Department which would definitely result into 
effective implementation of the programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The draft tri -partite MoU for RoW, to be signed between GoI/Do T, State Governments/UTs 
and BBNL, has already been sent to all the State Governments/UTs. Letters have also been 
written by Hon‘ble MOC&IT to CMs of States and from Secretary (Telecom) to Chief 
Secretaries of States. All efforts are being made to complete   the process in a time bound 
manner. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee further find from the information furnished by the Department that it 
has been decided to seek the approval of the Cabinet to extend USOF subsidy support to 
BSNL for providing and managing mobile services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected 
areas. The draft Cabinet note has been submitted for approva l of the competent authority. 
The Committee have also been apprised that mobile services shall be available for general 
public as well as security personnel around these locations and BSNL would maintain these 
mobile sites and network for five years with U SOF subsidy. The Committee appreciate the 
aforesaid initiatives of the Department and would like the Department to decide about the 
projected outlay required for the purpose so that the scheme can be implemented 
expeditiously. 
Reply of the the Government 
 
It has been proposed that BSNL would install 2199 mobile towers at the locations 
identified by MHA in the LWE affected areas and commission, operate and maintain the 
mobile services. USOF would fund the CAPEX and OPEX net of revenue for a period of six 
years. BSNL has conducted site survey and estimated that financial support required from 
the USOF would be to the tune of Rs. 5809.38 Crore  for setting up of infrastructure and 
commissioning of mobile towers at 2199 sites in LWE affected areas and maintenance  of the 
same for six years. The existing network of BSNL in the Licensed Service areas shall be 
utilized for backhaul, core network, customer care, and Billing requirements etc. Draft 
Cabinet Note has already been circulated for inter -ministerial consultat ion and comments 
have been received from concerned  Ministries/Departments. The proposal has been placed 
before the Telecom Commission on 26.05.2012 for its recommendations. The Telecom 
Commission has desired to have Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) of th e project and BSNL 
has been asked to furnish the same at the earliest. Ministry of Finance has recommended 
that the proposal be formulated for appraisal by EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee). 
Cabinet approval will be sought by following due procedure. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Installation of alternate OFC network for the Defence Services 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 13) 
 The Committee note that Optical Fibre Connectivity Network for the Air Force (AFNET) 
has been dedicated to nation by Air Force on 14.9.2010. With regard to the dedicated 
Optical Fibre Connectivity Network for the Army and Navy, the project has been 
considerably delayed. The information furnish ed by the Department indicates that initially 
the expected cost of the project was ` 2000 crore which was even approved by the Cabinet. 
However, at the execution stage, it was found that the cost was substantially higher than 
the cost approved by the Cabin et. The modifications in specifications and the several other 

 
 
reasons have been cited as the reason for escalation of cost. Now, the revised projected cost 
is ` 7,500 crore. The revised proposal would now be submitted to the Cabinet Committee on 
Infrastructure for financial approval. Timelines provided are a period of 36 months. Draft CCI 
has been circulated on 24 February, 2012 for inter -Ministerial consultations. With regard to 
the proposals for vacation of spectrum, the Committee have been informed that vacation of 
55 + 55 MHz in frequency band 1710 -1785 MHz paired with 1805-1880 MHz for 2G services; 
by the Ministry of Defence is being considered by Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM).  
The Committee are unhappy to note the delay caused to the important project with 
regard to installation of alternate Optical Fibre Connectivity Network to Army and Navy. The 
Committee fail to understand how the initial estimates of ` 2000 crore could escalate to ` 
7500 crore. The modifications in specifications alongwith s ome other reasons have been 
cited as the cause for revision of the cost of the project. The Committee would like the 
Department to apprise the Committee about each of the factor which resulted into more 
than three times of the cost of the project. Not only that the delay in execution of the project 
has resulted into blocking of outlay for the project during Eleventh Plan which has been cited 
as the main cause for under -spending of GBS component of the Department. Keeping in 
view the urgency of the matter, t he Committee strongly recommend to execute the project 
expeditiously so that it is dedicated to the services within the stipulated timeframe of 36 
months particularly when the vacation of spectrum which is urgently needed for expansion 
of telecom connectivity is contingent on providing the dedicated network to the Services. 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL: 
In this regard, it is intimated that the original estimate submitted was: 
(a) Rs. 8098 Crore for Defence Network of Army and Navy. 
(b) Rs. 1077 Crore for Air Force Network. 
 This was approved by Cabinet on dated 03.12.2009. 
 
The work for Air Force Network has been completed and dedicated to the Nation by Indian 
Air Force on 14.09.2010. 
As regards, the OFC laying for Army, Navy for the Core network, BSNL had floated t he 
tender. While the estimated cost of OFC was Rs. 2000/ - Crores, the tendered cost came 
around Rs. 7500 Crores. The additional cost of Rs.4957.03 Cr for Army & Navy Network over 
& above estimated cost of Rs.2000 Cr has come up due to the change in specifi cations of 
the Network, RoW charges and CENVATable amount to be  reimbursed to BSNL.   During 
floating of tender, Army  submitted the specifications of OFC as 48F/96F (G.655 & G.652D) 
with Intrusion proof and Armoured features along with other specifications as given below: 
 
(i)                Power cable for remote power supply. 
(ii)               GIS based Optical Fiber Network Management System. 
(iii)              Intrusion Proof System. 
(iv)              Remotely Managed Optical Patch Panels. 
(v)               Test and Measurement Equipments. 
(vi)              Cable Locating and Avoidance Systems. 
(vii)             Project Management and other Professional services. 
(viii)           Three years warranty. 
  
BSNL forwarded a proposal to DoT on 09.11.2010 seeking enhancement of budget.   The 
proposal of enhancement of budget was considered by Telecom Commission in its meeting 
held on 30.11.2010, and it was decided that Ministry of Defence (MoD) be requested to vet 
and authenticate the changes in specificatio ns & requirements including turnkey solution, 
for laying of ‗Alternate Communications Network‘ for Defence services. A request was 
accordingly made to Secretary, Ministry of Defence by Secretary, DoT on 13.12.2010.     On 
01.02.2011, Secretary, MoD requeste d DoT to refer the matter to IMG.    The IMG -2011 
submitted its report to DoT on 23.08.2011.   The issue was placed before Telecom 
Commission on 28.10.2011 for taking a view on BSNL‘s proposal seeking budget 
enhancement of Rs 5503 Crores, over and above the budget of Rs 8098 Crores.    The 
Telecom Commission desired that the IMG should certify that the specifications and 
estimates for the proposed Defence Network have been optimized with reference to the 
scope of work and the requirements of the defence services. 
 

 
 
Matter was then referred to IMG and the IMG submitted the optimization  report on 
23.01.2012. The Draft Note for Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI), for  financial 
approval of Rs. 5236 crore over and above Rs 8098 crore, already approved by Cabin et 
Committee on Infrastructure on 03.12.2009, for laying of alternate communication network 
for Defence Services in a period of 36 months and provision of the same in the budget of 
DoT was circulated on 24.02.2012 for inter -ministerial consultations. After  incorporating the 
comments of the concerned departments/ Ministries, the final CCI note was   submitted  to 
Cabinet Secretariat on 20 th June 2012  for CCI  approval. The CCI has approved the proposal 
in its meeting held on 3rd July 2012.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Position of connectivity in the border areas 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee would further like to strongly recommend that the po sition of 
connectivity in the border areas should particularly be monitored by the Department in 
consultation with the defence personnel posted on the borders. Keeping in view the strategic 
importance of these areas, all the initiatives should be taken to provide the requisite 
telecom infrastructure and also to maintain the telecom infrastructure provided on our 
borders, Not only that there should be some structured mechanism with the Department of 
Telecommunications and BSNL to review the position of conne ctivity on our borders. The 
action on the suggested lines should be taken by the Department and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL is planning and providing coverage in border areas as per the guidelines issued 
by DOT from time to time.  This is being reviewed by Planning Cell of individual circles 
periodically and action for installation of towers is being taken up according to feasibility, 
availability of equipment as well as adherence to DOT guidelines. The monitoring of status of 
connectivity in the Border Area is regularly done by BSNL.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Multi-layer connectivity on our border and strategic areas; maintenance of the infrastructure 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
 The Committee would further like to recommend that the Department as well as 
BSNL should ens ure that there is multi -layer connectivity on our border and strategic areas 
to avoid the situation of total blackout at the time of natural calamities or war like situation. 
Besides providing connectivity, there is an urgent need to ensure the maintenance  of the 
infrastructure as well as contingency exercises so that our systems function in any of the 
emergent situation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Multilayer connectivity in general in border area may not be feasible and same has to 
be examined on case to ca se basis.  Satellite is the appropriate technology for providing 
connectivity to isolated and remote places.   The steps taken by BSNL to ensure that 
communications in border and strategic areas remain open during the periods of crisis are:  
 
i. BSNL has issued  instructions to handle natural disasters including formation of 
Committee at BSNL Corporate Office as well as at Circle level for providing emergency 
telecom services. 
 
ii. BSNL is having complete infrastructure of Ku Band VSAT network with Hub at Mumbai 
and Delhi for meeting emergency communications across the country during natural 

 
 
calamities.  Over and above, BSNL is keeping number of DSPT (Digital Satellite Phase 
Terminal) Terminals which can be easily deployed anywhere in the country during such 
natural calamity for meeting the crisis. 
 
iii. In addition to the above infrastructure of VSAT and DSPT, most of the communication 
links across the country are connected through optical fiber rings which re -route the traffic 
automatically in case of cut on one side wher ein the chances of communication getting 
disrupted  during such disaster become very less.  Over and above, as a media diversity in 
NE, J&K & Himachal Pradesh , microwave links are provided as an alternate mode of 
communication in case of failures of OFC routes. 
 
iv. The BSNL network, in general, has been designed with decentralized architecture i.e. 
switching points are spread at multiple locations so that re -routing of traffic can be done. In 
addition, Disaster Recovery sites for Key network elements like Bil ling system, IN 
(Intelligent network) system, SSTP (Stand Alone Single Transfer Point) HLR (Home Location 
Register), etc are put in place and are kept in operative condition. The Transmission media 
connectivity between BSNL network elements are in ring top ology to ensure continuity of 
communication with one side cut. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
 
 
Undersea cabling in Lakshadweep 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 18) 
 The Committee observe that there was a proposal for laying of submarine cable of 
955 kms. for which the project estimate for connectivity of Ernakulam with various Islands of 
Lakshadweep including Kavarati was sent to DoT with an estimated cost of Rs. 435 .69 
during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee during the course of deliberations on Demands for 
Grants of the previous year had been apprised that USOF is evaluating options for 
augmentation of bandwidth to various Islands of Lakshadweep. The Committee under stand 
that the decision in this regard has still not been taken The Committee observe that 
Lakshadweep is strategically located area. For providing effective connectivity to various 
Islands, there is an urgent need to reconsider the issue of laying of subm arine cable. The 
concrete initiatives in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The options of augmentation of backhaul connectivity between Kerala mainland and 
10 inhabited Islands of Lakshadweep, i.e . sub -marine OFC & satellite backhaul, were 
discussed in detail. After detailed discussion and considering the fact that the population of 
Lakshadweep Island is about 66,000, it was agreed upon that the telecom demand of this 
population, even in the next five years, may be met by satellite connectivity. 
 
The difference in Capex between provision of submarine OFC connectivity (Rs. 500 
Crore) and Satellite connectivity to Lakshadweep (Rs. 25 Crore) is very huge whereas Opex 
is almost of the same order. The im plementation time of the sub -marine OFC will also 
extend over a longer period while satellite network roll-out may be done quickly. Accordingly 
USOF is working on a scheme for augmentation of satellite connectivity to Lakshadweep 
islands.  
 
A plan is being  considered to upgrade all the 10 inhabited islands to 34 Mb IDR but 
ISRO was having a paucity of satellite bandwidth on INSAT as well as on foreign satellites. 
The matter was taken up with ISRO by DoT. Now ISRO has recently informed that they are 
planning a satellite in C -Band with wide coverage to cover the Lakshadweep Islands. This 
satellite is expected to become operational in 2013 -14. However, in the meantime, they can 
hire transponder from foreign satellites to meet the present requirement of the Isla nds. With 
the confirmation from ISRO regarding availability of bandwidth on foreign satellites, USOF is 

 
 
working on upgradation of bandwidth to all the 10 inhabited islands. BSNL has been asked to 
submit the details of support required along with committed period of availability on foreign 
satellite and contingency plan in case of non -availability of the same. The scheme will be 
formulated thereafter. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Waiting list for Wireline and WLL 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 20) 
 The Department during the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the 
current year have furnished the waiting list for all the circles in case of Wireline and WLL. 
Analysing the statement, about waiting list for Wireline and WLL, it is seen that with regard 
to WLL, there is no waiting in all the circles except in Karnataka and Maharashtra. However, 
under wireline, the waiting list is in every circle except for Chhatt isgarh, North East -2, 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh (East and West) and Chennai. The Committee fail to understand 
huge waiting list under the wireline in most of the Circles. With regard to wireless segment, 
the Committee are unable to comprehend waiting list  in Karnataka and Maharashtra which 
are the progressive States. While deploring the waiting list in wireline and WLL segment, the 
Committee strongly recommend that BSNL should take all the initiatives to clear the waiting 
list so that the telephones are provided on demand to the customers. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In MTNL telephone are available on Demand and the waiting list of telephones is "NIL".  
 
BSNL: 
 
(a) BSNL telecom circles are assigned targets to clear the outstanding waiting list under 
wire line phones with techno -commercial viability. Accordingly circles are making all 
out efforts to reduce the waiting list, which can be seen from the table given below:  
  
As on Urban Rural Total 
31.03.2011 46,476 21,657 68,133 
31.03.2012 34,478 14,281 48,759 
30.04.2012 32,957 13,937 46,894 
 
The waiting list wherever technically feasible is cleared on priority and pendency is due to 
non-feasibility. 
(b)  WLL services are available on demand.  
 As on date (i.e.20 June 2012), there is no waiting list. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
Port IN/Port OUT 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 21) 
  The Committee find from the information furnished by the Department that in all the 
Circles except Jammu and Kashmir Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu including 
Chennai the porting out is more than porting in. The Committee would like to recommend 
that the Department as well as BSNL and MTNL should study the positive trends with regar d 
to porting in and porting out and other parameters in the good performing Circles and 
replicate the good practices being followed by these Circles in the poor performing Circles. 
Such an initiative would certainly result in improving the overall performance of PSUs. 
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
MTNL: 
 
The port in port out details for MTNL as on 31.03.2012 since the implementation of MNP in 
Jan 2011 is as under :  
 
 Port IN Port OUT 
Delhi 19940 58302 
Mumbai 7501 57787 
Total 27441 116089 
 
 Following remedial measures are being taken by MTNL to retain its customers:  
(i) MTNL has introduced new and attractive tariff plans for the existing customers.  
(ii) New Plans have also been introduced to excite interest of customers of others 
operators to port in to MTNL's network.  
(iii) Extensive marketing is being done for MTNL's services. 
(iv) Close monitoring of faults is being maintained. Emphasis has been  given on the 
improvement of the quality of service. 
(v) Emphasis is being given on the redressal of subscriber‘s complaints by  increasing 
number of positions in Customer Care Centre, providing  single window at the 
Sanchar Haats. 
 
BSNL: 
 
The good practices observed in good performing circles are as follows:  
 
(a) Monitoring of Quality of Service of Mobile Network through  
 Monitoring of Loading of Network elements and undertaking re -
arrangement based on traffic for enhanced utilization. 
 Replacement of life expired/worn out batteries to improve up time of the 
network. 
 Commissioning of Digital Microwave and Optical fiber communication 
media links to strengthen media connectivity. 
 Optimization of Radio network to reduce interference and to optimize 
performance. 
 Special emphasis on promptly resolving customer complaints and take 
action on feedbacks of customers to improve performance.  
(b) Monitoring of Performance of field units on regular basis (daily, weekly and 
monthly basis) based on Statistical reports of Ported in and Ported out 
subscribers from the MNP gateway and   taking corrective action. 
(c) Training of concerned staff and sales channels about MNP so as to serve 
customers properly. 
(d) Provide additional incentives to sales channels and introduce new tariff 
schemes matching with competitors.  
(e) Ensure adequate inventory of n ew SIM cards (SIM cards not pre -configured 
with Mobile No.) with sales outlets so as to accept MNP requests from 
customers. 
 
These instructions have been conveyed to CGM in -charge of territorial circles where Port-Out 
is more than Port-In. 
 
(Ministry of Co mmunications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
The officers on deputation in BSNL 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 23) 
 The Committee during the course of deliberations have been apprised by the 
Secretary, DoT that the higher management cadres of BSNL are occupied by officers on 
deputation from the Department of Telecommunications. The Committee understand that 

 
 
the decision on the issue of absorption of a small number of officers could not be taken and 
even when the issue went to Cabinet on a couple of occasions The Committee express 
unhappiness over the way such an important issue has been dealt with by the Department. 
The Committee emphasize that the issue need to be sorted out expeditiously, particularly 
when these officers on deputation are holding the higher management cadres of BSNL. The 
delay in taking policy decision in this regard definitely has an effect on the over all 
functioning of BSNL. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pursuant to formation of MTNL and BSNL, Group ‗A‘,‘B‘,‘C‘ and ‗D‘ employees of the 
Department of Telecommunications were transferred to these PSUs on ‗as is where is basis‘ 
on deemed deputation.  About 3,97,000 Group B, C & D employees already stand absorbed 
in BSNL/MTNL.  
 
2. Options were invited vide letter dated 24.03.2005 from Group A officers including ITS 
officers for absorption in BSNL/MTNL or continuation in Government service as per dec ision 
of the Cabinet dated 2.2.2005.  Consolidated General Terms and Conditions of absorption 
were also issued on 4.10.2005. Out of a total of 3088  working Group ‗A‘ officers, only 744 
working Group ‗A‘ officers (ITS – 135, TTS – 6, TFS – 37,  P&TBWS – 379 and IP&T AFS – 187) 
officers sought absorption.  
 
3. In order to complete the absorption process, Department of Telecommunications 
continued dialogue with the Indian Telecom Service Association (ITSA).  Based on these 
deliberations, the Department submit ted a note for consideration of the Cabinet.  Based on 
the decisions taken by GoM on 10.6.2008, the matter was decided by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held in 24.07.2008.  Pursuant to the Cabinet decision, revised option letter dated 
26.08.2008 calling option for absorption of Group A officers in MTNL/BSNL was issued by the 
Department which incorporated the revised/modified terms and conditions approved by the 
Cabinet.  Pursuant to this offer, only 17 working Group ‗A‘ officers (ITS – 10, P&T BWS – 4 
and IP&T AFS – 3) sought absorption. 
 
4. The position was reviewed on 18.12.2008 as follows: 
 
(a) Deployment of all Group ‗A‘ Officers in BSNL/MTNL on deemed deputation but 
not opting for absorption in BSNL/MTNL will not be disturbed. 
 
(b) The developments will be  brought to the notice of Cabinet Secretariat and it 
will be informed that this Department will be approaching that Secretariat 
shortly with a proposal for extension of period of deemed deputation by a 
reasonable period beyond 22.12.2008 with a view to giv ing another 
opportunity to the Group ‗A‘ Officers for exercising their option for absorption 
in BSNL/MTNL. 
 
 Accordingly, Cabinet Secretariat was informed on 12.1.2009.  
 
5. A fresh draft Note for the Cabinet was prepared and sent for inter -Ministerial 
consultations in October, 2010 to Department of Expenditure, DoP&PW, Deptt. of Legal 
Affairs and Department of Public Enterprises.  The said Cabinet Note included some 
additional benefits/incentives like allowing option for absorption till 31.12.2010 and elig ibility 
for pro -rata pension from a prospective date etc.  However, none of the Departments 
supported the main proposals.   
 
6. In the meantime, an O.A. No. 3124/2009 was filed by BSNL Group ‗A‘ Executive 
Association & another vs. UOI & others before the C entral Administrative Tribunal, Principal 
Bench in which it was, inter -alia, prayed to declare the process of absorption of Group A 
officers in BSNL/MTNL as complete and to direct DoT to repatriate the non -optee officers 
working in BSNL forthwith back to DoT. The said OA was  decided by the Tribunal by its order 
dated 1 st June, 2011, inter -alia, with the direction to the respondent DoT not to give any 
further opportunity to the officers of the Department of Telecommunications, who continue 
to be on deemed d eputation to BSNL and to repatriate them to their parent Department 
forthwith.   

 
 
 
7.    The above position was reviewed in a meeting held under the chair of Hon‘ble 
MOC&IT on 12th September, 2011.  
 
8.   In pursuance of the decisions taken with the approval of MOC&IT, 4 option letters 
dated 22.09.2011 on identical lines were issued by DoT calling for option for absorption from 
Indian Telecom Service (ITS)/Telegraph Traffic Service (TTS)/Telecom Factories  Service 
(TFS), General Central Service (GCS), Indian P&T Accounts and Finance Service (IP&T A&FS), 
P&T Building Works Service (P&T BWS).  Last date for exercising option for officers working 
in DoT or on deputation to organizations other than BSNL/MTNL wa s prescribed as 28 th 
October, 2011.  Such date for officers on deemed deputation to BSNL/MTNL was 8 th 
November, 2011.   
 
9. An application explaining and submitting that the DoT is taking all action on urgent 
basis for complying with the order dated 1 st June, 2011 by the Hon‘ble Tribunal was also filed 
in CAT, Principal Bench, New Delhi on  28 th September, 2011.  The said application has since 
been disposed of by the Tribunal by its order dated 04.11.2011 with the observation that 
there was no positive act involved to be done by the respondents and hence the application 
is dismissed.    
 
10. An O.M. dated 3 rd November, 2011, was  issued by the  Department of 
Telecommunications whereby Group ‗A‘  officers working on deemed deputation in 
BSNL/MTNL who have eit her not exercised their option or have opted for Government 
service or have exercised conditional option by the last date prescribed for exercising option 
i.e. 8.11.2011, were ordered to be reverted to Government from 9 th November, 2011 
onwards.  Officers numbering 109 who approached the Courts and where the Courts, as per 
records obtainable in DoT, have granted interim stay or given interim directions were asked 
to continue in BSNL/MTNL 
 
11. After issue of the above O.M. dated 3.11.2011, a Status Note on a bsorption of Group 
A officers in BSNL/MTNL was also sent to Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Secretary, 
DOP&T, Secretary, DOP&PW, Secretary, DPE and Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs on 
15.11.2011 with copies endorsed to JS, Cabinet Secretariat a nd JS, PMO.  A copy of the said 
Status Note was also sent to PS to Finance Minister for kind perusal of the Finance Minister.  
 
12. In pursuance of Rule 37 -A (6) of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, two separate OMs dated 
27.12.2011 were issued by this Department for constitution of Surplus Cell Establishment 
(SSE) for referring the names of Group A officers of ITS and IP&T AFS who have opted for 
Government service and are identified to be in excess of the requirement of DoT to the 
Surplus Cell of the Government for their redeployment.  
 
However, the SSE for Group ‗A‘ officers of IP&T AFS is not required since none of the 
officers of the cadre are continuing on deemed deputation in BSNL/MTNL and all the officers 
of the cadre are working against sanctioned Government posts.  
 
The question of constitution of SSE for P&T Building Works Service is under 
consideration in this Department. 
 
The aforesaid OM dated 27.12.2011 for constitution of SSE for ITS has been stayed by 
CAT, Jaipur Bench in OA No. 77/2012 and by CAT, Hy derabad Bench in OA Nos. 69/2012 and 
465/2012.  Necessary action is being taken to defend these OAs and to get the stay vacated.  
 
DOT has filed a Transfer Petition  in the Principal Bench of CAT, New Delhi for 
clubbing and transferring the above OAs to the Principal Bench for adjudication and decision. 
The Transfer Petition has been admitted and is listed for hearing on 5 th September, 2012.  
 
13. Suitable contingency plans have been worked out in consultation with CMDs of BSNL 
and MTNL to deal with the issu es arising from repatriation of officers with a view to ensuring 
that the services of BSNL and MTNL are not disrupted and their organizational needs do not 
suffer.   
 

 
 
14. In this context, it may also be mentioned that when the process of absorption of 
Group A officers in BSNL/MTNL was initiated by DoT in 2005, a number of cases were filed by 
Group ‗A‘ officers/ their Associations before different Benches of Central Administrative 
Tribunal challenging the terms and conditions of absorption. These cases were got 
transferred to the Principal Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal and were disposed 
of by the said Bench by its orders dated 31.10.2005 and 28.2.2006.  
 
15. The above orders passed by CAT, Principal Bench were challenged by some of the 
petitioners/ their Associations by filing writ petitions before the High Court of Delhi. These 
writ petitions have since been disposed of by the High Court of Delhi by its order dated 
17.4.2012.  In the said order, the High Court has, inter -alia, allowed the petit ioners to 
exercise a fresh option within two weeks from the date of this order, to revert to the 
Government or to seek permanent absorption in BSNL/MTNL as the case may be. The High 
Court has also directed that BSNL/MTNL shall relieve such of the petitione rs, who opt to 
revert to Government service within 2 weeks of receipt of options from them.  
 
16. BSNL & MTNL  filed petitions before Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi for extension of date 
of relieving unabsorbed Group ‗A‘ officers back to DOT.  The Hon‘ble Hig h Court  in its order 
dated 18.5.2012 extended the date for relieving these officers in BSNL/MTNL till September, 
2012.   
 
A review petition was also filed by some absorbed ITS officers before the Hon‘ble 
High Court of Delhi praying for revision/correction of the deemed date of absorption as 
ordered by the Hon‘ble High Court for the petitioners in its judgement dated 17.4.2012 .  This 
review petition was also dismissed by Hon‘ble High court.   
 
17. Opinion of Additional Solicitor General of India and Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law has been obtained on the above judgement dated 17.4.2012 pronounced by 
Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi. 
 
18.  A Contempt Petition has also been filed by  BSNL Executive Association before CAT, 
Principal Bench against Secretary (Telecom) and CMD, BSNL for non -compliance of the 
above-mentioned order dated 1.6.2011 passed by CAT Principal Bench, New Delhi in OA No. 
3124/2009 whereby Tribunal had directed DoT not to give of any further opportunity to the 
Group ‗A‘ officers on deemed deputation to BSNL/MTNL and also to repatriate them 
immediately.  The next  date of hearing of the Contempt Petition is 17.08.2012.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
Indian Telecom Industry (lTl) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 24) 
 The Committee appreciate that losses of ITI in the year 2011-12 were to the tune of 
Rs. 357 crore against the loss ranging from Rs. 600 crore to Rs. 700 crore last year as 
informed to the Committee by the representative of the ITI. On the issue of revival Plan of 
ITI, the Committee note that the case i s being considered by BIFR. The representative was 
confident that with the support of the Ministry, the revival plan would be approved in the 
second week of June. The Committee are further pleased to note that Palakkad Unit of ITI 
has achieved this year  an all time high turn over of Rs.  451 crore and have reported profit. 
The Committee in this regard would like to recommend for early approval of the revival plan 
of ITI. The Committee would also like to emphasize that all the initiatives being taken to 
contain the losses should be continued so as to make the ITI a profit making company. 
Besides, more emphasis need to be given to diversify activities by the various Units of ITI.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Revival Plan of ITI is under the consideration of BI FR and the next hearing has 
been fixed on 17th September 2012. 

 
 
Regarding initiatives on diversification, ITI has already diversified into manufacturing 
of non-telecom products as detailed below: 
 
(i) National Population Register (NPR) and Socio Economic & Caste Census (SECC) 
projects:  ITI is one among the consortium of three PSUs selected for the 
execution of prestigious NPR project. The job involves collection of citizen data 
including biometrics followed by issue of ID cards. ITI has already received an 
order to the tune of Rs. 750 Crores against this project from RGI for data 
collection including Biometrics which is under execution. 
An order to the tune of Rs. 450 Crores has also been received for SECC (Socio 
Economic Caste Census) project from the minis try of Rural Development, which is 
also under execution by the same consortium. This project involves collection of 
additional census data of all the citizens in the country. 
Citizen ID cards :  As part of National Population Register, ITI, along with its 
consortium partners, looks at the huge opportunity of manufacturing Smart card 
based citizen identity cards for all the citizens of the country.   
(ii) Solar Project: There has been special emphasis by the Government of India to 
implement the renewable energy so urces like solar. ITI is having requisite 
expertise and experience for implementing solar energy solutions. BSNL and 
other Service Providers are planning to upgrade their outdoor GSM -BTS sites with 
solar power, specially in rural areas where power supply position is not good. ITI is 
planning to address this requirement. 
(iii) LED lighting:  LED lighting is an environment friendly option due to non -use of 
mercury. Market potential for this product is good. ITI is planning to address this 
market. Potential areas of  business opportunities are expected from National 
Highway Authority. State Governments and Municipal Corporations, CPWDs/ 
PWDs, Railways, Hotels and Hospital Industry.  
(iv) Data Centre:  ITI has already established Tier 3+ state -of-art Data centre at 
Bangalore on PPP model. Presently this Data Centre is fully booked for co -location 
services. Scope exists in the market of Data centre considering the immense 
potential in the Government Sector to store data for projects of national 
importance like NPR, UIDAI etc.  ITI is planning to build its own Data Centers as 
part of its revival strategy. 
(v) IT Projects:  All the State Governments are pursuing -Governance projects for 
taking the benefit of IT to the grass root level. ITI is aggressively pursuing this 
market segment.  ITI has already executed SWAN (State Wide Area Network) 
projects of Maharashtra, Odisha and Mizoram. ITI is also executing Accelerated 
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP) of Tamil Nadu state. E -
Tendering is another major project being executed by ITI. 
(vi) Defence Projects:  ITI has supplied telecom equipment like Ruggedized 
Telephones and Telephone Exchanges, Transmission equipments, VSAT etc. to 
the Defence sector. ITI has successfully implemented communication network to 
Indian Army viz. ASCON Pha se-I,II,III on turnkey basis and also maintaining the 
project under AMC. ITI is the major supplier of Encryption equipment to Defence 
for its communication networks.   
Considering the expertise of ITI in the manufacture of Defence telecom 
equipments and hu ge manufacturing & service infrastructure available with ITI 
which can be utilized to manufacture other Defence products, DOT has 
recommended to award the Defence PSU status to ITI, which is under the active 
consideration of MoD. 
 
To enhance product portfo lio in Defence segment following technologies are 
being planned by ITI: 
 
 Satellite Trans-Receiver and Access equipments 
 RADARs and Allied Equipments 
 Weapon control systems 

 
 
 Missile systems and Equipments 
 Electronic fuzes 
 Software Defined Radio (SDR) 
 Home Land Security. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Synergies between various telecom units viz. BSNL,.  MTNL, TCIL, ITI, C-DoT, etc.  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 25) 
The Committee have been apprised that a Committee headed by Member (Services) 
Telecom Commission was constituted on 20 May, 2011 to look into the various issues to 
bring about synergies between various telecom units viz. BSNL, MTNL, TCIL, lTl, C -DoT etc. 
The said Committee examined and analyzed the inputs received from these telecom units 
and other divisions of DoT and submitted its report in the month of October, 2011. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the recommendations made by the aforesaid 
Committee headed by the Member (Services) Telecom Commission. Besides, the Committee 
would also like the Department to consider and implement the recommendations of the 
aforesaid telecom Committee so as to improve the coordination and synergy between 
various telecom units. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee on synergy among various units of DOT has already submitted its 
report to Ministry. The Recommendations of the Committee will boost the manufacturing 
activity in ITI, assure increased orders for ITI and helps in its turn around. ITI can have a long 
term tie-up with C-DOT/ C-DAC for transfer of technology for the products designed by them 
and take up manufacturing of such products. 
The Committee has recommended the following for optimum utilization of  resources 
amongst alliance members. 
(i)  The products and services available with the alliance units may be preferentially 
considered for implementation of telecom and infrastructure projects funded by 
USOF/ Government of India. Preferential treatment of procurement of products and 
services amongst the various units under alliance may be considered.  
(ii) For the execution of projects of national importance like Network for Defence, 
National Knowledge Network, National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) etc., th e alliance 
should generally be entrusted with job of implementation, operation and 
maintenance. 
(iii) The available indigenously developed and manufactured products need to be 
extensively deployed as it would ensure security and scalability of such deploye d 
products. 
           The implementation of recommendations has been initiated by DOT. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Roll Out Obligations of 2G Spectrum 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 26) 
 The Committee in the Twenty -first Report had recommended the Department to 
compile the data with regard to approximately 260 existing UAS licensees issued notices for 
not agreeing to the various obligations as per the Licence Agreement. When the issue was 
pursued further during the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the current year, 
the Department in a vague manner has furnished some information whereby it has been 
stated that demand notice for imposition of liquidated damages had been issued t o 125 
licensees due to delay in compliance of roll out obligations. Many of them had approached 
the Hon‘ble Telecom Disputes Settlement & Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) against the 
calculation of delay in compliance of rollout obligations & imposition of LD. I t has also been 
mentioned that the Department has received ` 318.91 crore out of ` 529.00 crore from the 

 
 
above referred Licensees against LD till 31 -3-2012. The Committee are not satisfied with the 
sketchy information furnished by the Department. The Commi ttee strongly recommend that 
the data with regard to violation of different licence obligations by the Services providers 
and the penalty imposed, penalty collected should be appropriately maintained by the 
Department after collecting the same from the con cerned technical Departments of DoT 
and. TRAI. Not only that the information should be placed on the website of the Department 
for greater transparency. The suggested procedure would ensure the Department to monitor 
the position of violation of various obl igations by licensees as well as collection of penalty 
thereto. The concrete action in this regard should be taken and the Committee apprised 
accordingly. 
 
Para no. 26 of Thirty -first Report of Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -
12) on ‗Demands for Grants (2012-13)‘. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that, after collecting the required information from various 
Cells/Divisions/ Wings of DoT and TRAI, details of the established violations by the CMTS/UAS 
Licensees in last two years we re furnished to the Committee in reply to Point no. 51 of the 
List of Points for Oral Evidence of the Department of Telecommunications on Examination of 
Demands for Grants for 2012 -13, Standing Committee on Information Technology of the 
Ministry of Communi cations and Information Technology (DoT). The copy of the same is 
enclosed again.  
 
 In respect of set procedure to maintain the details of established violations of various 
licences and action against them, it is to intimate that process for development o f a 
centralized IT application has been initiated by the Department in which all such details 
would be maintained & information would be placed on website of the department for 
greater transparency. 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 27) 
 The Committee in their Twe nty-first Report had strongly recommended for strict 
action against the defaulter licensees for not meeting their rollout obligations in respect of 
2G spectrum. Subsequently, the Supreme Court in its judgement has ordered for quashing of 
122 licences. With  regard to status of the matter, the Committee understand that the 
Department is grappling with certain legal complications arid seeking legal opinion. The 
Government has filed Interlocutory Application and Review Petition on 1st and 2nd March, 
2012 respec tively. However, the Committee have been apprised that the Review Petition 
does not challenge the quashing of licences. On the issue of allocating of 2G spectrum to be 
vacated by the licensees whose licences would be cancelled, the Department has informed 
that Central Government is considering the recommendations of TRAI and would take 
appropriate decision within the next one month. 
 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid position that cancellation of licences for 
violation of rollout obligation is being  delayed due to certain reasons. The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that spectrum is a scarce resource. With the situation of licensees not 
complying the rollout obligations, it results into blocking the scarce resource. The 
Committee would like the Dep artment to study such cases so as to understand the 
problems/intention of these defaulter licensees. Besides, when the National Telecom Policy, 
2011 is going to be finalized, the Committee would like the Department to ensure that the 
policy addresses the c hallenges being faced by the Department on several contentious 
issues. 
 
Para no. 27 of Thirty -first Report of Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -
12) on ‗Demands for Grants (2012-13)‘. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As regard to observation of the Committee for the need to have a study on the 
problems/intention for delayed rollout obligations resorted to by TSPs resulting in blocking 
the scarce resources of spectrum, it has been decided to get a study conducted by Nat ional 

 
 
Telecom Institute for Policy Research, Innovation and Training (NTIPRIT). It is also to inform 
that NTP 2012 has been announced.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 22.11.2012) 
 
Roll Out Period in Case of 3G Spectrum 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 28) 
The Committee disapprove the way the Department has dealt with one of the 
important recommendations made by the Committee in the Twenty -first Report. The 
Committee in the said Report while observing that the prescribed period of five years for 
rollout obligations for 3G spectrum as compared to 52 weeks in case of 2G spectrum would 
result into blocking of the scarce resource had strongly recommended to review the 
position. The De partment instead of taking the recommendations seriously has tried to 
sidetrack the issue by insisting that the rollout obligation in case of 3G spectrum being part 
of Notice Inviting Application (NIA) cannot be altered at this stage. Even when it was made  
clear in the action taken report as well as during the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants of the current year that the intention of the Committee was with regard to future 
policy, the Department tried to insist their stand. When the matter was ag ain pursued during 
the course of deliberations, the Secretary, at last, understood the issue and assured the 
Committee that the desirability of having shorter period and the recommendation of the 
Committee would be kept in mind when the Department go forwa rd with the auction 
process. The aforesaid response of the Secretary again indicates the insensitivity of the 
Department towards the important recommendation of the Committee. Even when the 
Department is going to finalize the new Telecom Policy, the import ant issue has not been 
considered as part of the long -term policy process. Not only that the ignorance of the 
representatives of the Department with regard to international practice in this regard further 
substantiates casual attitude of the Department tow ards important policy issues particularly 
when these are raised by the Parliamentary Committee. The Committee may like to 
reemphasize that spectrum is the scarce resource. The period of five years in case of 3G 
spectrum would result into blocking of resour ces particularly with the situation of rollout of 
2G spectrum whereby the licensees have not rolled out services even within the prescribed 
52 weeks and which has resulted into further blocking of resources and controversies. The 
Committee as such strongly recommend that the period of five years in case of 3G spectrum 
should be reviewed after looking into all the aspects as well as international practice in this 
regard. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the basis of fixing five years for 
rollout in case of 3G spectrum so as to understand the matter in detail. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is intimated that no auction on 3G Spectrum has been held since the last auction 
held in the year 2010. Further, it is intimated that presently auction of 2G spectrum is under 
way. EGoM in its meeting on 18.07.2012 has decided that for 2G spectrum auction at least 
10%, 20% and 30%  of the Block Headquarters of the LSA shall be covered by each winner 
of spectrum within three, four and five years, respectively fr om the effective date of license 
or date of assignment of spectrum won in the auction process, whichever is later.  
Details of roll out period is as given below:- 
 
Roll Out Period in case of 3G Spectrum 
 
1. As per Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) for auctio n of 3G & BWA spectrum dated 
25.02.2010, which is legal document and mentioned that the licensee to whom the 
spectrum is assigned shall have a network rollout obligation. The obligation reflects the need 
both to ensure the efficient use of spectrum and pro vide a reasonable level of service to a 
wide cross -section of customers. Copy of the relevant extracts of NIA relating to roll out 
obligations for 3G Spectrum & BWA spectrum is given below.    
 
1.1. Roll-out obligations for 3G Spectrum 
 
Metro service area 

 
 
The licensee to whom the spectrum is assigned shall be required to provide required 
street level coverage using the 3G Spectrum in at least 90% of the service area within 
five years of the Effective Date. 
 
Category A, B and C service areas 
The licensee to whom  the spectrum is assigned shall ensure that at least 50% of the 
District Headquarters (―DHQ‖) in the service area will be covered using the 3G Spectrum, 
out of which at least 15% of the DHQs should be rural Short Distance Charging Areas 
(―SDCA‖)6, within five years of the Effective Date. Further: 
 the operator shall be permitted to cover any other town in a District in lieu of 
the DHQ; 
  coverage of a DHQ/ town would mean that at least 90% of the area bounded 
by the municipal/ local body limits should get the  required street level 
coverage; 
  the DHQ shall be taken as on the Effective Date; 
  the choice of DHQs/ towns to be covered and further expansion beyond 50% 
of DHQs/ towns shall lie with the operator. 
 
The Effective Date shall be the later of the date when  the right to use awarded 
spectrum commercially commences and the date when the UAS licence, if applicable, is 
granted to the operator. 
 
If the licensee does not achieve its roll out obligations, it shall be allowed a further 
period of one year to do so by  making a payment of 2.5% of the Successful Bid Amount 
(i.e. spectrum acquisition price) per quarter or part thereof as liquidated damages. If the 
operator does not complete its roll out obligations even within the extended period of 
one year, the spectrum assignment shall be withdrawn. 
 
1.2. Roll-out obligations for BWA Spectrum 
Metro service area:  
The licensee to whom the spectrum is assigned shall be required to provide required street 
level coverage using the BWA Spectrum in at least 90% of the service area within five years 
of the Effective Date. 
Category A, B and C service areas:  
The licensee to whom the spectrum is assigned shall ensure that at least 50% of the rural 
SDCAs are covered within five years of the Effective Date using the BWA Spectrum. 
Coverage of a rural SDCA would mean that at least 90% of the area bounded by the 
municipal/ local body limits should get the required street level coverage. 
 
The Effective Date shall be the later of the date when the right to use awarded spectrum 
commercially commences and the date when the UAS licence or the ISP category ‗A‘ licence, 
if and as applicable, is granted to the operator. 
 
If the licensee does not achieve its roll out obligations, its spectrum assignment shall 
be withdrawn. 
 
Roll Out Obligations for 1800 MHz/800 MHz bands:   
 
1. Further, the roll out obligations for spectrum in 1800 MHz and 800 MHz band to be 
allotted through auction, have been decided by the EGoM in its meeting held on 18.07.2012 
as detail given below: 
 
2.1.  The new entrant will have to fulf il roll out obligation as provided in the existing UAS 
license with sharing of passive infrastructure as presently permissible. 
2.2.  Over the above rollout obligation mentioned in para 2.1, the new entrants as well as 
the incumbent licensees acquiring spectrum  in the auction, will have following rollout 
obligations: 
 
(i)      At least 10%, 20% and 30%  of the Block Headquarters of the LSA shall be 
achieved within three, four and five years, respectively from the effective date of license or 
date of assignment of spectrum won in the auction process, whichever is later.  
 

 
 
(ii)        Coverage of Block Headquarter would mean that at least 90% of the area bounded 
by the local body limits should get the required street level coverage by setting up of Base 
station (for example a BTS / node B/ e-node B) in the Block Headquarter.  
 
(iii) Incumbent licensees may offer coverage of Block Headquarters already achieved in 
accordance with Para 2.2(ii) above as compliance towards rollout obligation.  
 
(iv) The choice of Block Headquarters to be covered and further expansion beyond 30% 
Block Headquarters shall lie with the Licensee depending on their business decision.  
 
(v) In case of dual technology operators, the roll out obligation shall be applicable in 
respect of the network deployed using the spectrum acquired through auction. Accordingly, 
the roll out already achieved shall be counted in same spectrum band.  
 
2.3. while obligation under Para 2.1 will have to be met by setting up owned 
infrastructure with sharing of passive infrastructure as presently permissible, the new 
entrants and the incumbent licensees w ill have the flexibility to meet the roll out obligation 
mentioned in Para 2.2 (i) & (ii) through shared infrastructure to the extent permissible as per 
guidelines/instructions applicable from time to time. 
 
2.4.  In the case of Metro Service Area, there will be no obligation relating to Block 
Headquarters for the new entrants as well as incumbent licensees.  
 
2.5. The number of Block Headquarters will be taken as existing on the date of issue of 
the Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) for auction of spectrum.  
 
2.6. Liquidated Damages: Suitable clauses for imposition of liquidated damages in case of 
delayed roll out, time taken for Standing Advisory Committee on Radio Frequency Allocation 
(SACFA) clearance, provision of termi nation of license and with drawl of spectrum in case of 
failure in roll out etc. will be worked out separately by DoT and incorporated in the NIA.  
 
2.7.   DoT will suitably incorporate the above mentioned provisions by taking into account 
any other incidental provisions, as necessary, for compliance of roll out obligation.             
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 22.11.2012) 
 
Import of telecom equipments 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 30) 
 The Committee find that telecom equipments is a major share of country‘s electronic 
hardware import. The data furnished by the Department indicates that the substantial part 
of the total import relating to telecom equipments come from China. Out of 50,94,529.30 
lakhs of total imports during 2010-11, 30,41,588.17 lakhs were from China. Not only that the 
telecom equipments imports from China are increasing year after year. On the issue of 
security concerns involved in this regards the Committee have been apprised that the 
Government, vide Notification No. 8(78)/2010 -IPHW dated 10th February 2012, has laid 
down the policy for providing preference to domestically manufactured electronic products 
in procurement of those electronic products (includin g telecom equipment) which have 
security implications for the country and in Government procurement for its own use and not 
with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the production of goods for 
commercial sale. For the implementation of abo ve notification, the Department has 
constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Member(T) to recommend telecom 
product or products having security implications for the country and other actions to be 
taken by the Department for the implementation of various provisions mentioned in the 
notification. 
 
The Committee emphasize that there are serious security issues related to import of 
SIM cards and telecom equipments. As such telecom products having security implications 
for the country should be identified expeditiously by DoT. The requisite policy init iatives in 
this regard should be taken expeditiously so as to address the issue of security concerns in 

 
 
import of SIM cards and telecom equipments. Besides the Department of 
Telecommunications and other R&D agencies should pay more attention to ensure 
indigenous production of telecom equipments and SIM cards so as to attain the level of self 
sufficiency in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to attain self sufficiency with regard to telecom equipment including SIM cards, 
following steps has been taken: 
 
1. Department of Information Technology (DIT), vide Notification No.  8(78)/2010 -IPHW 
dated 10th February 2012, has laid down the policy for providing preference to domestically 
manufactured electronic products, in procurement of those electroni c products which have 
security implications for the country and in Government procurement for its own use and not 
with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the production of goods for 
commercial sale. It is proposed to cover SIM cards under  electronic products having security 
implications. For the implementation of above notification, this department has  constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Advisor (T) to recommend telecom product or 
products having security implications for the  country and other actions to be taken by this 
department for the implementation of various provisions mentioned in the notification. The 
Committee is understood to be in the final stage of consultations/deliberations and the final 
ATN will be submitted after the receipt of their recommendation, acceptance as well as issue 
of notification by the Deptt. of Telecommunications. 
2. For promoting R&D, Manufacturing and Standardization of Telecommunication 
Equipment in the country, National Telecom Policy – 2012, inter-alia, has following provisions 
under Objectives and Strategies: 
Objectives: 
 
Promote innovation, indigenous R&D and manufacturing to serve domestic and global 
markets, by increasing skills and competencies. 
 
 Promote the ecosystem for design, Resear ch and Development, IPR creation, testing, 
standardization and manufacturing i.e. complete value chain for domestic production of 
telecommunication equipment to meet Indian telecom sector demand to the extent of 60% 
and 80% with a minimum value addition of  45% and 65% by the year 2017 and 2020 
respectively. 
 
Provide preference to domestically manufactured telecommunication products, in 
procurement of those telecommunication products which have security implications for the 
country and in Government procurement for its own use, consistent with our World Trade 
Organization (WTO) commitments. 
 
Strategies: 
2.1.  To promote R&D, design, development and manufacturing in the domestic telecom 
equipment manufacturing. 
 
2.5.  To assist entrepreneurs to develop  and commercialize Indian products by making 
available requisite funding (pre -venture and venture capital), management and 
mentoring support. 
 
2.6.  To create fund to promote indigenous R&D, Intellectual Property reation, 
entrepreneurship, manufacturing, c ommercializing and deployment of state -of-the 
art telecom products and services. 
 
2.8.  To notify specific guidelines for according preference to domestically 
manufactured telecommunication equipment and products either for reasons of 
security or for Gover nment procurement in accordance with relevant government 
decisions and policies in this regard. 
 

 
 
2.10.  To support Electronic Design and Manufacturing Clusters for design, development 
and manufacture of telecommunication equipment. 
 
2.11.  To facilitate pr ovision of appropriate fiscal incentives through a Modified Special 
Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS) in manufacturing of telecom equipment. 
 
2.15.  To facilitate putting in place a stable tax regime for telecom equipment 
manufacturing. 
 
2.16. To provide appropriate incentives to the Indian product manufacturers for  domestic 
deployment and exports. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Cases of having SIM cards issued against false identity 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 31) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that approximately 16.7 lakh cases have been 
found non-compliant to the norms till 16.02.2012 and penalty of approximately ` 1800 crore 
have been imposed on the tele com ser for violation of norms on the matter of issue of SIM 
cards against false identity. The Committee feel that the penalty of ` 1800 crore itself 
indicates the quantum of irregularities on the matter of issue of SIM cards. This may be a tip 
of the iceb erg as the actual ground situation may further be alarming. The Committee 
strongly emphasize that the issue of SIMs on a false identity is a security threat to the 
country. The Committee strongly recommend that besides taking action against the 
individuals, strict penalty measures should be taken against the service providers. The 
Department should consider the issue seriously and new initiatives in this regard should be 
taken. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Looking into the laxity on part of telecom service providers in verification of identity of 
subscriber while providing SIM cards it was decided to sample check the compliance of 
instructions in respect of subscriber verification with a sample size of 0.02% on monthly 
basis and a penalty of Rs 1000/ - was pr escribed for non -compliant cases. The size of 
sampling was discussed with National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) and was raised to 
0.1% w.e.f. 01.05.08 as per the inputs received from NSSO. To bring more seriousness 
amongst the TSPs system of graded pe nalty was introduced vide DoT letter dated 
24.12.2008 According to the said scheme, the correct subscriber verification percentage vis -
à-vis financial penalty per unverified subscriber shall be as per table below: 
 
Correct subscriber verification 
percentage in a service area 
Amount of financial penalty per 
unverified subscriber 
Above 95% Rs 1000/= 
90%-95% Rs 5000/= 
85-90% Rs 10000/= 
80-85% Rs 20000/= 
Below 80% Rs 50000/= 
 
 The penalties are being imposed on regular basis and penalty amounting to Rs 1800/- 
Crores has been imposed against non -compliant cases found since beginning of CAF 
verification activity i.e. April 2007. As a result of this exercise the compliance %age which 
was approx 81% in 2007 has now gone upto approx 96% as per latest data. 
A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed by Mr. Avishek Goenka against Union of India by 
way of Writ Petition No. 285/2010 before the Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India. This PIL sought 
implementation of the subscriber verification guidelines seriously and t o make physical 
verification compulsory for securing mobile connection. During pendancy of this PIL, the 
Government had decided to revise the existing guidelines for verification of customer‘s 
identity. However, when these instructions were about to be iss ued, the Hon‘ble Supreme 
Court during the hearing on 14.03.2011 asked the Government to file these guidelines 
before it and to issue the same only after clearance from the Hon‘ble Supreme Court. In the 

 
 
judgment dated 27.04.12 passes in Writ Petition Hon‘bl e Supreme Court has directed the 
Government to constitute a Joint Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Telecom) having 2 members each from Department of Telecom (DoT) and Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). The issue whether ther e is any need for enhancing the 
penalty for violation of instructions/ guidelines by TSPs including sale of pre -activated SIM 
cards is also to be examined by this committee. Consequent upon decision of this 
committee, further actions will be initiated  
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Universal service obligation fund (USOF) - The issue of allocations lesser than the revenue 
earned  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
 The resources for meeting the Universal Service Obligation (USO) are generated 
through a Universal Service Levy (USL), which  is a percentage of the revenue earned by the 
operators under various licenses. Keeping in line with National Telecom Policy, 1999, the 
Universal Service Support Policy came into effect from 1 st April, 2002. The Committee have 
consistently been raising the  issue of allocating resources under USO Fund which has to be 
commensurate to the level of revenue generated through USL (Universal Service Levy). The 
data furnished by the Department indicates that from the year 2002 -03 to 2011 -12  ` 
40574.16 crore of rev enue was earned under USO Fund by levy, out of which the BE 
allocation under USO Fund is ` 13700 crore against the proposed allocation of ` 26853.61 
crore. The expenditure met out of USO Fund is to the tune of ` 15159.4 crore for the said 
year. 
 
The Committee find that the Department on the recommendation of the Committee 
took up the aforesaid issue with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are not inclined to 
accept the response of, the Ministry of Finance in this regard wher it has been stated that 
resources cannot be blocked as Government is committed to finance various flagship 
programmes of the Government. 
 
The Committee emphasize that Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund is being 
generated through a Universal Service Levy to meet the social obligation related to telecom 
sector as per the Telecom Policy, 1999. There is no reason to justify the allocations that do 
not commensurate with the revenue generated through Universal Service Levy (USL). The 
Committee may further like to highlight the fi ndings of the study undertaken by the 
Department in association with the Internet Mobile Association of India whereby it has been 
stated that 10 per cent increase in internet subscribers delivers on an average of 1.08 per 
cent increase in GDP. Keeping in v iew the status of broadband connectivity whereby 
broadband penetration is just 1.44 per cent when compared to the teledensity of 78.10 
percent in the country, the Committee emphasize that much more needs to be done to 
improve the growth of broadband connec tivity particularly when the growth in broadband 
connectivity can help the country achieve high level of GDP. Moreover providing allocations 
commensurating to revenue generated through USL are justified as the allocations being 
made are being fully utilize d. The Committee as such exhort the Government to provide 
allocations for USO activities of the Department commensurating the Universal Service 
Obligation (USO) Fund generated through USL. The concerns of the Committee in this regard 
should again be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In compliance of recommendations/observations of Standing Committee/ PAC, the   
Department of Telecommunications had taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance from  
time to time. The Ministry of Finance vide their letter No  F -2(35)-B (AC)/ 2009 dated 3 rd May 
2012 have intimated as below:  
 ―The Observation/recommendations of PAC made in their 49 th Report have been 
examined. After careful reading of the paragraph 7 and 8 of 49 th Report, it is observed that 
the Committee is highlighting the position viz. ― proceeds from USO Fund are made available 
for USO activities in general and for provision and expansion of rural telephony in particular, 
in accord with the provision of the Indi an Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003‖. If the 
committee are referring to the proceeds from USOF, it may be held that the funds 
transferred to USOF are only available for USO activities and expansion of rural telephony in 
accordance with the provisions of the Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003. 
 If, however, the Committee are referring to the Universal Access Levy, collected as 
part of licence fee and credited to the Consolidated Fund of India under the Major Head 

 
 
‗1275-Other Communication Services‘, for b eing transferred to the USOF kept in the Public 
Account of India, the following are the comments of this Ministry: 
(a)  In terms of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, Government may 
 credit such proceeds to the Universal Service Obligation Fund from time 
 to time for being utilized exclusively for meeting the  Universal Service 
 Obligation. Keeping this in view, funds are being provided in the 
 Demands for Grants of Department of Telecommunications for transfer 
 to USOF. Further, provisions for transfer to USOF are made based on  the 
requirement and ability of the Department to spend in any financial  year. This 
practice is being followed over the years. It may be noted that  the unutilized funds 
kept in the Public Account add to the liability of the  Government. It may also be 
recalled that while approving the  amendment to IT Act, 1885, Cabinet has directed 
that Department of  Telecommunications to consult Ministry of Finance while 
finalizing the  amount to be transferred to USOF; 
 
(b)  Department of Telecommu nications has, recently, obtained the approval 
 of Cabinet for implementation of a new scheme called ‗National  Optical Fiber 
Network‘ (NOFN) for providing broadband connectivity to Panchayats with a 
financial outlay of 20,100 crore over a period of  3 (three) years by utilizing the 
USOF. Thus, the bulk of the accruals to USOF over the years would be utilised in 
financing and implementing NOFN.  
Keeping the above points in view, Department of Telecommunications is requested to 
apprise PAC of the rationale in not keeping the entire accruals in the Public Account idly‖.  
 
The committee has emphasized on the growth of broadband in the entire country. As far as 
USOF‘s efforts are concerned, for expansion of Broadband Services in rural and remote 
areas of the country, USOF has adopted a two pronged strategy i.e. launching of scheme for 
provision of broadband to the end users (such as Wireline/ Wireless Broadband Schemes) as 
well as augmentation of OFC backhaul media for carrying the broadband traffic from rural 
areas to the core network. Accordingly, for rural and remote areas, the following schemes 
have been undertaken by USOF: 
 
1. Rural Wireline  Broadband Scheme, the estimated  cost of Rs 1500 Crore 
2.  Rural Wireless Broadband Scheme, the estimated  cost of  Rs 1000 Crore 
3.  Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in ASSAM, the estimated cost of Rs 99.90 
Crore 
4. Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -    
District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in NE -I Circle (comprising states of 
Meghalaya,Mizoram&Tripura), the estimated cost of Rs 68.05 Crore 
5. Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and  Management of Intra - 
District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in NE -II Circle (comprising states of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland), the estimated cost of Rs. 226.86 
Crore 
6. National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) Rs. 20100.00 Crore  
 
(Total 1 to 6) Rs. 22994.81 Crore 
 
From the position stated above it is stated    that credits to the fund shall be the amount as 
received through Parliamentary approvals are made available for USO activities in general 
and for provision and expansion of rural telephony in p articular, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Indian Telegraph (Amendment ) Act, 2003.  The fund is to be utilised 
exclusively for meeting the Universal Service Obligation. It is expected that the bulk of the 
accruals to USOF would be utilised in the span of 2-3 years. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
  

 
 
Use of Non-conventional energy 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 29) 
 The Committee have consistently been recommending in their Reports for the use of 
non-conventional energy sources for powering the mobile infrastructure sites. The 
Committee find that enhanced and continued adoption of green policy in telecom and 
incentivise use of, renewable energy sources f or sustainability is one of the objectives of the 
draft National Telecom Policy, 2011 The Committee may like to emphasize that power 
supply is the major constraint in expanding the telecom network in rural areas. Moreover, 
the use of non - conventional ener gy sources for telecom sector would address the 
environmental concerns as rightly emphasized in the new proposed Telecom Policy. The 
urgent steps for promoting and incentivizing use of non -conventional energy sources for 
telecom sector in line with the pol icy document should expeditiously be taken by the 
Department for sustained telecom growth in an environment friendly environment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has planned Solar Power / Solar cum wind Power (hybrid) at 20 USOF sites for 
which subsidy was provided by USOF. Out of these 20 sites, 14 are planned as Solar 
Powered and 6 are planned as Solar cum Wind Powered (Hybrid) sites. Out of these 20 sites, 
16 sites have been commissioned and remaining four sites are expected to be 
commissioned shortly.  
 
For subsequent sites, the tender for providing Solar Power systems at 100 Nos BTS 
amounting to Rs 22.05 Crores has been finalized and Purchase Order [SITC ( Supply, 
Installation, Testing and Commissioning ) of Solar Power systems] issued for 100 No BTS. 
Subsidy to the tune of Rs 18 Crores shall be provided for installation and commissioning of 
these solar power systems from Ministry of Non -Renewable Energy (MNR E) under Jawahar 
Lal Nehru National Solar Mission. 
 
 
USOF: As far as USOF is concerned, it has been decided that all future USOF supported 
schemes would encourage use of Renewable Energy Resources, wherever feasible.  
 
It is further stated that TRAI had iss ued recommendations dated 12.04.2011 on 
―Approach towards Green Telecommunications.  TRAI Recommendations had been accepted 
by DoT. Accordingly, directions have already been issued to all the telecom service licensees 
vide letter dated 23.01.2012 for implementation of Green Technologies in Telecom Sector.  
 
 As per the said directions, at least 50% of all rural towers and 20% of the urban 
towers are to be powered by hybrid power {Renewable Energy Technologies (RET) +Grid 
Power} by 2015, while 75% of rural towers and 33% of urban towers are to be powered by 
hybrid power by 2020.     
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Under Utilization of allocations made under IEBR and GBS Components 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee note that for the year 2012 -13, the Department have been allocated 
a Plan Outlay of ` 15231.39 crore which comprises of ` 10,431.39 crore as Internal and 
External Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and ` 4,800 crore as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS). 
The Plan allocation is ` 4649.70 crore lesser than the outlay allocated at Budget Estimates 
stage of the previous year. The analysis of the data further reveals that the Plan allocation 
to the tune of ` 19881.09 crore allocated at Budget Estimates stage during  the year 2011-12 
was reduced to ` 11878.07 crore at Revised Estimates stage. The Department could utilize 
only ` 4949.22 crore i.e. 41.67 per cent of the allocations upto February, 2012. If the 
percentage utilization of IEBR and GBS components during the year 2011-12 is analyzed, the 
Committee find that under IEBR, BSNL and MTNL have performed badly. Whereas the 
percentage utilization with regard to RE under IEBR during the year 2011-12 has been stated 
as 32.57 per cent, BSNL‘s financial achievement is 33. 67 per cent. MTNL has performed in a 
worst manner whereby the financial achievement is just 15.97 per cent. With regard to GBS 
performance during the year 2011 -12, the percentage utilization has been stated to be 
87.98 per cent. 
 
While reviewing the financ ial achievement of the Department during the Eleventh 
Plan as a whole which has come to a close on 31 st March, 2012, the Committee find under 
utilization in both IEBR and GBS components. During the five years, the allocations under 
IEBR and GBS components were made for ` 101228.78 crore at BE stage which were 
reduced to ` 75556.45 crore at RE stage and the utilization is ` 50003.68 crore which 
indicates that almost 50 per cent of the allocations made at BE stage remained unutilized. If 
the performance under  IEBR and GBS components separately is reviewed, the allocations 
under IEBR component during the Eleventh Plan were made to the tune of ` 94664.78 crore 
at BE stage, the expenditure reported to be ` 46821.97 crore which is lesser than 50 per 
cent of the BE allocations. Under GBS component, total Eleventh Plan allocations at BE stage 
were ` 6564 crore and the utilization was ` 3181.71 crore. Another repetitive trend noticed 
is huge variation between BE, RE and actual during each year of the Eleventh Plan. Th e 
allocations made at BE stage have considerably been reduced at RE stage and even the 
reduced allocations could not be utilized resulting into under -spending during each of the 
years. 
 
The Committee have consistently been raising the issue of variation of  allocations at 
various Estimate Stages as well as under -spending of the scarce resources. In spite of that 
the trend is repetitive during each of the years. With regard to the reasons, the Department 
is repetitively stating fiercely competitive market as well as mid-term corrections depending 
upon the market needs and changing scenario as reasons for under -spending under IEBR. 
Another reason subscribed for low utilization under IEBR by BSNL is delay in completion of 
the procurement process under various pr ojects and delay in completion of the various 
ongoing projects. With regard to under -spending under GBS component, the problems with 
the major schemes i.e. Defence Service Network, A&N project have been cited. The 
aforesaid scenario clearly indicates unrea listic projections made by the Department. Not 
only that there are serious problems with the Public Sector Undertakings. The projections for 
the bigger projects are being made unrealistically without analyzing the bottlenecks coming 
in the way of implement ation and huge resources are being blocked, particularly when the 
important projects of the Government are starving for funds. 
 
The Committee deplore the way the projections are being made by the Department 
under both IEBR and GBS components. The Committee  strongly recommend that the 
allocations for the major projects should be projected only when all the preliminary work for 
implementation has been done, clearances are in place thereby not repeating the situation 
of blocking scarce resources of the Governm ent. The Committee caution the Department to 
keep into consideration the aforesaid observations of the Committee while projecting 
allocations for the projects during the Twelfth Plan. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 MTNL:  
 
The financial performance of MTNL durin g the last five years since 2007 -08 to 2011 -12 is 
given below:- 
                                                                          
      (Rs. in Crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Budget 
Estimates 
2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 1204.10 1145.46 
Revised 
Estimates 
1692.33 1304.28 1352.01 1281.84 792.25 
Actual utilization  932.46 871.12 1194.70 1257.07 167.94 
Percentage  of 
utilization w.r.t. 
Revised 
Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 88.36% 98.07% 21.20% 
 
MTNL is operating only in Delhi and Mumbai which are the most fiercely competitive markets 
characterized by high saturation and low ARPU (Average Revenue Per User) and having 
more than 150% tele -density. In view of the rapid developments / changing scenari o in the 
fiercely competitive telecom sector it is very difficult to forecast the exact requirements well 
in advance. Therefore, the plans are very dynamic in nature and require not only continuous 
review but midterm corrections depending upon the market n eeds, future demand and 
changing scenario.  
 
At the time of initial planning, provision of funds have also to be kept for the new and 
upcoming projects likely to come in future. However, the projects do not come up or are 
delayed due to unavoidable circums tances. In such cases the funds allotted against such 
projects remain unutilized and results in lower expenditure as compared to outlay. In case of 
some projects, although equipment has been installed and is in commercial use, full 
payment could not be released due to some pending points / features to be demonstrated. 
 
MTNL has been continuously making conscious efforts to make plans with realistic and 
achievable targets as well as to minimize the gap between planned outlay & expenditure. 
Due to conscious e fforts, the percent utilization of funds for the year 2010 -11 has 
progressively increased to 98% (Planned outlay: Rs 1281.84Cr, Expenditure: Rs 1257.07Cr) 
from 88.36% during 2009-10 &  67% & 55% during 2008-09 & 2007-08 respectively.  
 
The expenditure duri ng the year 2011 -12, however, has been low (21.20%). In this context, 
it is submitted that currently MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem and is 
borrowing money to meet its day to day requirements. Therefore, it becomes important for 
MTNL not o nly to continuously review its spending but also ensure that funds are utilized 
judiciously.  Since enough capacity is available the plan size was reduced at RE stage and 
further expenditure has been made as per the requirement. However, none of the scheme s 
have been affected due to low expenditure.  
 
It is further submitted that all the services which are being provided by MTNL to its‘ 
customers are available on demand and there is no waiting list for any of the services. MTNL 
generates the required funds through its internal resources / arrangements and does not get 
any assistance from the Govt. The money is withdrawn as and when needed for a project 
and hence there is no unspent balance available at the end of each financial year and funds 
available / unutilized continue to remain invested as per DPE guidelines. 
 
MTNL has drafted its 12th five year Plan taking into consideration the experience it had 
gained during the previous years. Meetings were held with the units to review the progress 
of the ongoing p rojects. Further, the status of the new / upcoming projects to be taken up 
during the next 5 years were reviewed and provision of funds have been made based on the 
expenditure likely to be booked under various heads.  
 
 
 

 
 
BSNL: 
 
The revised IEBR component in respect of BSNL during Eleventh Five Year Plan was Rs. 
65218 Crores. The aggregated expenditure is Rs. 42947 Crores which works out to 66%. 
Since BSNL does not receive any General Budgetary Support (GBS) from Government, all 
projections are funded out of internal accruals / external sources funding. 
 BSNL Management is very much concerned about the shortfall in the utilization of allocation 
under IEBR and is committed to address the issues which contribute to under utilization of 
Outlay on continuous basis. 
 
BSNL has examined the reasons for shortfall in utilization of allocation outlay and has 
initiated corrective actions to address the same as given below: 
 
(i) Delay in tender finalization has been one of the main reason attributed to 
underutilization of ou tlay. To address the same, BSNL has started inviting all 
centralized tenders through e -tendering which has not only improved 
transparency with the vendors but also has speeded up / reduced the time in 
finalization of tender.  
 
(ii) Earlier the requirement of fund was projected on yearly basis which used to 
undergo changes because of many reasons including the delay in finalization 
of tenders. To obviate the same, the requirement of fund will now be made, 
project wise, on quarterly basis spanning various milest ones of the project. 
This projection will be suitable fitted in the annual plan for giving BE and RE 
based upon actual project performance, which will also be reviewed on 
quarterly basis. 
   
  It is expected that with the aforesaid initiatives, BSNL will b e in a position to 
formulate a realistic plan where it intends to spend a significant percentage of plan outlay 
for the achievement of its physical targets. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Broadband expansion in the country 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee observe that whereas the Department has exceeded the targets of 
telecom connectivity, the progress with regard to broadband expansion has not been to the 
desired level as could be seen from the data furnished by the Department. There are 13.5 4 
million broadband connections by February, 2012 against the target of 20 million broadband 
subscribers by 2010. The broadband penetration is just 1.44 per cent when compared to the 
impressive teledensity of 78.10 per cent. The major initiative proposed t o be taken during 
the Twelfth Plan to address to the problem of broadband connectivity particularly in the 
context of rural areas is the National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for providing broadband 
connectivity to 2.50 lakh village Panchayats. The Committ ee feel that with the 
implementation of the aforesaid project, the constraint of non -availability of backhaul 
connectivity up to the villages would be addressed. The other constraints enumerated by 
the Department are non-availability of content in vernacul ar languages, low English literacy, 
affordability of customer premises equipment (CPE), Right of Way (RoW), International 
bandwidth prices, affordability of broadband, low level of digital literacy etc. To address the 
various issues the Department need to act in coordination with respective Union 
Departments as well as the State Governments. The coordination with the State 
Governments is utmost necessary to address the issue of Right of Way (RoW). With regard 
to the constraint of content in vernacular langu ages, the Department should take up the 
matter with the sister Department i.e. Department of Information Technology and the 
research organizations like C -DAC and C -DoT. On the issue of low English literacy, low level 

 
 
of digital literacy certain schemes are  being implemented by the various Departments 
including the Department of Information Technology. There is an urgent need to look into 
the matter on affordability of computers as well as on affordability on broadband. The 
initiatives need to be taken with the private sector service providers as well as with the 
private industry as a whole. More emphasis need to be given to R&D so as to make the 
computer equipments and maintenance of computers cheaper. The Committee would like 
the Department to take up the v arious issues with the respective Ministries/State 
Governments/Industry as an integrated approach need to be taken to address the various 
issues. The Committee exhort the Department to take the desired initiatives during the 
Twelfth Plan so as to address t he constraints so that the broadband connectivity scenario in 
the country improves and the growth matches to the impressive telecom growth in urban 
areas of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MTNL:  As far as MTNL is concerned, it is providing broadband on both wireline as well as on 
wireless. Wire -line connections are currently being provided by MTNL using ADSL 2+ 
technology on its existing legacy fixed line copper network. The wireless broadband 
connections are provided by MTNL through its 3G network. MTNL has presently, over 1.05 
million broadband connections on landline against a deployed capacity of over 1.6 million 
line. Further for wireless services MTNL has enable all its 2G customers for 3G services 
Broadband services which means that any customer having a 3G handset can have access 
to wireless Broadband services. The Broad Band services both through land line & wireless 
are available to the customers on demand. 
 
To meet the ever increasing demand for the bandwidth, achieve higher level of customer 
satisfaction and providing wide range of services to its customers MTNL is aggressively 
laying and extending the reach of optical fiber in its network and is deploying G PON based 
FTTH network. It is a centrally managed network designed to provide reliable fiber routes to 
cover all possible destinations within MTNL. This will help in meeting the increased 
bandwidth requirement for both data and video applications.  
 
In the  Greenfield areas MTNL is laying fiber to provide the broadband band connectivity. 
However in the areas of existing legacy network MTNL has planned to provide high speed 
broadband using VDSL (Very High Data Rate Digital - Subscriber Lines) technology where 
copper loop length will be reduced. With these initiatives the quality of Broadband services 
will improve and also MTNL will be able to provide higher bandwidths (20 Mbps +) to its 
customers. 
 
USOF: 
 
For expansion of Broadband Services in rural and remote areas of the country, USOF 
has adopted a two pronged strategy i.e. launching of scheme for provision of broadband to 
the end users (such as Wireline/ Wireless Broadband Schemes) as well as augmentation of 
OFC backhaul media for carrying the broadband traff ic from rural areas to the core network. 
Accordingly, for rural and remote areas, the following schemes have been undertaken by 
USOF: 
 
1. Rural broadband Schemes: undertaken/planned by USOF  
 
 The Indian Telegraph Rules have been amended, and stream IV has  been added 
under the title ―Provision of broadband connectivity to villages in a phased manner‖ to bring 
provisioning of broadband connectivity to the rural areas  under the purview of the USOF.  
The rural broadband connectivity will cover Institutional Users, such as Higher secondary 
schools, Public Health Centres etc., as well as Individual Users, located in the villages. The 
Schemes are as under:  
 
a)    Ongoing Scheme: Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme  
 
Brief and background note:  For providing broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas, 
USOF has signed an Agreement with BSNL on January 20, 2009 under the Rural Wireline 
Broadband Scheme to provide wire -line broadband connectivity to rural & re mote areas by 

 
 
leveraging the existing rural exchanges infrastructure and copper wire -line network.  This 
scheme is being implemented at pan -India level. The objective is to make the rural and 
remote areas broadband enabled by facilitating the service providers in creating Broadband 
The speed of each of the broadband connections shall be at least 512 kbps always on, with 
the capability to deliver data, voice and video services in the fixed mode. The rural 
broadband connectivity will cover Institutional Users, such as Gram Panchayats, Higher 
Secondary Schools and Public Health Centres, as well as Individual Users, located i n the 
villages.  
Under this scheme, BSNL will provide 8, 88,832 wire -line Broadband connections to 
individual users and Government Institutions and will set up 28,672 Kiosks over a period of 
5-years, i.e., by 2014. The subsidy disbursement is for (i) broad band connections, Customer 
Premises Equipment (CPE), Computer/Computing devices (ii) setting up of Kiosks for public 
access to broadband services. The estimated subsidy outflow is Rs. 1500 crore in 5 years 
time that includes subsidy for 9 lakh broadband co nnections, CPEs, computers/computing 
devices and Kiosks. 
Present Status:  Under this scheme, a s of April 2012, a total of 3,60,966 broadband 
connections have been provided.   
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates:  The scheme has an overall target to provide 8, 8 8,832 
wire-line Broadband connections by 2014.  
 
b)  Planned Schemes: Rural Wireless Broadband Scheme  
 
USOF is working on a scheme for providing financial assistance by way of  subsidy for 
building up the wireless broadband infrastructure such as Base Stations by utilizing the 
existing infrastructure available with the Telecom service providers. This scheme  envisages 
to  provide broadband coverage to about 5 lakh villages at a speed of 512 kbps. This 
scheme is envisaged to provide Broadband in all states of India.   
 
The scheme has been approved by the competent authority and the draft tender document 
has be en prepared and uploaded in the public domain for comments/suggestions of 
stakeholders on 21.04.2011. The stakeholders have raised some issues and DoT has been 
requested to give directions to resolve the policy issues raised by stakeholders.  
 
Present Statu s:  The Scheme has been put on hold due to roll out obligations of 3G/BWA 
operators 
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates:  The planned scheme has an overall tentative target to 
cover 5 lakh villages   
 
2. General Infrastructure Augmentation - Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation 
and Management of Intra-District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network for backhauling  
 
Salient Features of the Schemes: 
 
For provision of broadband in rural areas, sufficient back -haul capacity is required to 
integrate the voice and data tr affic from the access network in the rural areas to their core 
network by strengthening the OFC network. Accordingly, this scheme considers OFC 
Network augmentation between the blocks' HQ and Districts' HQ to begin with. The States of 
Assam, Meghalaya, Man ipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, & Nagaland have been 
taken up for implementation.   
 
This OFC Schemes would be undertaken on BOO model, i.e. build, operate & own basis, and 
accordingly, the Telecom Service Providers, implementing the schemes wou ld  build, 
operate, own and manage all the equipment/infrastructure for the execution of the scheme.  
 
All locations shall be connected on physical OFC Ring Route(s) with the DHQ node ensuring 
the cable route diversity and ring capacity of at least 2.5 Gbp s, with the capability to 

 
 
efficiently transport various protocols, including TDM, IP, Frame Relay, etc., for integrated 
voice, data and video signals in all the specified districts.  
 The following Optical Fibre Network schemes have been taken up:  
 
a)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra-District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in ASSAM‖ 
 
Brief and background note:   The State of Assam has been taken up first for implementation. 
As per the outcome of the tender for implementation of t his scheme in Assam, BSNL has 
been declared the successful bidder at a subsidy quote of Rs. 98.89 Crore, and 
subsequently, an Agreement has been signed with them on 12.02.2010 in this regard. This 
Scheme is envisaged to be rolled out in a phased manner dur ing the current Five Year Plan 
(2007-2012). 
This OFC Scheme would connect 354 total locations in Assam in total 27 Districts within 18 
months from the date of signing of the Agreement. The Agreement shall be valid for a period 
of seven years from the effective date  
At least 70% of the subsidized ba ndwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall be 
shared with the licensed service providers in the area of ASSAM at a rate not more than 
26.22 % of the current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
Present Status: As of April 2012, about 190 nodes have been installed so far (Out of 354). 
Roadmap ahead with target dates: The scheme has an overall target to install 354 nodes in 
Assam.  
b)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in NE -I Circle (comprising states of Meghalaya, Mizoram & 
Tripura),‖  
 
Brief and background note:   The States of Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura have been taken 
up for OFC augmentation in this scheme. As per the outcome of the tender for 
implementation of this scheme, Agreement has been sig ned with M/s RailTel Corporation of 
India Limited at their subsidy quote of Rs. 89.50 Crore on 16.01.2012.   
 
This OFC Scheme would connect 188 locations in 19 Districts within 24 months from the 
date of signing of the Agreement. The Agreement shall be val id for a period of eight years 
from the date of signing of agreement i.e. 16.01.2012. 
 
At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall be 
shared with the licensed service providers in the area at a rate not more than 12% of the 
current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
 
Present Status: Network roll out is yet to start. 
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates: This OFC Scheme would connect 188 locations in 19 
Districts within 24 months from the date of signing of the Agreement. 
 
c)  ―Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in NE -II Circle (comprising states of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur & Nagaland),‖  
 
Brief and background note:   The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nag aland have 
been taken up for OFC augmentation in this scheme. As per the outcome of the tender for 
implementation of this scheme, Agreement has been signed with M/s RailTel Corporation of 
India Limited at their subsidy quote of Rs. 89.50 Crore on 16.01.2012.  
 
This OFC Scheme would connect 407 locations in total 30 Districts within 30 months from 
the date of signing of the Agreement. The Agreement shall be valid for a period of eight 
years from the date of signing of agreement i.e. 16.01.2012. 
 

 
 
At least 70%  of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall be 
shared with the licensed service providers in the area at a rate not more than 27% of the 
current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
 
Present Status: Network roll out is yet to start. 
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates: This OFC Scheme would connect 407 locations in total 30 
Districts within 30 months from the date of signing of the Agreement. 
 
3.National Optical Fibre Network 
 
Brief and background note:   The optical fibre presently has predominan tly reached state 
capitals, Districts and blocks and there is plan to connect all the 2,50,000 Gram  Panchayats 
in the country through optical fibre utilizing existing fibre of PSUs viz. BSNL, RailTel and 
Power Grid and laying incremental fibre wherever ne cessary. Size of the incremental 
network is Approx. 0.5 million km. Dark fibre network thus created will be lit by appropriate 
technology thus creating sufficient bandwidth at GPs level. This will be called National 
Optical Fibre Network (NOFN). Thus preva iling connectivity gap between GPs and 
Blocks/Districts will be filled. Non-discriminatory access to the network will be provided to all 
the telecom service providers.  Further the   broadband connectivity to 2.5 lakh GPs for 
various applications like e -health, e -education and e -governance etc. will be provided by 
NOFN as closed user group. The network is proposed to be completed in 2 years‘ time. The 
project will be funded by Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). The project will be 
executed by a Speci al Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which will be a company incorporated under 
Indian Companies Act 1956 and initially will be fully owned by Central Government, with 
equity participation from Government and interested Central Public Sector Units (CPSUs) 
(BSNL, Railt el, Powergrid,). The cabinet Note for the same has been approved and the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) named Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) has been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012 to execute the project.  
  
Present Status: The Network roll out is yet to start. 
 
Roadmap ahead with target dates:  The network proposed, under the scheme, is to be 
completed in 2 years‘ time. 
 
 With regard to Right of Way (RoW) , it is stated that the draft tri -partite MoU for RoW, to be 
signed between GoI/DoT, State Governments/UTs and BBNL, has already been sent to all the 
State Governments/UTs. Letters have also been written by Hon‘ble MOC&IT  to CMs of States 
and from Secretary (Telecom) to Chief Secretaries of States. All efforts are being made to 
complete  the process in a time bound manner. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
National Optical Fibre network (NOFN) for broadband connectivity to 2.50 lakh village 
Panchayats of the Country 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee find that out of ` 8600 crore allocated at Budget Estimates stage for 
the year 2012 -13, the major component of BE i.e. ` 8000 crore has been proposed for the 
scheme creation of National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for broadband connectivity to 
2.50 lakh village Panchayats of the country. Out of ` 3,000 crore USO allocation made during 
the year 2011-12, ` 2547 crore have been allocated for this scheme. The overall approval of 
` 20,000 crore for the project has already been accorded The Committ ee find that the 
aforesaid scheme would bridge connection gaps between Gram Panchayats and Blocks. The 
Committee further note that project is envisaged to be completed within two years. From 
the information furnished by the Department, the Committee find t hat although the scheme 
has been approved by the Cabinet, the bid for the project would be by September, 2012 and 

 
 
the award of work would then commence from September, 2012 onwards. While 
appreciating the ambitious programme of the Department, the Committe e have their own 
doubts about the completion of the project within two years particularly when the award of 
work would commence from September, 2012. Nevertheless, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should take all the initiatives so that  the allocations made 
for the project are meaningfully utilized for the year 2012-13. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The SPV named Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) has already been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012 to execute the project. Amendment to Indian Tel egraph rules 
has been notified in order to fund the project by USOF. Currently, each of the 3 CPSUs 
(BSNL, Railtel and Power Grid) is conducting pilot project in one Block to understand the 
issues which may arise during the execution of the main project. A ll initiatives are being 
taken to complete the project within the stipulated period of 2 years. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Performance of PSUs, BSNL and MTNL 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 19) 
 The Committee find from the information furnished by the Department that more and 
more subscribers are preferring private service providers over the public service providers. 
The growth of private sector during each year of the Eleventh Plan is higher than the growth 
in the public sector. The share of public sector under wireless category is gradually 
declining. Not only that the public sector is also losing their place in the wireline segment 
predominantly occupied by them earlier. What is more disappointing is the fact that MTNL 
and BSNL could not take the benefit of mobile number portability scheme of the 
Government which is evident from circlewise data wit h regard to porting out and porting in 
with regard to BSNL telephone connections. The analysis of the data indicates that in all the 
circles excepting Jammu and Kashmir, Odisha, Kerala. Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu 
including Chennai, the porting out is more than the porting in. 
 
The Committee are constrained to observe that issues related to unsatisfactory 
performance of BSNL and MTNL when highlighted by the Committee during the course of 
deliberations, the Secretary instead of enumerating the measures taken so far tried to justify 
the position by giving various reasons. The reasons enumerated by him include high cost of 
the staff which is 50 per cent in case of PSUs as compared to 4 to 5 per cent in case of 
private companies Rs. 28000 crore paid by BSNL an d MTNL for 3G spectrum and the issues 
related to delay in procurement. The justifications given by the Secretary are totally 
unacceptable. The Committee may like to highlight that besides the problem of growing 
losses, the PSUs have not been able to levera ge the support provided by the Government 
through GBS and various policy initiatives. The allocations provided through GBS component 
remained underspent due to the internal problems of PSUs. Not only that the recent request 
of BSNL for partial surrender of  BWA spectrum speaks volume of the inability of the Public 
Sector Organisations to leverage the Government support. Allocation of 3G spectrum much 
before the auction to the Public Sector Organisations which could have provided them an 
edge in the market an d lured the customers have proven to be a liability as stated by the 
Secretary according to whom Rs. 28,000 crore was paid by BSNL and MTNL in spectrum and 
there is a little business case for that Rs. 28,000 crore. To add to the problem of the Public 
Sector Undertakings their profits have shrunk over the years and the companies are now on 
losses. 
 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that both the PSUs BSNL and 
MTNL are ailing from various types of maladies. There is an urgent need to take imm ediate 
initiatives to reenergize these organizations. Moreover, the PSUs are working in a typical 
Government set up which has become their main impediment limiting their ability to 

 
 
compete in the market. The PSUs have not been able to provide quality servi ces to their 
customers in spite of having huge trained workforce. The trained workforce which could 
have been their asset have now converted into liability. Moreover, the Committee are not 
able to comprehend the system of purchases whereby purchase orders could not be placed 
for the last four years as explained by the representatives of the Department during the 
course of deliberations in the context of setting up of towers in strategic area of Sikkim The 
Public Sector Undertakings MTNL and BSNL fails under  the administrative jurisdiction of the 
Department of Telecommunications and as such the Department has the great responsibility 
to reenergize these organizations. The system of working of PSUs need to be reviewed 
immediately followed by certain concrete c orrective actions. There is an urgent need to 
reform the system of acquisition/procurement in the Department. The system need to be 
made simple, transparent, e-enabled and decentralized. Besides, there an urgent need to fix 
the accountability for delay in purchases. Above all, the working of the staff of these 
organizations need to be reviewed. There is an urgent need to sensitize and motivate the 
huge workforce of PSUs through periodic reviews and the system of incentivizing the good 
performing staff. The Committee strongly recommend that the urgent initiatives as 
suggested above should be taken by the Department and Public Sector Org so as to improve 
their financial position as well as their place in the telecom industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MTNL: 
 
Some of the reasons for the under performance of MTNL vis -a-vis private players are 
as under : 
 
1. MTNL is operating telecom services only in two cities of Delhi and Mumbai and does not 
have a PAN India presence therefore it becomes difficult for MTNL to match the various 
service / tariff  packages as can be done by a Pan India Operator. 
2. MTNL is confined to Delhi and Mumbai and is not able to operate in Tier -II and Tire -III 
cities where maximum growth is taking place.  This restriction on service area also  
impacts MTNL in another way.  While it‘s competitors having Pan India presence can 
offer discount on calls to their network elsewhere in the country, MTNL cannot offer 
similar discounts being restricted to Delhi and Mumbai service areas.   
3. Being a Public Sector Company, MTNL has to follow the Govt. guidelines on the 
procurement for new equipment and expansion / up gradation of existing equipment. 
This results in multiplicity of vendor for the same kind of equipment leading to inter 
operability/integrations issues thus resulting in delay in commencing. Further, since 
technology is changing very fast in the telecom sector and new applications / services 
are being developed very frequently, it is not possible for MTNL to induct the new 
developments due to absence of price reference in the tender.  
 
MTNL had to pay Rs 4533.97 cr towards one time spectrum fee for BWA spectrum based on 
auction prices received by the Govt. Since the one time amount of spectrum charges BWA 
spectrum as a result of the auctions were u nexpectedly high, to pay   such unexpectedly 
large amounts, short term loans had to be taken by MTNL. In comparison to the spectrum 
charges of WA Services, the potential revenue is low because of low tariffs due to cut throat 
competition.   
 
MTNL is the on ly operator who had been allotted the spectrum only for Delhi & Mumbai 
Metros after matching the highest bid for these two cities.   Other Telecom operators who 
have a Pan India presence have purchased the Spectrum for these two cities along with 
other telecom circles also. This way they are able to average out the exorbitant high cost of 
spectrum for these two cities.  
 
The BWA spectrum has not been put to use by MTNL. The expression of Interest (EOI) 
floated by MTNL twice to identify franchisee on revenue  share basis, could not result in any 
suitable party being identified. In fact in the second EOI, no bid was received as the market 
found it to be a week business case requiring very deep pockets whereas MTNL is cash 
stripped. As a result MTNL is now servi ng heavy debt without receiving returns out of the 
BWA Spectrum. 
 

 
 
Delhi and Mumbai are the most competitive telecom licence service areas. In Delhi, there 
are 15 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators whereas in Mumbai, there are 
14 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators.  
 
The subscriber base for the MTNL‘s various services for the past 5 years is as under:  
 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Total Wire -line 
Connections                     
(including WLL fixed 
connections) 
38,07,081 36,94,970 36,23,110 35,81,148 35,65,896 
Total Wireless 
Connections including 
WLL mobile 
34,02,767 43,60,748 49,67,660 53,61,827 57,24,231 
Broadband on landline 5,70,591 6,95,500 8,15,830 9,42,317 10,40,191 
 
Although there is some decline in the MTNL‘s market share for different services but it can 
be seen that the number of customers are growing for MTNL‘s Mobile and Broadband 
services which means that the growth of MTNL is less compared to its competitors in  
absolute terms.  
 
It is submitted that even though there is continuous growth in MTNL‘s wireless subscriber 
base, however, due to increase in competition & number of service provider in Delhi &  
Mumbai, there is marginal decline in market share. Further, with entry of new players, 
market share of existing operators get shared and market share of some of our competitors 
has also declined.  It is submitted that due to continuous efforts, MTNL has b een able to 
reduce the net churn of its wireless customers under MNP from 9,256 in April 2011 to 2,153 
in March 2012.  
 
To further increase the market share the strategy conceived are as under:  
 
 Accelerate the pace of expansion of Data services and Mobile  services with up -
gradation of technology.  
 Use triple play (Voice, video and data) as an instrument of retention of fixed 
subscribers and revenue growth. 
 Make services more customer- friendly.    
 Leverage data services to increase customer's base and reve nues. For this purpose 
adopt two types of strategies .One to provide higher bandwidths using wire line 
network Secondly provide data capabilities to mobile subscribers using 3G,Wi -Max 
etc technologies. 
 Expanding the reach of fiber network near to the custo mer premises particularly in 
apartment complexes through FTTH in order to meet the ever increasing bandwidth 
requirement for both data and video applications.  
 Phasing out of old technology.   
 To improve customer care by reducing fault rate, upgrade Sancha r Haats, stream 
lining billing / delivery and to take other measures to improve customer convenience 
and satisfaction to achieve international best practices. 
 Strengthening of franchisee model for giving connectivity in the last mile & meeting 
customer req uirements, provision of value added services including contents & 
marketing on fixed & mobile networks. 
 MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of land 
line connections. Present day fixed line network does not support man y value added 
services like video call etc whereas the same are available in the GSM.   This is one of 
the reasons for the churning of the landline subscribers. To  revert this trend MTNL is 
planning to introduce Class V NGN / IMS based services in its fix ed line network which 
will enable it to provide all the various types of values added services.  
 
Future Plans of MTNL  
 
MTNL is giving major thrust on the expansion of capacity for GSM and Broadband to cater 
the further demand. Following actions are being  taken to generate fresh demands by 

 
 
providing quality services, customer care & satisfaction, introduction of new services / 
schemes and innovative marketing strategies.  
(i) Expansion / augmentation of existing 3G network to (High Speed Packet Access 
(HSPA+): At present MTNL‘s 3G network is HSDPA (High Speed Data Packet Access) with 
download speeds up to 3.6 Mbps and uploads speed upto 384 Kbps. After upgradation 
download speed upto 21.1 Mbps and upload speed upto 5.76 Mbps will be supported by the 
network.  
 
(ii) Deployment of new technology state of art exchanges and Next Generation Networks 
(NGN)/ IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) : MTNL has planned to replace its TDM (Time Divi sion 
Multiplexing) Fixed line switches with NGN / IMS switch in phased manner during 12th Five 
year plan. Introduction of NGN / IMS based services will not only help MTNL in saving Opex, 
space but also enable MTNL to offer all data / video centric services  which are currently 
enjoyed by Mobile subscribers to the fixed line subscribers also ultimately leading to 
convergence of fixed and mobile services. 
 
(iii) To bring optical fiber near / to subscriber‘s premises by introducing FTTC (Fibre to the 
Curve) and  reaching homes thereafter with FTTH (Fibre to the Home) on PON (Passive 
Optical Network) technology: MTNL is adding optical fibre in its access network and is 
deploying FTTH based on GPON (Gigabit Passive Optical Network). This will enable MTNL to 
provide access to this latest technology to its‘ esteemed customers with very high 
bandwidth. 
 
(iv) Expansion of broadband network to provide bandwidth on demand by deployment of 
ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) / VDSL (Very High Data Rate Digital Subscr iber 
Line) , MLDN (Managed Leased Data Network) / PON etc. Introduction of more broadband 
services such as video on demand, video conference for public.   
 
(v) Expansion of high capacity IP -MPLS (IP Multiprotocol Label Switching) based 
backbone network to migrate to NGN (Next Generation Network) for establishing unified 
network for speech and data. Introduction of VOIP in the backbone and access network.  
 
BSNL: 
 
Initially Govt. had allowed only private operators to enter wireless market.  Accordingly, only 
private operators were rolling out wireless network from 1996 till 2000.  BSNL rolled out its 
GSM Mobil e Services in October, 2002. Growth of Market Share of private operators is as 
under: 
 
S. No. Name of major 
operator 
Market share as on 31 -3-
2002 (%) 
Market share as on 
31-3-2012 (%) 
1 Bharti Airtel 21.32 19.70 
2 Vodafone 14.07 16.35 
3 Idea 11.74 12.25 
4 Aircel   3.87   6.80 
 
 From the above table, it may be seen that market share of most of the major PAN 
India operators has either come down or remained at the same level.   Whereas, in case of 
BSNL, the services were rolled out in March, 2002 wherein the Market Share was 3.11% 
which stands at 10.71 % as on 31 -3-2012.   It had gone up to 20.0% in 2006.   However, due 
to non-augmentation of capacity because of cancellation of tenders, the Market Share has 
come down.   Now, the latest 15 Million tender has been finalized and POs hav e been placed 
on successful vendors, which should help in capacity augmentation in the network.   
From the above, it can be seen that private operators in wireless market, being incumbent 
operators, have individually lost the market share over a period of time and this has been 
picked up by other operators.  The same trend is seen in case of wired segment also where 
PSUs were incumbent operators when the competition was opened, and private sector 
picked up market share. 
 
When MNP (Mobile Number Portability)  was launched in January, 2011, a very aggressive 
marketing was done by private operators to migrate customers and also attractive free bees 
were given, that too selectively for individual networks.  Private operators were also blocking 

 
 
the request of cust omers porting out from their network. This was brought to the notice of 
TRAI which took action to prevent this subsequently.  Because of this, there was a large port 
out of customers as compared to the port in customers.  However, BSNL Telecom Circles 
took following measures to prevent large scale churning. 
(i) Personal address by CGM to all sections of staff and unions. 
(ii) Competition among SSAs (Secondary Switching Areas) to become positive on 
MNP and daily      monitoring of figures. 
(iii) Holding of press conferences and coverage of the same in media to get 
publicity without expenditure. 
(iv) Training to staff through virtual class room sessions. 
(v) Identification of service quality, tariff plan and customer services as key areas 
and continuous monitoring of the same.  
(vi) Briefing to franchisees and retailers and ensuring availability of SIMs at all 
locations. 
(vii) In depth analysis of QoS parameters and corrective actions. 
 
Some of the Circles like Andhra Pradesh had done extremely well right from the beginning 
because of certain innovative steps taken by them.  These measures were conveyed to 
other Circles and after following the steps, there was an overall positive trend from most of 
the Circles because of which the number of ported out customers, as compared to ported in , 
reduced.   This is evident from the ratio of ported out to ported in which has been gradually 
reduced from July, 2011 onwards and it stands at 1.4: 1 approx.   The reasons for large port 
out were analyzed based on the feedback received from customers.  
 
They are given below: 
 
(i) Congestion in the network 
(ii) Attractive tariffs given by other operators; and 
(iii) Poor customer service. 
 
Following measures have been taken to address these issues: 
 
(a) Tender for augmenting  the  capacity of  mobile  network  for   15 Millio n lines 
has been finalized and the orders are placed.   This will improve the coverage 
as well as reduce the congestion in the network; 
(b) New tariff schemes matching with competitors are being launched periodically 
which includes: 
(i) Forgoing porting fees from customers coming into BSNL network 
(ii) Introduction of aggressive data plans both for GPRS and 3G network. 
(iii) Additional incentives were given to sales channels. 
(iv) Publicity is being given through special ring back tones of mobile number 
portability as well as givi ng Radio Jingles specific to MNP.  SMSs also 
were given to all the customers. 
(c) 11 call centres have been established to address the customer complaints. 
The customers willing to port out from BSNL network were asked the reasons 
for porting out.   Many o f the complaints of the customers were solved during 
the feedback given by customers which prevented the porting out of 
customers from BSNL network. 
 
 All these measures have resulted in positive achievement because of which the port 
out to port in ratio in all Telecom Circles has reduced considerably. 
 
With a view to motivate the BSNL employees and measure their performance in the 
most objective manner, Performance Management System (PMS) has been introduced in the 
organization. PMS has been split into thr ee types, namely, Group Performance Management 
System (GPMS), Individual Performance Management System (IPMS) and Field level 
Performance Management System (FPMS). GPMS aims to measure performance at Group 
level, viz Corporate Office Business Units, Territ orial and non -Territorial Circles, SSAs etc. 
FPMS caters to the BSNL‘s workforce posted in the field units across the length and breadth 
of the country. The objective of FPMS is to recognise the performance of employees at SSA 
level and motivate them to wo rk effectively and efficiently.  For this purpose, five job 
families critical to the organisation and covering a large number of employees, have been 

 
 
identified. Employees associated with sales in fixed line, as channel management team 
members in mobile bu siness or as key account managers in Enterprise segment are given 
incentives. Employees working in Customer Service Centres, Exchange Operation (indoor as 
well as outdoor) and Mobility Operation are given quasi financial awards like trophies and 
certificates based on performance so that they put in their best efforts to achieve the 
prescribed targets, which are in line with the organisational objectives.‖ 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
E-waste 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 33) 
 The Committee find that handling of e -waste is the major area of concern for any of 
the country. Since the Department of Telecommunications is finalising new Telecom Policy, 
the Committee would like to emphasise that the issue of e -waste should be addressed in a 
comprehensive manner in coordination with the other concerned Ministries like Department 
of Electronics and Inform ation Technology and Ministry of Environment and Forests. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the quantum of e -waste in the country 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency for policy, planning, 
promoting and coordinationg the environmental programmes and is involved in enacting 
laws, guidelines referring to e-waste. DeitY, being the nodal Department for issues related to 
electronics, is involved in the proce ss of developing technological solutions to the e -waste 
management. 
 
Department is interacting with MoEF from time to time to get necessary data, status of 
present E-waste Rules etc. The MoEF, however, informed earlier that, a survey carried out by 
the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), estimated that 1.47 lakh Metric Tons (MT) of e -
waste was generated in the country in the year 2005, which would reach about 8.00 lakh MT 
by 2012. 
 
In order to have a structured and sustained mechanism to address various  issues on e -
waste, the Department is in the process of setting up a Working Group on e -Waste, involving 
MoEF, DoT, industry associations like ELCINA, MAIT and other possible stakeholders.  
 
  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department  of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Telecom Coverage to Naxailte Affected Areas 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 11) 
 The Committee find that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has identified 2199 
locations in nine States which are affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE) and do not have 
any coverage by any service provider in these States. BSNL has installed towers at 363 
locations. The Committee would like to be apprised about the requisite towers to cover the 
2199 locations as identified by MHA so as to understand the extent of coverage by BSNL. 
The Committee may also like to  emphasize that the remaining locations should be covered 
within the stipulated timeframe. The Committee would also like to emphasize that utmost 
priority should be given to providing connectivity in the Naxalite affected States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been proposed that BSNL would install 2199 mobile towers at the locations 
identified by MHA in the LWE affected areas and commission, operate and maintain the 
mobile services. USOF would fund the CAPEX and OPEX net of revenue for a period of six 
years. BSNL has conducted site survey and estimated that financial support required from 
the USOF would be to the tune of Rs.5809.38 Crore for setting up of infrastructure and 
commissioning of mobile towers at 2199 sites in LWE affected areas and maintenance of the 
same for six years. The existing network of BSNL in the Licensed Service areas shall be 
utilized for backhaul, core network, customer care, and Billing requirements etc. Draft 
Cabinet Note has already been circulated for inter -ministerial consultati on and comments 
have been received from concerned Ministries/Departments. The proposal has been placed 
before the Telecom Commission on 26.05.2012 for its recommendations. The Telecom 
Commission has desired to have Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) of the project and BSNL 
has been asked to furnish the same at the earliest. Ministry of Finance has recommended 
that the proposal be formulated for appraisal by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). 
Cabinet approval will be sought by following due procedure. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Laying of Optical Fibre Cable/better connectivity in the border areas 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 14) 
 The Committee during their Study  visits to the border areas of the country which 
include Study visit to Nathula and Andaman and Nicobar Islands have noted the severe 
problem of connectivity. The Members of the Committee were moved to learn from the 
jawans posted at Nathula that they are not able to remain in touch with their family 
members. More disappointing is the fact that even when the Committee were assured of 
setting up of mobile tower and upgradation of exchange at the Army camp in Nathula by the 
representatives of BSNL who were pr esent at the site during the study visit on 6 July, 2011, 
the promises are yet to be fulfilled. Now the representatives of the Ministry after passage of 
8 months have informed that the mobile tower and upgradation of exchange could not be 
done due to the p rocurement problems. The Committee disapprove the way the BSNL has 
acted on such an important issue particularly when the assurance was given to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee during the on -site inspection. The Committee emphasize 
that keeping in vie w the strategic location of the area the mobile tower and upgradation of 
the exchange should be done without any further delay and also within the stipulated 
timeframe. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) The Parliamentary Standing committee on Communication and IT d iscussed/ 
reviewed the telecom facilities near Nathula Pass during July 2011. A demand was received 

 
 
from Army for providing mobile and broadband facilities in the adjoining areas near Nathula 
Pass. 
(b) As a follow up, a meeting was held by CGM, West Bengal, BSNL with officials of Army 
and it was decided to install GSM BTS and Wi -Max BTS to upgrade the telecom facility near 
Nathu La Pass.  
(c) The necessary equipments for the installation of GSM and Wi -Max BT S including 
allied items have already been arranged by BSNL.  
However, to install and commission the GSM and Wimax BTS, BSNL is facing the following 
problems : 
(i) The commercial AC supply of Thegu is highly unreliable. 
(ii) To install the BTSs near the Internation al border, BSNL has to get permissions 
from concerned Army authorities. These permissions generally take longer 
time. 
(iii) To provide back -hole connectivity to BTSs near International borders, 
permission to lay OF Cables take longer time. 
BSNL has intimated tha t it will commission the proposed BTS within a period 6 to 8 months 
after receipt of clearance from the Army authorities for installation/commissioning of the 
following infrastructure required for telecom facilities in Nathula Pass: 
(a) Provisioning of commercial Three Phase AC Mains Supply (15KW) by the Army. 
(b) Installation of 22 meters of Ground Base Tower. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
The issues related to connectivity in A&N Island and the project regarding undersea cabling 
between Mainland and Andaman and Nicobar Island 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee express unhappiness over the way the project related to undersea 
cabling between Mainland and  Andaman and Nicobar Island has been shuttled between 
Union Government and the UT Administration resulting into huge delay.  Not only that the 
specific allocations for the project were earmarked during the Eleventh Plan which remained 
unutilized due to the  aforesaid reasons. The aforesaid shuttling of the project has further 
resulted into non -involvement of BSNL and MTNL in implementation of such an important 
project.  The project was initially to be executed by M/s Millennium Telecom Limited a joint 
venture company of BSNL and MTNL. Now, the project being funded by Planning Commission 
under UT Plan Budget is being implemented by ANIIDCO (a PSU of A&N Islands 
Administration). Nevertheless, keeping in view the importance of the project, the Committee 
would li ke to emphasize early execution of the project so as to improve the connectivity 
scenario in various islands of Andaman and Nicobar. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As decided by Planning commission, the project ―Sub Marine Optical Fiber Cable to 
A&N Islands‖ is being implemented by A&N Administration through one of its Corporation.   
 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration (A&NI) has decided to implement the 
project through Andaman and Nicobar Integrated Island Development Corporation 
(ANIIDCO).    
 
As per PIB Memo, ANIIDCO has submitted the following implementation schedule :-  
 
Sl No. Activity  Project implementation schedule 
1. Award of work and signing Nov-Dec 2012  

 
 
of contract  
2. Cable landing station for 
Port Blair  
Nov-Dec 2013 
3. Cable Landing station for 
other Islands  
May-Jun 2014 
4. Commissioning  of other 
Islands  
Jul-Aug 2014 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
BSNL and National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 22) 
 It has come out during the course of deliberations on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) 
of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology that various components of e -
Governance programmes are suffering due to connectivity constraints. The Committee have 
been apprised that out of 74457 Common Service Centres (CSCs) locations enabled for 
connectivity, only about 21426 CSCs have availed BSNL connectivity primarily because of 
delay on the part of B SNL Circle Officers in providing connectivity. With regard to the 
implementation of State Wide Area Network (SWAN), non availability of leased line 
connectivity has been cited as reason for the delay in implementation of SWAN by the 
Department of Informati on Technology. The Committee during the course of their study 
visits to various parts of the country have also got the feedback that the important e -
governance projects are suffering due to connectivity constraints. The Committee 
emphasize that National e -Governance plan is one of the flagship programme of the 
Government which when implemented would revolutionize the delivery mechanism of the 
various programmes of the Government. The Committee deplore the aforesaid situation 
whereby telecom connectivity con straint has become the biggest impediment in the 
implementation of various component of NeGP. The Committee strongly recommend that 
the Department of Telecommunications should look into the matter in coordination with the 
various State Governments so that NeGP is implemented expeditiously. Not only that the 
system of fixing accountability in case of delay on the part of the officials of PSUs/DoT need 
to be enforced. The urgent initiatives in this regard should be taken and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL: 
 
(i) Broadband Connectivity to CSCs: 
 
a) As on 30.04.2012, BSNL has enabled 76,484 CSCs through broadband connectivity 
from various technologies i.e. Landline Broadband, Wi-Max etc. 
b) BSNL has also provided broadband connections to 21426 CSCs. BSNL has provided all 
connections at CSCs wherever Village Level Enterpreneurs (VLEs) has applied on 
prescribed format. All request received upto 31.05.2012 has been complied and no 
such request is pending. 
c) To further increase the Broadband con nectivity to the CSCs, the field units have been 
asked to co -ordinate with Concerned State IT departments and provide all the 
feasible CSCs Broadband connectivity on Top Priority. BSNL targets to provide 
connectivity to all willing CSCs by July, 2012. 
 
(ii) Implementation of SWAN: 
 
BSNL has implemented and commissioned SWAN projects in almost all the State 
Governments (with the exceptions indicated below): 
 Nagaland: Out of 49 sites (DHQ/BHQ) under this project, BSNL has provided media 
connectivity to 38 sites.  
The media connectivity via OFC to the 3 sites will be provided by 30.08.2012.  

 
 
The remaining 8 sites are planned on VSAT for which the payment of Rs. 32 lakh 
approximately is awaited from State. 
 Mizoram: Out of 41 sites (DHQ/BHQ) under this project, BSNL h as provided media 
connectivity to 28 sites.  
The media connectivity via OFC to the 5 sites will be provided within three 
months..  
The remaining 8 sites are planned on VSAT for which the payment of 50 percent 
payment amounting to Rs. 26 lakh approximately is awaited from State. 
 Rajasthan: Agreement has been signed and implementation of the SWAN Project is being 
pursued. 
 Jammu and Kashmir: Agreement has not yet been signed. 
Further, it is informed that there are 35 SHQ (State Headquarters) POPs (Point 
of Pre sence), 610 DHQ (District Headquarters) POPs and 7000 BHQ(Block 
Headquarters) POPs working for SWAN across the country. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
Dispatch of SIM cards through Post 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 32) 
The Department should consider sending S IM cards through Post which may address 
the issue of SW cards on false identity. The action in this regard should be taken and the 
Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The joint expert committee constituted by Hon‘ble Supre me Court of India to 
examine the new guidelines proposed to be issued by DoT, is also examining the issue of 
delivery of SIM cards through post and which is the best mode of delivery of SIM cards to 
provide due verification of identity and address of a subscriber.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
Illegal telecom operations 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 34) 
 On the illegal telecom operations, the Department has informed  that 540 cases of 
raids were conducted by Vigilance Branch of DoT and the cases were handed to the Law 
Enforcement Agency (LEA) on spot for further actions including prosecution of the culprits. 
The detailed data furnished by the Department with regard to  the specific cases indicates 
that some of the raids were conducted even in the year 2000 -02 which means that almost 
10 years have passed since the raids have been conducted and cases handed over to LEAs. 
Against some of the cases of 2005, it has been ment ioned that these are under examination 
of police. Against some of the cases it has been mentioned that these cases are untraceable 
by police. 
 
The Committee fail to understand how the cases can remain under investigation with 
the police for more than 6 to 7 years. The Committee would like the Department to clarify 
the position in this regard. The Committee would also like the Department to clarify how the 
cases would remain untraceable by police as informed by the Department. The Committee 
have consistently been raising the issue of operation of illegal telecom towers in the country 
in the various reports. The Committee again emphasize that illegal telecom networks 
besides causing the great loss to the Government are security threat to the country. There is 
an urgent need to have intelligence mechanism with DoT to find out such cases. Besides, 
the Department need to follow up cases with the investigation agencies so that these cases 
reach to the logical conclusion and the culprits are penalized which may be d eterrent for 
others to follow such unlawful activities which are a threat to the security of the country.  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The data indicating date of raid and date of handover to LEA has been collected from TERM 
Cells and is enclosed as Annexure. In respect of untraceable cases old records/ files are 
being scrutinized so that any additional information may also be passed on to the LEA for 
tracing the cases.  
 
In order to proactively identify any such illegal network and their locations regular anal ysis 
of data/ CDRs is being carried out by TERM Cells. Besides this following sources are also 
being relied upon for detecting and curbing the grey market activities. 
 Public telephone no. 1800-110-420 of DOT. 
 Complaint by any other means. 
 Analyses of unusual traffic 
 Social contacts. 
 Already investigated/ under investigation cases. 
 Security/Law enforcement Agencies. 
When presence of any illegal network is suspected, a team of field officers rackies the area 
and once its presence is confirmed, raid is conducted with the help of concerned Law 
Enforcement Agency (LEA) on location of the network. While conducting raid the equipments 
being used in the setup are seized by the LEA. The culprits identified during raids are also 
taken into custody by LEA along with all the evidences for further actions by them. The 
illegal setups caught so far stand closed and no setup out of these is working at present. 
Regarding present status of the cases TERM Cells are pursuing with the concerned LEA. 
Further, MHA is also be ing requested to ask the concerned LEA for keeping the track of the 
case and provide the information to TERM Cell periodically. 
It has been observed that cases of illegal routing of international calls are on the decrease, 
since 2005 -06. Some of the main r easons are strict monitoring by TERM Cells, increased 
public awareness and dropping of ISD call rates and ISD termination charges.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O. M. No. 16-3/2012-B dated 02.08.2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
      December, 2012  Standing Committee on 
      Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)         Information Technology 
 
 
  

 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13th December, 2012 from 1500 hours to 
1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
9. Shri Joy Abraham 
10. Shri Salim Ansari 
11. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra Agarwal, 
a Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitting in accordance with 
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration of the Draft Action Taken 
Reports on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) relating to ….xxxxx… and the Department 
of Telecommunications. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the same 
without any modification. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize 
and present the reports to the House during the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
4. xxxxx……………….xxxxx………………..xxxxx……………………xxxxx…………………xxxxx. 
 
5. xxxxx……………….xxxxx………………..xxxxx……………………xxxxx…………………xxxxx. 
 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________ 
xxxxx Matters not related to the Report. 
 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-FIRST REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12, 13 , 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 30 and 31 
 
 Total 21 
 Percentage 61.78 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 7 and 29  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 5.88 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 6,  9, 19 and 33    
 Total 05 
 Percentage 14.70 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature  
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  11, 14, 17, 22, 32 and 34  
 Total 06 
 Percentage 17.64 
 
 
 