 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10)] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 11 
 

 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10)] 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
 May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
  
INTRODUCTION  (iii) 
REPORT  
Part-I  
Chapter       I Report 
 
1 
Chapter      II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
8 
Chapter     III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government………………… 
 
30 
Chapter     IV Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration…………………………………………………….......... 
31 
Chapter     V Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………………………. 
35 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in their Third Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) …………………………………………………………………… 
38 
 
 
 
APPENDIX* 
 
 
 Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Information Technology (2009-10) held on 4th May, 2010......... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________  
*Not included in the cyclostyled copy of the Report. 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-2010) 
    
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh  -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
*5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
**9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Abdul Rahman 
12. Shri Prem Das Rai 
  #13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
15. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19. Shri C. Sivasami 
20. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
 @23. Vacant 
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
25. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
26. Shri Prabhat Jha 
27. Shri P. Rajeeve 
28. Shri Shriram Pal 
29. Shri N.R. Govindarajar 
30. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
31. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
 
** Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 10th September, 2009. 
# Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 13th October, 2009. 
* Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 19th November, 2009. 
@ Consequent upon retirement of Shri Dharampal Sabharwal from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2009 -10) 
having been authorized by the Committe e to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants (2009 -10)‟ of the Minis try of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology). 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Information Technology) furnished their Action 
Taken Notes on 8 March, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
4th May, 2010. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Reco mmendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in their Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given at Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
  May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
  vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals wit h the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) pertaining to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Information Technology). 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 1 7 December, 2009 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day . It contained                                               
30 Recommendations/Observations.   
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Information Technology) and these have been categorized as 
under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  1,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, 
16,17,18,20,21,24,26,27,28 & 29 
 
 Total 23 
 Chapter II 
   
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Paragraph No:-  19  
 Total 1 
 Chapter III 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  2,3 ,23 & 25  
 Total 4 
 Chapter IV 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim nature:- 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  22 & 30  
 Total 2 
 Chapter V 
 
 
 

 
4. The Committee also trust that utmost importance would be g iven to 
implementation of the Observations/  Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee 
further desire that Action Tak en Notes on the Observations /Recommendations  
contained in Chapter - I and final action taken replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter - V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early 
date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
 
Pendency of Utilisation Certificates and Unspent Balances 
 
(Recommendation No. 2&3) 
 
6. The Committee had noted th at unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 983.92 crore 
(as on 31st March, 2009) were pending with the implementing agencies. Besides 623 
Utilisation Certificates amounting to Rs. 958.3 crore were still pending with the 
implementing agencies. Not only that the  Committee had found that out of 203 
implementing agencies to whom the Outlay was released, as many as 113 agencies  did 
not furnish the Utilisation Certificates at all. Besides, the Committee had noted from the 
data made available by the Department that the projection made by the Department are 
unrealistic. While deploring the way the schemes are being implemented, the Committee 
had recommended to analyse each scheme/project and take the desired corrective 
actions. As t he various program mes/schemes are  being implemented by the Line 
Ministries/Department and various State Governments, the Committee recommended on 
the need for a pr oactive role by the Department. The Committee also emphasised for 
strengthening of the monitoring mechanism.  
7. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:- 
  
“Projects/schemes funded by the Department of Information Technology are 
first considered in terms of relevance by the specific Working Group and 
after its recommendation, the same is considered for sanction a s per the 
guidelines for plan schemes. 
 
To ensure that the programmes are implemented in the right earnest, a 
Project Review & Steering Group (PRSG) is constituted for each of the 
project so that the project is enabled to achieve its objectives well in tim e. 
This mechanism is working well and is effective and will continue. The 
Programme Divisions have been advised to hold PRSG meetings more 
frequently so as to closely monitor the progress of the project. 

 
 
As regards unspent balances with the grantee instit utions, it is stated that 
subsequent release of funds to grantee institutions are made only after 
submission of the Utilisation Certificate (UC) for the earlier grant and after 
adjusting the unspent balance shown in the UC. Further, the 
recommendation of the PRSG for release of next installment of Grants-in-aid 
is also insisted upon, so as to ensure that releases are linked with the 
progress made in the project. 
 
The Department has put in place a mechanism to ensure that the projects 
are implemented with fo cus by constituting Project Review & Steering 
Group (PRSG) for each project with focus by constituting PRSG for each 
project with experts from Industry, Academia, etc. The PRSG monitor the 
progress made the project, utilization of funds and also recommends  
subsequent release of funds. This mechanism is effective and will continue. 
The PRSGs have been strengthened by suggesting more frequent meetings 
so that outcomes are achieved.” 
 
 
8. The Committee find that the Department seem to be contended with th e 
existing monitoring mechanism even when balances to the tune of Rs. 983.92 
crore are lying unspent with the d ifferent implementing agencies and as many 
as 113 agencies out of 203 implementing agencies  to whom the grants were 
released did not furnish even the single U tilisation Certificate and the data 
indicated unrealistic projections.  Instead of reviewing the performance of 
different schemes and taking the desired corrective action, the Department has 
reproduced the existing system of release of installments to implementing 
agencies.  Not only that the Department has tried to emphasize that the existing 
mechanism is effective and will continue. The Committee express serious 
concern over the way the suggestion s of the Committees have been dealt with. 
While reit erating the earlier recommendation s, the Committee desire the 
Department to take the concrete corrective actions and apprise them 
accordingly. 
 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
9. The Committee had noted that t hough Rs. 1,100 crore is the proposed allocation 
for promotion of Electronics / IT Hardware Manufacturing for the Eleventh Plan, only Rs. 
2.30 crore were provided for this sector during the year 2009 -10. During the year 2008-
09 the Budgetary allocation was only for Rs. 0.80 crore against the proposed allocation of 
Rs. 2 crore and only Rs. 21.25 percent of the allocated Outlay (i.e. Rs. 0.17 Crore) could 
be utilized. While noting that the hardware industry has a tremendous potential in terms 
of revenue and emp loyment generation, the Committee had strongly recommended that 
the Department should pay more attention to this sector and take concrete action. 

 
 
 
10. The Department in their Action Taken Notes has stated as under:- 
 
“The estimated growth rate projected f or the year 2009 -10 is 0.1 per cent 
lesser than the previous year, on account of global economic recession. It 
may be noted that five applicants in the area of Solar Photovoltaics have 
intimated partial financial closure more than Rs.1000 crore, only in 
December 2009. Further, it is anticipated that some applicants could 
approach DIT for disbursement of incentives after fulfilling necessary 
conditions of threshold investment in the remaining two years of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. In view of the above, th e provision of Rs.1100 
crore has been retained under the head of “Promotion of Electronics/IT 
Hardware Manufacturing” during the 11th Plan period. In view of the various 
challenges faced by the Indian electronics hardware manufacturing industry 
and further in the backdrop the global economic crisis, a Task Force was set 
up by the Department of Information Technology vide Office Order dated 
11th August, 2009. The mandate given to the Task Force is to make 
recommendations on: 
 i. Strategies to augment the gro wth of the IT software and IT enabled 
services sector in the context of global developments. 
 ii Steps needed to accelerate domestic demand for (i) Electronics 
hardware products and (ii) IT & IT enabled services. 
 iii. Steps needed to boost domestic manufa cturing in Electronics 
hardware sector. 
 
In order to ensure wide ranging consultations with industry including 
industry associations and the experts in this area as well as to ensure 
unfettered view it was decided that the Task Force will be purely from th e 
industry and headed by a renowned industry leader. Accordingly, the Task 
Force was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Ajai Chowdhry, 
Chairman & CEO, HCL Infosystems Ltd., with Dr. Kiran Karnik, as Co -
chairman. 
 
The Task Force held wide -ranging co nsultations across all sectors of the 
industry covering the entire ecosystem. Department of Information 
Technology also wrote to various industry associations to provide their 
views and inputs to the Task Force, so as to ensure that the problems of 
the ind ustry are addressed in a comprehensive manner. The Task Force 
submitted its report to the Department of Information Technology on 
December 11, 2009. The Task Force report is in three parts (i) Software 
and Services Sector, (ii) Electronic Systems, Design a nd Manufacturing 
Ecosystem and (iii) Strategic Electronics. The report is available on the 
website of DIT (http://www.mit.gov.in). The recommendations contained in 
the report are currently under examination in the Department. 
 
11. In pursuance of the recom mendation of the Committee to pay more 
attention to the har dware, sector the Department has  stated that a Task Force 
was set up vide Office Order dated 11 th August, 2009, which has submitted its 
report on 11th December, 2009. In this regard, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details as well as the status of the implementation of the 
recommendations made by the Task Force. 
 
 

 
 
 
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 23) 
 
12. The Committee  while noting  that the deadline for one of the important project 
„Compact Antenna Test Range Facility‟ of the SAMEER under DIT, which was supposed  to 
be set up by June, 2009, had been delayed by six months due to delay in procurement of 
special antenna and  associated accessories from an agency abroad had emphasised  the 
Department to take extra caution so that such delays do not repeat. 
 
13. The Department in the  action taken note has stated that the observation of the 
Committee has been noted for compliance in future. 
 
14. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 
had observed that the deadline for one of the important project ‘ Compact 
Antenna Test Range Facility ’ of the SAMEER, which was sup posed to be set up 
by June, 2009 was delayed by six months.  In the action taken notes submitted 
on 8th March, 2010 even w hen the extended period was over, the Department 
did not bother to update the status of the aforesaid project. While expressing 
unhappiness over the manner the Department has  responded to the 
recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the 
project alongwith the details of the  cost escalation due to delay in setting up of 
the aforesaid project. 
 
 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
15. The Committee had observed that Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(C-DAC) is the premier R&D organisation of the Department for carrying out research and 
development in IT, Electronics and associated areas.  Total allocation for the entire Plan 
period for C -DAC is Rs. 900 crore. During the first three years of the Eleventh Plan the 
allocations are just for Rs. 291 crore which is almost one third of the total entire plan 
allocations. While taking note of the fact tha t the allocated Outlay was not even half of 
the proposed allocation, though the utilisation wa s more than 100 per cent t he 
Committee had recommended that all the possible budgetary support should be provided 
to C-DAC so as to enable the Society to achieve excellence in various R&D initiatives in 
information technology.  
 

 
The Committee in their earlier Reports have consistently been drawing the 
attention of Department towards the attrition of manpower in C -DAC. In this regard, the 
Committee had  been apprised  that the attrition rate in C -DAC in the last year was 
significantly lower with the implementation of the recommendations of the Sixth Pay 
Commission. While appreciating the position, the Committee recommend ed to  observe 
the trend carefully in the coming years. The Committee had also noted that the issue of 
performance incentive was being taken by the Department with the Ministry of Finance. 
Hence, the Committee emphasised to pursue the matter further and implement it. 
 
16. The Department in the Action Tak en Reply has stated that the observations of the 
Committee have been noted. They also stated that the Department has been providing all 
possible support to C-DAC and the allocations for C-DAC has been enhanced from Rs.119 
crore in BE 2009 -10 to Rs.131 cror e in RE 2009 -10. Further, a sum of Rs.183 crore has 
been earmarked for C-DAC in BE 2010-11.  
 
17. The Commit tee note that the Department has  not responded to part 
recommendation of the Committee related to the outcome of the performance 
incentive to staff of C-DAC which was stated as being taken by the Department 
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
details in this regard. 
 
National Informatics Centre 
 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 
18. The Committee had been apprised by  the Department that the proposal of NIC to 
provide salaries in respect of employees/ post existing as on 31 March 2007 and 
contingency expenditure under the non-Plan budget and the development expenditure 
under the Plan Budget were not agreed by the Minist ry of Finance . The Committee had 
observed that the allocations under Plan and Non -Plan head as desired by NIC would 
certainly help to analyze the increasing/decreasing trends of Outlay under the Plan/Non -
Plan schemes clearly.  As such the Committee desired the Department to place their 
concern in this regard before the Ministry of Finance / Planning Commission. 
 
19. The Department in the  action taken reply has stated that the concerns of the 
Committee would be placed before the Ministry of Finance at RE stage when the RE (Plan 
& Non-Plan) for 2010-11 and BE (Non-Plan) for 2011-12 is finalized. 
 

 
20. The Department in the action taken reply has assured the Committee that 
the proposal of NIC to provide salaries in respect of employees/post existing as 
on 31 st March, 2007 and contingency expenditure under non -Plan Budget, and 
the development expenditure under Plan budget, w ould be placed before the 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage.  The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the outcome in this regard. 
 
 

 
Chapter-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Over-all Analysis of the Budgetary Allocation of The Department Of Information 
Technology 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
 The analysis of the data with regard to the Budgetary a llocations for the planned 
schemes of the Department of Information Technology during the first three years of the 
Eleventh Plan indicates that the allocations made at the Budget Estimates stage are quite 
lesser than the proposed allocations.  This trend is applicable to all the three sectors viz. 
Infrastructure sector, R&D and Human Resource Development.  As regards the position of 
allocations at RE stage, the examination of the data for the years 2007 -08 and 2008-09 
reveals that under the infrastructure  sector, the Outlays are considerably reduced.   
However, under the remaining two sectors, there is slight variation at RE stage.   Under 
R&D sector the allocations are slightly more than RE and under HRD the allocations are 
slightly lesser. With regard to the  status of utilisation, the releases are overall 
satisfactory.  Under the Infrastructure Sector, the major part of the allocations is  for 
Electronic Governance.  The scheme wise analysis has been done in the later part of the 
report.  Here, the Committee w ould like to recommend that whatever allocations are 
being made at BE stage should not be reduced at RE stage particularly when the 
allocations are for creating critical infrastructure for the development of Information 
Technology in the country.   Besides, there should not be gaps in the estimated and the 
allocated Outlay.  Adequate Outlay should be provided to different schemes under the 
aforesaid three sectors. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Departm ent will make all 
efforts so that the allocations made at BE stage may not be reduced at the RE stage.  The 
Department projects its requirements based on the planned activities of the year. The 
Planning Commission, in turn, allocates resources based on ove rall availability position. 
Therefore, the gap between estimated requirement and actual allocation may vary 
depending upon the availability of total resources. 
 The following statement shows that there is marginal gap in the proposed outlay 
and approved ou tlay for 2010 -11 in respect of the Infrastructure, R&D and Human 
Resources Development Sectors: 
 

 
Sector Outlay 
(Rs. in crore) 
Proposed by 
DIT 
Approved by 
Planning 
Commission 
R&D 643.41 522.00 
Infrastructure 1427.80 1179.00 
Human Resource 
Development 
128.26 124.00 
TOTAL 2199.47 1825.00 
 
 
Internal and External Budgetary Resources 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note from the data made available by the Department that during 
the year 2008-09 under IEBR, in case of Technology Development Council, actuals are nil 
against the projections for Rs. 1.50 crore.  In the case of Media Lab Asia, the actuals are 
Rs. 1.12 crore against the projections of Rs. 20 crore.  There is slight shortfall in actuals 
in the case of Components & Material Development  Programme, DOEACC. Besides, the 
projected IEBR during the year 2009 -10 is Rs. 272.14 crore which is Rs. 60.68 crore 
lesser than the actual IEBR of the previous year.  While justifying the reduced projections 
for the current year as compared to the actuals  of the previous year, the Department on 
the one hand have stated that the projections are made by the six respective 
organisations, on the other hand it has been stated that the projections are fixed by the 
Planning Commission.  Moreover, the Department a re contended with the level of IEBR 
generation during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan, even when the actual are 2 
percent lesser than the average projections made for the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee 
do not agree with the stand of the Department while justifying the reduced IEBR.  The 
Committee feel that the Planning Commission should fix IEBR as per the projections of 
the respective organisations. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that 
every effort should be made so that IEBR duri ng the current year is not lesser than the 
actuals of the previous year in case of each and every organisation. 
Action Taken by the Government 
  
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee was  considered while making 
projection for IR and EBR in respect of organizations of DIT for Annual Plan 2010-11. The 
total projected IEBR for 2010 -11 is Rs.406.61 crore against the actuals of Rs.332.82 
crore for 2008-09. 
 
Allocation of Outlay to North-Eastern areas  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 

 
 The Committee note tha t in case of North -Eastern areas, the percentage of 
expenditure as compared to RE is 88.5 per cent. Besides during the year 2008 -09, no 
allocation was made under STPI and DOEACC. The Committee take note of the under -
utilisation of the Outlay seriously and recommend that all efforts should be made to 
utilize the Outlay fully.  On the issue of not making any allocation for STPI and DOEACC, 
the Committee are not satisfied with the reason furnished by the Department that it was 
due to overall reduction in plan allocations. The Committee feel that besides providing the 
mandated 10 per cent overall Outlay to North -Eastern areas, it should also be ensured 
that for each and every programme, the 10 per cent allocation is provided to these areas.  
The Committee also n ote that there is pendency of Utilisation Certificate in case of 
various North-Eastern States viz. Assam and Mizoram.  As recommended earlier, every 
effort should be made so that the Outlay earmarked is utilized by the implementing 
agencies and the set obj ective of the programmes are achieved.  The desired action on 
the suggested line should be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Department has been 
making consistent efforts to ensure that the outlay earmarked for development of North -
Eastern region is utilized by the implementing agencies to achieve the set objectives of 
the programmes. 
In so far as providing budgetary support to STPI for setting up of STPI Ce ntres is 
concerned, it may be stated that as per current policy for setting up a new STPI Centre, 
the State Government has to provide 3 acres of land, 10000 sq.ft. of built up space and a 
grant-in-aid of Rs.1 crore to STPI. DIT provides a seed capital of R s.50 lakh to STPI for 
setting up a new Centre.  
 STPI has started supporting setting up of new Centres on their own without 
depending upon the financial support from DIT. STPI has so far set up its facilities in 4 
locations and are operational, namely, Guw ahati, Imphal, Gangtok and Shilong in the 
Northeastern States. Setting up of STPI center at Agartala and Aizawl have been 
approved and the respective State Governments are in the process of identifying the 
suitable land for the STPI centers. 
 Funds to the DOEACC Society are also released as Grant-in-aid for implementation 
of various projects under Manpower Development Programme being run for the benefit of 
the North Eastern Region. Accordingly, a sum of Rs.2 crore has been released during the 
year 2009-10 for its Centres located in the North Eastern Region. The budgetary support 
for Manpower Development in NE Region has been increased by Rs. 8 crore in RE 2009 -
10. 

 
 Department of Information Technology is strictly following the guidelines issued by 
M/o Finance for release of second or further installment from time to time. Furnishing of 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) is the pre-requisite for release of further installment. 
 
National e-Governance Programme  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
 
 The Committee note tha t during each year of the Eleventh Plan the allocations 
made under one of the flagship programmes of the Government i.e. National e -
governance Plan are lesser than the proposed allocation.  The allocations are further 
reduced at RE stage and even the reduc ed allocations are not fully utilized.  There is 
under-spending of Rs. 126.29 crore during the year 2007 -08 and Rs. 3.99 crore during 
the year 2008 -09.  The allocations provided at RE stage during the year 2008 -09 was 
97.35 crore lesser than the RE of 2007 -08.  As explained earlier in Report, there are 
further unspent balances with the various State Governments/implementing agencies 
under the different programmes.  All this explains the unsatisfactory implementation 
status of one of the most important progr ammes of the Government. The Committee 
note that the National e -Governance Plan is the major initiative of the Government for 
ushering e -Governance and is expected to change the entire concept and system of 
governance in the country. As such, there is an u rgent need to analyze the performance 
critically and identify the weaknesses experienced in implementation of the programme.  
The Committee expect the Ministry to be serious in this regard and take all the corrective 
actions. The Committee should also be kept apprised about the corrective action taken in 
this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The progress of the projects are mainly dependent on the pace of work at the 
State level during pre bid, post bid and during implementation phase, like submissi on of 
RFP, Publishing of RFP, Evaluation of RFP, and award of contract to the selected bidder. 
Any delay at any of these stages compound the overall delay in the completion time 
scheduled for the project. Further, Timely selection of agency/third Party for  conducting 
Partial Acceptance (PAT), Final Acceptance Test (FAT), and timely release of funds to the 
PPP partner/contractor is also very important. Connectivity, power shortage in the rural 
areas and availability of G2C services are serious challenges tha t is affecting the 
implementation of CSC scheme.  
 
 The under – spending during the year 2007-08 was for the following reasons: 
 

 
1. State Data Centre and Capacity Building Schemes were approved in January 2008.  
At the time of furnishing Revised Estimates bas ed on feedback about the 
preparedness of States to kick start programme, financial requirement was worked 
out.   Funds to the tune of Rs. 76.00 crore could not be released under the 
programme SDC as decision was taken to release only 50 per cost of funds 
projected earlier. 
 
Further in respect of Capacity Building Programme, the anticipated releases to the 
tune of Rs. 11.00 crores could not be released as there has been delay on the part 
of States in sending Acceptance of Terms & Conditions and completion of  other 
formalities like forwarding names of designated implementation agencies etc. 
 
2. For ongoing schemes SWAN and CSC the releases anticipated could not be 
processed as UCs for releases made in the earlier years was not forthcoming.  
Infact, in few cases there has been reduction in expenditure. 
 
There has been considerable progress in programmes SWAN(15 operationalised), 
SDC(Three States have signed the contract, CSC (60837 CSCs  rolled out in 27 
States) and Capacity Building(Setting up of State e -Governance Mission 
Team(SeMT) in 22 States/UTs.) 
 
For ensuring timely action the following mechanism is in place 
 
a) DIT participating in State Level Monitoring Committees. 
 
b) Regular interaction and issuing of advisory notes to States for expediting the 
processes of implementation. 
 
c) Escalation of problem areas to Chief Secretaries of States.  
 
d) Deputing senior Officials of DIT for targeted monitoring. These officials have 
been assigned the special responsibility to monitor the progress and discuss the 
bottlenecks for arriving at actionable points to ensure timely completion. 
 
e) Regional level meetings/workshops are being conducted to monitor the physical 
and financial progress. 
 
 
 
 
Mission Mode Projects (MMP) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
 
 There are 27 Mission mode project s (MMPs), under National e -Governance Plan, 
spanning multiple backend Ministries/ Departments aimed at creating the right 
governance and institutional mechanisms, core infrastructure, polices & standards and 
the necessary legal framework for adoption of e -Governance. From the information 
furnished by the Department, the Committee note that only 6 MMPs are at post 
implementation stage. Remaining MMPs are at various stages of implementation.  Even 

 
the deadlines for the remaining MMPs are being further extende d.  As apprised to the 
Committee, the deadlines for 7 projects have further been extended.  Such projects in 
case of which deadlines have been extended are 3 integrated projects viz. CSC, e -courts, 
National e -Governance Service Delivery Gateway (NSDG); 3 C entral projects viz. 
Passport and Visa, Immigration and Central Excise and 1 State MMP viz. Police.   The 
Committee note that various Line Ministries and State Governments are involved in 
Central, State and integrated MMPs.  There is an urgent need to have  the effective 
coordination with the State Governments and Line Ministries. In this regard, the 
Department have written to various Inter-State Councils to have e-Governance as a part 
of agenda item for Chief Minister‟s Conference. The Department have furth er informed 
that the State Governments are taking efforts to include e -Governance as a part of 
agenda item for CM‟s conference. Besides, leadership meets orientation programmes are 
being organized for the training of State Governments, Ministers, legislato rs and policy 
makers under NeGP.  The Committee note that these are the steps in the right direction 
and need to be continued. The Committee would like to know about the details of the 
training programmes conducted so far as well as the outcome of the deli berations in the 
Chief Minister‟s conference so as to know the impact of the aforesaid mechanisms.  
  
Action Taken by the Government 
The details of the Training Programmes 
i) The programme for imparting specialized training, orientation program for SeMTs 
and policy and decision makers under the Capacity Building Scheme has been 
divided into two phases and both phases have been approved by the Empowered 
Committee for the CB Scheme. While the first phase focuses on the 
“Orientation/Training of SeMT and policy & decision makers”, the second phase is 
a “Specialized Training Program”.  
Phase I 
a. In this regard a calendar for orientation/training for policy & decision makers 
named as “e-Governance Leadership Meet” has been circulated to all States/UTs 
for opting slots according to their convenience. The “e -Governance Leadership 
Meet” has already been completed in the following states:  
i. Meghalaya  
ii. Sikkim 
iii. Manipur  
iv. Orissa  
v. Nagaland 
 
The following states have confirmed their schedules for the “e -Governance 
Leadership Meet” for the month of February 2010: 
i. Bihar  
ii. West Bengal 
Phase II 

 
b. The “Specialized Training Program” under Phase -II is a project level training 
program for Secretaries, Joint Secretaries, Directors, Joint Directors and other 
senior level officers at State HQ and  District level preferably from NeGP and 
State MMPs; as well as Project e -Mission Team (PeMT) members. The areas 
covered under this training program include Government Process Reengineering, 
Business Models and PPP, Project Management, Change Management, Regulatory 
& Legal framework for e -Governance, Knowledge Management, Documentation 
standards & skills, Security  Standards and Open Source Standards. National 
Institute for Smart Government (NISG) has been selected as the implementation 
agency for this trai ning programme and the necessary Administrative Approval 
has also been issued by DIT to all States/UTs. 
The outcome of the deliberations in the Chief Minister‟s conference  
Our request to Inter –State council for including e -Governance as a part of the age nda 
item for CM‟s conference is pending. Last meeting of the Inter – State council was held in 
December, 2006 only. However, DIT took the initiative and organized the first meeting at 
the national level of the State IT Ministers on 27 th October, 2009 at Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi.  The Conference focused on topical issues related to speeding -up delivery of e -
Services, Institutional framework for implementation e -governance projects at state 
level, and speeding up of e-infrastructure required for the delivery of e-Governance.  The 
Conference provided a unique platform to all stakeholders to discuss all issues pertaining 
to speeding up delivery of e-services to the common man. 
 
e-District 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
 
 The Committee note that e -District is one of the Central MMP.  The pilot e -district 
projects are being implemented in 37 districts in the country. As informed by the 
Department, the e -district scheme has not yet been  finalized because of delay in 
implementation of the pilot projects in 14 States.  The Committee are not satisfied with 
the status of implementation of pilot projects.  Out of the 14 States where pilot projects 
are being undertaken, 12 States have not furnished Utilisation Certificates for the first 
installment.  Only in the case of Utt ar Pradesh, the total approved Outlay has been 
released. However, UC of final installment is awaited. From the aforesaid analysis the 
Committee conclude that there are problems in implementation of the pilot projects. The 
Committee are unable to comprehend  as to how much time the Department would take 
to launch the programme formally which is dependent on the successful implementation 
of the pilot projects. The Committee fu rther note that e-district is an important MMP 
whose objective is to target certain h igh volume services delivered at the district level 
which are not covered by any other MMP and also to undertake backend computerisation 
of these services trough Common Service Centres.  As such all the initiatives should be 
taken so that the MMP is approved and implemented in full scale. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 

 
1. DIT is constantly monitoring the progress of the Pilot projects and there has been 
good progress since the status was last reported. Out of the 14 States where the 
eDistrict Pilot project i s being implemented, the project has now gone live/ been 
launched in 3 States – UP, Assam and Tamil Nadu. 
 
2. States have taken much more than the stipulated time in completing the tendering 
process to select the System Integrators whose main job is to develo p the 
application and integrate with hardware, digitized data and other facilities to 
deliver the electronic services under eDistrict. However, States like MP, Kerala and 
Bihar have developed the application and the eDistrict project in these States may 
be launched in next 3 months. Other States like Maharashtra, West Bengal, 
Mizoram, Orissa and Jharkhand have recently completed the process of selection 
of the System Integrator. Progress is slow in Haryana, Uttarakhand and Punjab 
and it is being pursued wit h these States at the highest level. DIT is also 
constantly following up with the States to submit the Utilization Certificates. 
 
3. DIT is already in the process of preparing national rollout scheme. In this context: 
a. Senior officers of DIT have visited eDistricts of UP, Assam and Tamil Nadu in 
January 2010 to assess the implementation of these pilot eDistricts. 
b. DIT has commissioned IIM Ahmadabad for baseline assessment of the 
services being provided at pilot eDistricts. 
c. Learnings from the Pilot projects are b eing included to finalize the strategy 
for the national roll -out of the e -District Project.  Such measures include 
interalia, preparation of common core application, empanelment of System 
Integrators, Standard Government Orders to enable electronic service s, 
ensure availability of NeGP infrastructure, and provide ready templates, 
guidelines and processes, amongst others. 
 
 
 
e-Bharat 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
 
 The Committee note that e -Bharat which is expected to contribute to improve 
Government effectiveness, increasing fiscal revenues and reducing public procurement 
cost etc. is in trouble. To support the programme, Government of India have been 
carrying out a dialogue with World Bank for possible programme management and 
financial support. Following G overnment of India‟s decision, not to establish a dedicated 
SPV (National e -Governance Agency) a requirement insisted by World Bank earlier, the 
Bank advocated a newer look to be adopted inter -alia suggesting termination of the 
preparation of “e-Bharat” Project.  With the reemphasis given by DIT to carry forward e -
Bharat project, discussions with the World Bank are currently under way to explore and 
agree on a revised frame work and modalities for the project to be operationalised.  
Keeping in view the sign ificant efforts including sizeable resources put in by DIT and 
other line Ministries and participating States for timely completion of project preparation 
activities, the Committee recommend that the issue should be pursued with World Bank 
so that the project is implemented with the financial support given by the World Bank.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 

 
 Government of India has been carrying out extensive dialogue with World Bank 
(“the Bank”) over the last few years, for possible programme management and financial 
support for NeGP.   
 Amongst other recommendations, the Bank had earlier been highlighting the need 
for establishment of a dedicated Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for programme 
management of NeGP/e-Bharat. However, since formation of NeGA was not approved by 
GoI, the Bank intimated its intention to revise the scope of the project including a much 
reduced project scope and financing level. 
 DIT however, made it clear to the Bank that capacities required for successful 
implementation of e -Bharat project already exist within DIT. Consistent with program 
management framework as had been mutually agreed to, DIT has already established an 
autonomous National e -Governance Division (NeGD) within Media Lab Asia (MLAsia), 
which is an existing organizatio n of DIT and a not -for-profit company established under 
section 25 of the Companies Act. This Division is headed by a President and CEO (at 
present, the Additional Secretary, DIT).  
 Following submissions from DIT, though no formal communication has been 
received from the Bank, it shared a draft revised project approach which it was 
contemplating to propose for e -Bharat. The revised proposal is likely to be based on 
programme-based” approach, which comes under the category of Development Policy 
Loan (DPL). 
 Meetings between DIT and World Bank have recently been held to discuss the 
proposed programmatic approach for NeGP including Development Policy Loan approach 
and instrument, its main components and requirements, main processing steps involved 
and the way forward. 
Monitoring of MMPs 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department are in the process of implementing a 
Project Amendment Information System (PMIS) to monitor all components of MMPs.  The 
likely date of operationalisation of first phase  according to the Department may be July, 
2010. The Committee strongly recommend that the Project Amendment Information 
System (PMIS) should be expeditiously set up for the effective implementation of e -
governance project.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 

 
 The Project Management Information System (PMIS) would serve as central 
repository for the status, key milestones and achievements as well as documents for all 
targeted MMPs during all stages of the MMP viz. conceptualization, design and 
development, implementation and post-implementation. The PMIS would be web-enabled 
to ensure anywhere -anytime access and would generate State -specific, District -wise, 
Tehsil-wise, Inter-state and all India-basis MIS views/ reports. 
 
Unique Identification Number (UID) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that the project Unique Identification Number (UID) for BPL 
families was sanctioned on 3 March, 2006, at a total estimated Outlay of Rs. 46.70 crore 
to be implemented by NIC through NICSI.  UID h as now been set up under Planning 
Commission under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani and further approach and 
implementation of UID will be worked out by UIDAI. The Committee understand that the 
Department will provide all necessary support to UIDAI  as it is one of the MMP.  The 
Committee expect a synergistic cooperation between the Department and the UIDAI 
under Planning Commission, for the successful implementation of the UID project. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 UID being one of the MMPs, DIT continues to extend all necessary support to 
UIDAI for the successful implementation of the UID project. 
 DIT has set up an institutional mechanism for evolving Standards for e -
Governance.  The Apex Body for standards under the Chairmanship of Secretary DI T has 
the mandate to approve and notify the draft recommendations of the Expert 
Committees/Working Groups setup to evolve standards in different areas. 
 In respect of Demographic data structure, the Apex Body has already 
approved the Metadata and Data Stan dards for Person Identification and Land 
Codification.  DIT is in the process of notifying the same.  With respect to Biometric 
standards, the Expert Committee has prepared the draft standards.  These are to be 
further deliberated and circulated for public review. 
 The UIDAI was urged to leverage the considerable work done by DIT in 
evolving Standards in Biometric and Demographic data.  In fact, the sub -committee for 
the Demographic Data Standards for UIDAI is chaired by AS(E -Gov),DIT.  The sub -
committee has given its report which adopts the GoI metadata and Data Standards. 
 
 
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
 

 
 State Wide Area Network (SWAN) is one of the three core infrastructure 
components of NeGP.  Under the scheme it is envisaged to provide technical and financial 
assistance to States for establishing SWANs from State Headquarters upto the Block level 
with a minimum bandwidth capacity of 2 Mbps.  Even when the proposals from all the 
States have already been approved and total O utlay of Rs. 1964.97 crore has been 
sanctioned, the deadlines for implementation of SWAN in various States are continuously 
being extended.  During the examination of Demands for Grants of 2007 -08, the 
Committee was assured that by March, 2008, SWAN would be in place either partly or 
fully in at least 15 States/UTs.  However, as informed during the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants of previous year, the SWAN could be implemented in four States 
only (refer Recommendation No. 9 of 58 th report).  There is little progress in this regard 
as reported during the course of examination of Demands of the current year. As of June, 
2009, only 7 States/UTs have completed the SWAN implementation.  Now the Committee 
have been apprised that SWANs are expected to b e operationalised by June, 2010.  With 
the status of implementation as given above, the Committee have still doubts about the 
operationalisation of SWANs by June, 2010.  The Committee again express unhappiness 
over the deferring of the deadlines again and again by the Department.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that all the shortcomings being experienced in the implementation 
of SWAN should be addressed on a priority basis particularly when delivery of services 
and transmission of information under some o f the MMPs would also be affected due to 
the non-availability of connectivity with the delay in implementation of SWAN.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The SWAN projects are being implemented at the State/UT level under supervision 
of the State/UT Leve l Implementation Committee.  Department of IT, as a Member in 
these Committees, regularly attend the meetings and pursue for meeting the deadlines, 
as indicated by the respective State/UT Implementing Agency.  
 
 With the above -mentioned monitoring mechanis m, the major hurdles like site 
availability & preparation, connectivity issues and power problems would overcome. 
 
 Taking into consideration the status of progress of implementation in some of the 
States/UTs, the date of complete roll out for SWAN has now been revised to August 2010 
and periodical reporting to the Cabinet Secretariat/PMO has been so revised. 
 
 The SWANs in 17 States/UTs Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Tamilnadu, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Chandigar h, Delhi, 
Puducherry, Tripura,  Lakshadweep, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh  have been rolled out. 
SWANs in other States/UTs are in various stages of implementation. Implementation of 

 
SWANs at 4 States/UTs is in advance stage, while implementation in 6 States is i n 
progress. In 4 other States, the bid process has been initiated. RFP/BOM are under 
review and finalization for 2 UTs. 
 
State Data Centres (SDCs) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13&14) 
 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of State Data Centres has been identifi ed as 
one of the important elements of the core infrastructure for supporting e -Governance 
initiative of NeGP. Pursuant to that, it was proposed to create data repositories/data 
centres in various States/UTs so that a common secured data storage could be 
maintained to serve a horde of e-Governance applications. The Scheme was approved by 
the Government in January, 2008 at an Outlay of Rs. 1623.20 crore.  The Committee 
note that it has been mentioned in the Outcome Budget that the timeframe to 
operationalise the Data Centre which was March,2008 has now been extended to March, 
2009.   In the written note furnished by the Department, the targeted dates are - 3 
States by March 2010, 5 States by April -June 2010 7 States by July -September, 2010 
and 7 States by Jan uary-March, 2011.  The Committee find that there are contradictions 
in the time frame with regard to operationalisation of SDC as mentioned in the Outcome 
Budget and in a written note.  While expressing unhappiness over the way the 
information has been ind icated in the Outcome Budget, the Committee would like the 
clarification of the Department in this regard.  
 
 The Committee further note that till date not even a single Data Centre could be 
operationalised.  With the status of the things moving on, the Co mmittee have their own 
doubts about the operationalisation of State Data Centres in all the States/UT‟s even by 
2011.  In light of the significance of SDCs in supporting e -governance plan, the 
Committee strongly recommend that all the bottlenecks being faced in implementation of 
Data Centres should be addressed so that these Centres are set up expeditiously.  
 
Action Taken by the Government (13&14) 
 
 DIT agrees with the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee regarding 
delay in implementation of the SDCs. 
 The factors for delay in implementation of the SDC are directly related to the 
States. These are finalisation of the RFP, longer time taken for bid process management 
and placement of orders on the successful bidder by the States. Other connected issu es 

 
are availability of suitable site for the SDC and raw power supply provisioning which need 
to be ensured by the State. 
 Considering the urgency and importance of the SDC, the States have been now 
advised to expedite various activities and placement of o rders on the successful bidder 
ensuring timely implementation of the SDC. The  programme is being monitored 
closely with the States. Further, Project Implementation Committee has been constituted 
by each State/UT to monitor the progress and implementation of the Project.  
 DIT would like to inform that the SDC program has since progressed considerably. 
RFPs of 19 States viz. Orissa, Tripura, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Nagaland, West Bengal, 
Puducherry, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Haryana, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Kerala,  A ndhra 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, Andaman & Nicobar Island, Tamil Nadu  and Karnataka,  
have been approved by the DIT. Eleven States have completed the bid evaluation, out of 
which 3 States (Orissa, Tripura and Gujarat) have issued the award of contra ct to the 
selected bidder, 3 States (Maharashtra, Nagaland and West Bengal) have issued the LoI 
to the selected bidder and 5 States (Puducherry, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Haryana and 
Rajasthan) are in the process of issuing LoI to the selected bidder. Bid process  is in 
progress in 4 States (Jharkhand, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh).  
 DIT would like to reiterate and assure the Standing Committee that considering 
the progress made, about 12-15 Data Centre shall get operationalised by December 2010 
and the remaining shall get operationalised progressively during the year 2011. These 
projections are on realistic assessment and every effort shall be made by the DIT and 
followed up with the States to ensure that these timelines are met and adhered to. 
 
 
Common Service Centre (CSC) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government approved a scheme in September 2006 
for facilitating establishment of 1,00,000 broadband internet enabled Common Service 
Centre in the rural areas with the objective of delivering Government and private services 
at the doorstep of the citizen.  The scheme was approved at a total cost of Rs. 5742 crore 
and was to be implemented on a PPP mode.  The Committee note that till date around 
55,000 Common Service Centres co uld be set up in various States.  In the case of 
Common Service Centres also, the deadline is being extended again and again.  During 
the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous year, the Committee 
were apprised that the scheduled date of completion was extended from 2008 to March 
2009.  Now the Department has informed that the deadline has again been extended to 
June, 2010.  The Committee are unhappy to note the aforesaid state of affairs with 

 
regard to implementation of one of the basi c components of NeGP i.e. Common Service 
Centre which intend to provide Government services to citizens in rural areas at their 
doorstep.  The various problems identified in this regard includes non -availability of 
broadband connection, non -release/delayed payment of revenue support by the States 
etc. The Committee feel that with regard to the issue of connectivity, the Department 
should coordinate with the sister Department i.e. Department of Telecom and BSNL. 
Besides the problems faced by the various Stat e Governments need to be addressed in 
State specific manner.  Proper consultations should be done and the desired action taken. 
The Committee should be kept apprised about the follow up action in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 There has bee n slow down in the rate of rollout of CSCs across all the States 
primarily due to over all slowing down of the economy, financial crunch, non -availability 
of variety of G2C services, power and connectivity problems in the rural areas. 
 However with a view to expedite rollout of CSCs and address various problems, 
DIT is holding regular meetings with BSNL for provision of Broad Band connectivity for 
the CSCs, also weekly meeting is held with the SCAs at DIT reviewing status on rollout 
and installation of Online Monitoring Tool. In addition to this, Senior Officers of the level 
of Director and above have been assigned specific States for Targeted Monitoring of 
progress of CSCs in the States.  
 Wherever information is received from any of the SCAs regarding delay in payment 
of revenue support, the concerned State Government is requested to handle such issues 
of revenue support payment on priority so that SCAs do not suffer any liquidity problem. 
Besides DIT has also issued a policy letter procedurally simplifying  release of revenue 
support.  
 In addition to above, DIT has also been holding discussion with the some the 
nationalized banks like State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank and United Bank of 
India etc to make available loans to the VLEs and also support business correspondence 
model for VLEs for financial inclusion penetration in rural areas. 
 
e-Governance Societies 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that guidelines have been issued to all the State 
Governments to constitute district e -governance societies in all the districts under 
Chairmanship of Collector for coordinating and implementing the scheme.  When asked 
the information about the status of constitution of these societies, the Department in the 
replies furnished in November, 2009 has stated that a reminder has been issued to all 
State IT Secretaries on 21 October, 2009 to furnish the information about the setting up 

 
of these societies in the respective States.  The Committee note that the Department felt 
the need of getting the sta tus of setting up of these societies only when the issue was 
raised through a question during the course of examination of Demands for Grants. This 
clearly states the insensitive attitude of the Department towards such an important issue.  
The Committee feel that besides setting up various coordinating mechanisms, it is desired 
that these mechanisms actually work.  For this, the Department has to pursue with the 
State Governments.  The Committee strongly recommend that the information about the 
e-governance societies should at least now be procured from the States. Besides in case 
of the States where these societies could not be set up, it should be emphasized to set up 
the same expeditiously. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 In response to DIT letter to all the States to form district e-governance societies in 
all the districts, in all about 11 States have set up the societies. These States are: Assam, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Prad esh and Maharashtra. The remaining States are being 
requested to assign importance to this aspect and set up  e-governance societies 
expeditiously. 
 
Locating CSCs in the Panchayat premises  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee are of the firm view that proper coordination with Gram 
Panchayats would certainly help in establishing CSCs in the rural areas.  In this regard, 
suitable guidelines should be issued to the State Government to proper tie up with local 
bodies so as to facilitate speeding up roll out of the remaining CSCs. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 All the state Governments have been requested to locate CSCs in the Panchayat 
premises as far as possible as this will enhance credibility and sustainability of CSCs. All 
the Collectors in the states/UTs have been requested to hold regular meetings with 
stakeholders of the scheme, identify more and more G2C services to be delivered through 
CSCs, advise SCAs in VLE selection and also proper location, resolve local issues in the 
implementation of scheme, organize seminars, awareness and sensitization programmes 
at the district level so as to evoke positive response that will  facilitate speedy rollout and 
also utilisation of CSCs for various services to benefit rural masses. 
 Besides e-Governance societies with collector as chairman and district Panchayat 
raj officer as one of the members of the societies will facilitate effective coordination in 

 
implementing various Bharat Nirman Programmes/ Flagship Schemes through 
integration/utilization of CSCs. 
 
Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee find that the Outlay provided to STQC during the year 2009 -10 
is Rs. 71 crore against the proposed allocation of Rs. 94 crore. The Committee note 
that the budgetary allocation below the proposed level may affect the expansion of 
test and calibration facility as per industry requirement; Procurement of software 
tools for mission critical projects like Defence/space; maintenance of existing 
equipment & software tools; Skill up gradation of technical manpower and Obtaining 
international accreditation for IT test laboratories. The Committee note that STQC is 
a major infrastructure of national importance in the field of quality assurance.  
Currently STQC servi ces are being utilized by more than 10000 organisations 
representing the entire segment of industry, Government departments, R&D 
organisations etc. Not only that, during the year 2009 -10, STQC is expected to 
generate Rs. 44 crore by providing services to t he industry.  In view of the 
importance of STQC, the Committee strongly recommend that adequate Outlay 
should be provided to facilitate STQC in setting up the desired infrastructure.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 STQC had projected fund requirement of Rs.94 crore during the year 2009-10. 
The budget allocated was Rs.71 crore, higher than that of 2008 -09 (Rs.65 crore) 
since the overall budget allocation of DIT itself for such activities/discipline was more 
or less same as that of the previous year. Consi dering that STQC is a major 
infrastructure of national importance in the field of quality assurance and calibration, 
more funds have been earmarked towards upgradation of infrastructure and skill 
development in STQC.  
 
CYBER SECURITY 
 
(i) Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee note that the problems/ incidents related to Cyber Crime are 
reported to CERT -In by various organisations in Government/Public Sector Banks, 
financial institutions and private sector/organisations.  In this, regard, the Committee 

 
learned that upto September, 2009 the     CERT -In has tracked 4121 web 
defacement, 1724 open proxy servers, 3335096 Bot infected system, has issued one 
white paper, 115 vulnerability notes, 45 advisories, 20 se curity alerts/incident notes, 
and received 5864 e -mail messages and handled 6589 incidents. Noting the 
complexities of growing use of information technology the Committee feel that there 
is an urgent need to chalk out a multi pronged strategy to tackle myr iad forms of 
Cyber Crime. The steps taken in this regard should  be communicated to the 
Committee. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Steps taken by CERT-In to effectively tackle cyber crimes are: 
 Amendment of the Indian IT Act 2000 to create a conducive lega l environment 
and enhance law enforcement capabilities that can enable responsible action 
by the stake holders and effective prosecution. 
 Developed a comprehensive crisis management plan for countering cyber 
attacks and cyber terrorism. The plan has been approved by the National Crisis 
Management Committee and is being implemented across key Central 
Government critical sector Ministries/Departments and all States/UTs. 
 Carrying out regular cyber security drills as part of crisis management plan to 
counter cy ber attacks and cyber terrorism with an objective to assess the 
ability and preparedness of organizations in Government and critical sectors to 
secure their IT networks & systems and resist cyber attacks. 
 Development of appropriate procedure/best practices /manuals for acquiring, 
analyzing, preparing and presenting electronic digital evidence during 
investigation of cyber crimes. 
 Focused training, awareness and education programmes are being conducted 
to Government and critical sector organizations, especial ly the affected 
organizations. 
 Security alerts and advisories are being issued on a regular basis to support 
preventive actions at the user end. 
 Information security management best practices as per international standard 
are being promoted for compliance within Government and critical sectors. 
 Proactive scanning of approximately 150 sensitive websites for detecting 
malware infection and malicious links. 
 Search engines of Google and Microsoft help CERT -In on daily basis with 
information on malicious links on the web for effective preventive actions. 
 International cooperation with overseas CERTs to deal with spam and phishing 
activities. 
 Cooperation with security vendors to deal with malware and BOT detection and 
mitigation actions. 
  

 
(ii)  Information Technology Act, 2000 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee note that DIT as well as the presiding officers of CRAT have 
taken intensive awareness drive to disseminate information about the provisions of IT 
Act, 2000. Workshops are being conducted in vari ous parts of the country together 
with all Industry Associations and Computer Society of India.  These workshops also 
provide information about the process of filing applications/petitions/appeals different 
provisions of the Act with the Police, Adjudicating Officer and appeal before the CRAT. 
Besides, many of the States have set up a Cyber Crime Cell for registering and 
investigating the cases under the IT Act, 2000.  Indian Computer Emergency 
Response Team (CERT-In) is also assisting the Central Bureau of  Investigation to set 
up a state -of-the-art lab fully equipped with the tools to train the senior officers in 
the area of cyber forensic.  The regular training programmes are also being organized 
at the National Police Academy to train Police officials in the area of cyber/digital 
forensic.   CERT-In is also conducting regular workshops to train senior police officials 
and judicial officers in the use of computer and cyber forensics. The Committee note 
that these are the steps in the right direction and nee d to be intensified with the 
proper coordination of the State Governments.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 To intensify efforts in conducting training/workshops in computer and cyber 
forensics and also to cover large number of police officials and judicial officers, CERT-
In has taken the following steps: 
 Communication channels are being established with the judicial academics and 
police chiefs in all the States and Union Territories. 
 Plans are being drawn up to organize in -house training workshops for po lice 
officials and judicial officers in each State or a cluster of States. 
 Plans are being drawn up to create master trainers in most of the States and 
Union Territories to enable them to train large number of police officials and 
judicial officers. 
 
 DIT has established Cyber Forensic Labs for CBI and Kerala Police equipped 
with a large number of Cyber Forensics tools to facilitate investigation of cyber crimes 
effectively. 
Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Development Programme 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 24) 

 
 
 The Committee find that the global Market for Nanotechnology is expected to 
be US$ 1 trillion by the year 2015. The Governments in other countries have been 
heavily funding R&D in this area for quite some time and the increasing trend in 
investment is expected to continue. The Department of Information Technology have 
allocated Rs. 250 crore  for entire Eleventh Five Year Plan under this Scheme. 
However, the Committee are seriously concerned to observe that  for last three years 
the Department were not  able to utilize even the allocated amount. The Committee 
were made to understand that the target could not be fully achieved due to paucity of 
fund. Considering the visionary impact of Micro & Nanotechnology programme, the 
Committee strongly feel that the  fund sought by the Department should be allocated 
by the Planning Commission, for the year 2009 -10, to fund R&D in this area in a 
larger way. While recommending for higher Outlay, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that it should be ensured that allocations are meaningfully utilized.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Department has made provision for additional grant of Rs. 44.50 crore for 
Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Development Programme at the RE stage 
during the financial year (2009 -2010). This grant would be utilized meaningfully for 
initiating R&D projects already recommended by the Working Group on 
Nanotechnology consisting of subject experts. 
 
Technology Development of Indian Language 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee note that the allocation provided under the programme during 
each year of Eleventh Plan is far lesser than the proposed allocation.  During the year 
2009-10, Rs. 8.89 crore were allocated against the proposed Outlay of Rs. 18 crore.  
The Committee note that th e objective of TDIL is to develop information processing 
tools to facilitate human machine interaction in Indian languages and to create an 
access to multilingual knowledge resources/content as well as to promote 
collaborative development of futuristic tec hnologies leading to  innovative products 
and services. Keeping in view the fact that India is a multilingual country, there is an 
urgent need to provide the adequate allocation for the programme so that the 
benefits of technology reach to the last person of the society.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 

 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. The allocations for TDIL 
has been enhanced by Rs. 3 crores  from Rs.7.89 crore to Rs.10.89 in RE 2009 -10. A 
sum of Rs.35.00 crore has also been earmarked for TDIL in BE 2010-11. 
 
Media Lab Asia  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 27) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government have set up Media Lab Asia, a not -
for profit organisation, to bring the benefits of the Information and Communication 
Technologies in the field of health care, education, livelihood generation, 
empowerment of the disabled and providing rural connectivity, to the common man.  
The Committee note that as per the directives of the Cabinet, given at the time of 
restructuring of MLA in May 2003, the Eleventh Plan funding was to be decided based 
on the recommendations of the Empowered Steering Committee constituted by the 
Cabinet.  As informed by the Department, the approved Outlay for the Eleventh Plan 
is Rs. 300 crore.  The Committee are concerned to no te that during the first three 
years of Eleventh Plan only the nominal allocation could be made to MLA due to 
pending clearance by the Empowered Steering Committee.  Almost two and a half 
year of the plan period was lost in getting clearance from the empowered steering 
Committee.  The Committee are unhappy to note the aforesaid situation.  Now when 
the clearances are in place, only Rs. 67 crore is allocated for the remaining period of 
Eleventh Plan, which is not proportionate to overall approved Outlay of Eleventh Plan.  
The Committee strongly recommend that at least now adequate allocation should be 
made for the remaining period of the Eleventh Plan and efforts should be made for 
the effective utilisation of the allocated Outlay. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The allocations for Media Lab Asia (MLA) for the remaining period of the XI 
Plan are being done as per the recommendations of the Steering Committee. MLA has 
identified specific areas, as per the directions of its Technology Advisory Board, to 
effectively utilize the grants being allocated. A total budget outlay of Rs.30.00 crore 
has been earmarked in BE 2010-11 for MLA which includes IEBR of Rs.20.00 crore. 
 
Human Resource Development 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 28) 
 

 
 The Committee are concerned to n ote that for such an important sector i.e. 
Human Resource Development, the Outlay provided during first three years of 
Eleventh Plan are far lesser than the proposed allocation. During the year 2007 -08, 
BE was Rs. 43 crore which was increased to Rs. 50.15 crore at RE stage and the 
Outlay was almost fully utilized. During the year 2008-09 the Outlay was Rs. 45 crore 
which was 74 crore lesser than the proposed amount. The Outlay allocated for 2008 -
09 was also almost fully utilized. During the year 2009 -10 Rs. 45 crore have again 
been provided. The Committee note that there is an urgent need to pay more 
attention for training of manpower to ensure availability of trained resources for 
manufacturing and service sectors of electronics and IT industry. The Committ ee 
strongly recommend that more emphasis should be given for this sector and the 
Outlay should commensurate with the proposed allocations for Eleventh Plan under 
this sector.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been not ed. An additional allocation 
of Rs.22 crore has been made in RE 2009 -10 enhancing the budget provision from 
Rs.45 crore to Rs.67 crore. Also, a sum of Rs.113 crore has been earmarked in BE 
2010-11 under Manpower Development Programme. 
 
 
National Informatics Centre 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee find that the allocation provided during each year of Eleventh 
Plan to NIC is lesser than the proposed allocation.  The difference between the 
proposed and allocated Outlay is increasing year after yea r.  During the year 2008 -
09, Rs. 400 crore are provided against the proposed allocation of Rs. 560 crore. An 
additional fund of Rs. 64.08 crore was provided at RE stage.  However, since the 
allocation was under the salary Budget, on account of revised pay and 40 per cent 
arrears as per the recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission, the RE 2008 -09 
remained at the level of BE 2008-09.  The Committee are concerned to note that the 
activities of NIC have been hampered and had to be carried out at the reduced leve l.  
The Committee note that the National Informatics Centre ( NIC) is the only 
organisation in the country to provide total informatics support to the Central 
Ministries & Departments, State Governments, District Administrations and other 
Government bodies.  NIC in the pursuit of its objectives is playing a pivotal role in the 
major e -Governance initiatives at all levels of Governance and providing various 

 
network services (WAN, MAN, LAN), Data Centres, capacity building etc. In view of 
the importance of the mandate given to NIC and the wide spectrum of activities it has 
been carrying out, the Committee emphasize that adequate allocation should be 
provided to NIC.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
  The observations of the Committee have been noted. A sum of  Rs.700       
crore has been earmarked for NIC in BE 2010 -11 against Rs.550 crore for the year 
2009-10. 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Digital DNA Park 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note that Digital DNA Parks were to be set up to promote BIO IT 
activities in the Country, generate professional manpower and R&D development in Bio-IT 
area. In this regard, initially Karnataka and Tamil Nadu prop osed to set up Digital DNA 
Park. However, the projects could not be carried out due to non -availability of land. To 
address the problem of land acquisition the Ministry has now decided to go in for the 
smaller clusters of Bio IT centres instead of setting up of Bio IT Park involving large area 
of land. During the current Fiscal, one Bio IT Centre at Bengaluru is expected to be 
initiated by March, 2010. In this regard, the Committee would like to be clarified whether 
the Bio IT Centres now proposed would achieve the objectives of the Digital DNA Park, so 
as to enable the Committee to analyse the position and comment further in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The proposed Bio-IT Centre would help initiate the cutting edge technologies in the 
area of Biological Sciences.  This will spur the setting up of more such Bio -IT Centres 
thereby leading to the objective of Digital DNA Park.  

 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPETED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Pendency of Utilisation Certificates and Unspent Balance 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
 As stated in Para No.1 the data indicates that the overall utilisation position during 
the first two years of the Elevent h Plan for the Plan Schemes is overall satisfactory.   
However, a disturbing trend noticed by the Committee is that there are huge unspent 
balances with the implementing agencies.   The cumulative unspent balance as on 31 
March, 2009 with all grantee/loanee bodies which received more than Rs. one lakh is for 
Rs. 983.92 crore.   Inspite of  the efforts made by the Department to get the Utilisation 
Certificates from the implementing agencies, as on 3 November, 2009, out of the total 
sanctioned amount of Rs. 1211.8 crore, Utilisation Certificates were received in respect of 
only 253.4 crore.   623 Utilisation Certificates amounting to Rs. 958.3 crore are still 
pending with the implementing agencies.   The detailed examination has further revealed 
that out of 203 imp lementing agencies to whom the Outlay was released, against as 
many as 113 agencies, the Utilisation Certificates for the amount received has been 
indicated as nil.   The Department have acknowledged the fact that there may be cases 
where one time grant is released.  The further installment cannot be released as these 
agencies could not utilize the first installment effectively and stopped demanding the 
further installments.   All this clearly shows that there are serious problems in the 
implementation of the  various planned programmes/schemes.   The release of Outlay is 
considered as the utlilisation from the Department side.  All this emphasises the need for 
review of different schemes.   The Committee deplore the way the schemes are being 
implemented.  There is an urgent need to probe the schemes and identify the 
weaknesses.  The Department should analyse each scheme/programme and take the 
desired corrective actions.  The Committee should be kept apprised in this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Projects/schemes funded by the Department of Information Technology are first 
considered in terms of relevance by the specific Working Group and after its 
recommendation, the same is considered for sanction as per the guidelines for plan 
schemes. 
 

 
 To ensure tha t the programmes are implemented in the right earnest, a Project 
Review & Steering Group (PRSG) is constituted for each of the project so that  the project 
is enabled to achieve its objectives well in time. This mechanism is working well and is 
effective and will continue. The Programme Divisions have been advised to hold PRSG 
meetings more frequently so as to closely monitor the progress of the project. 
 
 As regards unspent balances with the grantee institutions, it is stated that 
subsequent release of funds to grantee institutions are made only after submission of the 
Utilisation Certificate (UC) for the earlier grant and after adjusting the unspent balance 
shown in the UC. Further, the recommendation of the PRSG for release of next 
installment of Grants-in-aid is also insisted upon, so as to ensure that releases are linked 
with the progress made in the project. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter -1) 
 
 
Eleventh Five Year Plan  
 
 (Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
 The total budgetary al location for the Eleventh Plan is for Rs. 12496 crore.   The 
actual utilisation during the first two years of the Plan is Rs. 2768.71 crore.  The BE for 
the third year i.e. 2009 -10 is for Rs. 2530 crore.   Thus, the allocations during the first 
three years a re for Rs. 5298.71 crore which are even lesser than half of the approved 
Outlay of the Eleventh Plan.   The Committee have further been apprised that for the 
remaining two years of the Plan, the Department have projected requirement of Rs. 
12598.70 crore.  The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that the projections made by the 
Department are either not realistic or the Department are facing serious problems in the 
implementation of the different programmes.  The Committee also find that the Eleventh 
Plan has laid significant emphasis on the Information Technology sector.   The Committee 
feel that with the induction of technology, delivery of different programmes/schemes for 
which crores of Rupees are being allocated annually can be improved and benefits 
envisaged under these programmes/schemes can reach to the targeted beneficiaries.   
While recommending for higher Outlay for the information sector, the Committee urge 
that the Department should pay adequate emphasis on the implementation of the 
programmes.  Since the programmes/schemes are being implemented by the line 
Ministries/Departments and various State Governments, there is an urgent need to play a 
proactive role by the Department.   Besides, the monitoring mechanism under the 

 
different programmes/schemes should be further strengthened.   The Department should 
take the desired actions on the suggested lines and inform the Committee accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Department has put in place a mechanism to ensure that the projects are 
implemented with focus by constituting Project Review & Steering Group (PRSG) for each 
project with focus by constituting PRSG for each project with experts from Industry, 
Academia, etc. The PRSG monitor the progress made the project, utilization of funds and 
also recommends subsequent release of funds. This mechanism is effective and will 
continue. The PRSGs have been strengthened by suggesting more frequent meetings so 
that outcomes are achieved.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter -1) 
 
 
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 The Committee in their earlier report were distressed to find that the deadline for 
one of the important project „Compact Antenna Test Range Fac ility‟ of the SAMEER under 
DIT, which was supposed to be set up by June, 2009, had been delayed by six months 
due to delay in procurement of special antenna and associated accessories from an 
agency abroad. The total project cost is Rs. 18.02 crore with DI T support of Rs.12.97 
crore and SAMEER contributions of Rs. 5.05 crore. The Committee wanted the 
Department to take extra caution so that such delays did not repeat. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance in future. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter -1) 
 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
 The Committee in their earlier report had observed that Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing (C -DAC) is the premier R&D organisation of the Department for 
carrying out research and development in IT, Electronics and associated areas.  Total 
allocation for the entire Plan period for C -DAC is Rs. 900 crore. From the data made 
available by the Department, the Committee also noted that the allocated Outlay was not 

 
even half of the proposed allocation, though the utilisation was more than 100 per cent. 
During the first three years of the Eleventh Plan the allocations are just for Rs. 291 crore  
which is almost one third of the total entire plan allocations. The Committee 
recommended that all the possible budgetary support should be provided to C -DAC so as 
to enable the Society to achieve excellence in various R&D initiatives in information 
technology. The Committee in their earlier Reports have consistently drawing the 
attention of Department towards the attrition of manpower in C -DAC. In this regard, the 
Committee had been apprised that the attrition rate in C -DAC in the last year was 
significantly lower with the implementation of the recommendations of the Sixth Pay 
Commission. While appreciating the position, the Committee recommended for a need to 
be observe the trend carefully in the coming years. The Committee also noted that the 
issue of pe rformance incentive is being taken by the Department with the Ministry of 
Finance. Hence, the Committee expressed a need for the issue to be pursued further and 
implemented and desired that the Committee should be kept apprised of the 
development in this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Department has 
been providing all possible support to C -DAC. The allocations for C -DAC has been 
enhanced from Rs.119 crore in BE 2009 -10 to Rs.131 crore in RE 200 9-10. A sum of 
Rs.183 crore has been earmarked for C-DAC in BE 2010-11.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter -1) 

 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note with concern that the Indian hardware production constitutes 
only around 1.4 per cent of global electronic production  The estimated growth rate 
projected for the year 200 9-10 is 0.1 per cent lesser than the previous year which was 
12.1 per cent. It has been mentioned in the Budget documents that Government of India 
has identified growth of electronics hardware manufacturing sector as a thrust area. 
Though Rs. 1,100 crore i s the proposed allocation for promotion of electronics IT 
hardware manufacturing for the Eleventh Plan, only Rs. 2.30 crore have been provided 
for this sector during the year 2009 -10. During the year 2008 -09 the Budgetary 
allocation was only for Rs. 0.80 c rore against the proposed allocation of Rs. 2 crore and 
only Rs. 21.25 percent of the allocated Outlay (i.e. Rs. 0.17 Crore) could be utilized. The 
Committee note that the aforesaid allocation was made particularly for meeting the 
requirement under Special  Incentive Package Scheme (SIPS). Under this Scheme the 
applicants need to approach DIT for disbursement after meeting the prescribed 
conditions. Whereas, the Department has acclaimed that SIPS is one big programme 
which has brought in the special incentiv e package scheme for the semi-conductor which 
is wafer-fab and eco -system units which are the heart of the electronic sector, the fact 
that no applicant has so far approached DIT for reimbursement calls for review of entire 
Programme. The Committee are further surprised to note that even when allocation of Rs. 
1100 crore during Eleventh Plan has remained under -utilized substantially out of the 
proposed allocation, the Department‟s statement that the activities related to enhanced 
R&D project works, augmentation of Registry technical resources and seeding of the new 
national IPR Institute for Semiconductor layout Designs (NISLD) are affected due to non -
sufficient fund allocations and have to be deferred  is not understandable. The Committee 
conclude from the aforesaid that sufficient attention is not being paid to one of the 
identified priority sector i.e. Hardware manufacturing sector. While noting that the 
hardware industry has a tremendous potential in terms of revenue and employment 
generation, the Committ ee strongly recommend that the Department should pay more 
attention to the hardware sector and take concrete action. The Committee should also be 
kept apprised about the initiatives taken in this regard. 
 

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The estimated grow th rate projected for the year 2009 -10 is 0.1 per cent lesser 
than the previous year, on account of global economic recession. It may be noted that 
five applicants in the area of Solar Photovoltaics have intimated partial financial closure 
more than Rs.100 0 crore, only in December 2009. Further, it is anticipated that some 
applicants could approach DIT for disbursement of incentives after fulfilling necessary 
conditions of threshold investment in the remaining two years of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan. In vi ew of the above, the provision of Rs.1100 crore has been retained under the 
head of “Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing” during the 11 th Plan 
period. In view of the various challenges faced by the Indian electronics hardware 
manufacturing industry and further in the backdrop the global economic crisis, a Task 
Force was set up by the Department of Information Technology vide Office Order dated 
11th August, 2009. The mandate given to the Task Force is to make recommendations 
on: 
i. Strategies to augment the growth of the IT software and IT enabled services 
sector in the context of global developments. 
ii Steps needed to accelerate domestic demand for (i) Electronics hardware products 
and (ii) IT & IT enabled services. 
iii. Steps needed to boost domestic manufacturing in Electronics hardware sector. 
 
 In order to ensure wide ranging consultations with industry including industry 
associations and the experts in this area as well as to ensure unfettered view it was 
decided that the Task Force will be purely from the industry and headed by a renowned 
industry leader. Accordingly, the Task Force was constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Shri Ajai Chowdhry, Chairman & CEO, HCL Infosystems Ltd., with Dr. Kiran Karnik, as Co-
chairman. 
 The Task Force hel d wide-ranging consultations across all sectors of the industry 
covering the entire ecosystem. Department of Information Technology also wrote to 
various industry associations to provide their views and inputs to the Task Force, so as to 
ensure that the problems of the industry are addressed in a comprehensive manner. The 
Task Force submitted its report to the Department of Information Technology on 
December 11, 2009. The Task Force report is in three parts (i) Software and Services 
Sector, (ii) Electronic Systems, Design and Manufacturing Ecosystem and (iii) Strategic 
Electronics. The report is available on the website of DIT (http://www.mit.gov.in). The 
recommendations contained in the report are currently under examination in the 
Department. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter -1) 

 
 
 
National Informatics Centre 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 30) 
 
 
 The Committee further note that NIC has proposed to Planning Commission that 
the Budget for salaries in respect of employees/post existing as on 31.3.2007 and 
contingency expenditure should be provided under non-Plan budget and the development 
expenditure should be put under Plan budget. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
Ministry of Finance has not agreed to the proposal of NIC. The Comm ittee find that the 
proposal made by NIC merits consideration and need to be implemented expeditiously.  
The allocations under Plan and Non -Plan head as desired by NIC would certainly help to 
analyze the increasing/decreasing trends of Outlay under the Pla n/Non-Plan schemes 
clearly.  The concerns of the Committee in this regard should be placed before the 
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The concerns of the Committee will be placed before the Ministry of Finance at R E 
stage when the RE (Plan & Non -Plan) for 2010 -11 and BE (Non -Plan) for 2011 -12 is 
finalized. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter -1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 

 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRD REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No.5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  1,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, 
16,17,18,20,21,24,26,27,28 & 29 
 
 Total 23 
 Percentage 76.17 
   
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Paragraph No:-  19  
 Total 1 
 Percentage 3.33 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  2,3 ,23 & 25  
 Total 4 
 Percentage 13.33 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim nature:- 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  22 & 30  
 Total 2 
 Percentage 6.67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Confidential  
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-10) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4th May, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1615 hours in Committee Room „62‟, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
P R E S E N T 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Shri Charles Dias 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
8. Shri Abdul Rahman 
9. Shri Prem Das Rai 
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
11. Dr. Bhola Singh 
12. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya  
15. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
16. Shri P. Rajeeve 
17. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
S E C R E T A R I A T 
  
  18. Shri T. K. Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
  19. Smt. Sudesh Luthra, Director 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration and adopted the same without any modifications:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in their First Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Govern ment on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Second  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting. 
 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contai ned in their Third  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Information Technology). 
 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations con tained in their Fourth  Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to  the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above  
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. The Committee also decided to undertake on -the-spot study tour during 
the month of June, 2010. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 