 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 
 
30 


 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENT 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-24 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
25-29 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
30 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
31-42 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
43 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee held on 7th March, 
2012………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
44-46 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Twenty -second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………………………………………………………………… 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
14. Shri  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for Grants              
(2011-12)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 4 August, 2011. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished their Action 
Taken Notes contained in the Twenty -second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 16th February, 
2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
7 March, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi;                    Chairman, 
20   March, 2012                                                                               Standing Committee on 
30   Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011-12) 
deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
relating to Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 
4th August „2011. It contained 14 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Para Nos.:-  1, 10, 12 & 14   
 Total: 04 
 Chapter: II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total: Nil 
 Chapter: III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: 
 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,  8, 11 & 13   
 Total: 09 
 Chapter: IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl ies of 
the Government are of interim in nature: 
 
 Para Nos.:-  9   
 Total: 01 
 Chapter: V 
 

 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given t o 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with  reasons for non -implementation. 
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Note s on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should 
be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by t he Government on some of 
their Recommendations.  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para No. 2 ) 
I.  On-going and new schemes  
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“According to the Ministry, at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan the 
Ministry had formulated 86 schemes. However, at the time of Zero Based 
Budgeting exercise undertaken by the Planning Commission in May, 2007, 
the total number of schemes was reduced to 65. During examination of 
the previous year Demands for Grants (2010 -11), the Committee had 
noted that out of total 38 new schemes, 13 schemes were awaiting 
approval and out of 28 on -going schemes, approval for 2 schemes was 
pending. Thus in total 15 schemes w ere pending clearance/approval. 
Having observed that delay in approval of the schemes was one of the 
factors responsible for under utilization of outlay, the Committee in their 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) had desired that the 
Ministry should work out a more streamlined approval system. In spite of 
that four important schemes of the Ministry which include Global Film 
School, Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming 
and Special Effects, National Film Heritage Mission under Film Sector and 
International Channel under Broadcasting Sector are still awaiting 
approval/clearance even when Annual Plan 2011 -12 is the last year of 
Eleventh Plan. The Secretary of the Ministry during the course of oral 
evidence admitted that it i s quite late particularly when the Eleventh Plan 
is going to end at the end of the current financial year. The Committee 
disapprove the way projects are being planned by the Ministry. All the 
above schemes were formulated at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan and 
in the process four precious years have already been lost and even then 

 
 
the schemes of the Ministry are awaiting approval/clearance. It clearly 
indicates that there are serious problems in the whole planning process 
which is not conducive for the o verall functioning of the Ministry. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should work out a more streamlined 
approval system so that the situation of non -clearance of the schemes 
does not persist. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take 
corrective measures so that the situation of non -clearance of schemes 
does not repeat during the Twelfth Plan.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The suggestions of the Hon‟ble Committee ha ve been noted for 
compliance.   
 
The Ministry has since obtained approval for the implementation of all 
major schemes during the 11th Plan except the following four schemes: 
 
Film Sector: 
(i) Global Film School – A Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Global Film 
School was submitted by Ms Hewitt Associates India Pvt. Ltd. in 
September, 2010.  However, the contents of the DPR were not 
found to be acceptable.  A fresh DPR has since been prepared and 
accepted by the Governing Council of FTII. 
(ii) Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming 
and Special Effects: The proposal is under consideration of EFC.   
(iii) National Film Heritage Mission: This scheme was conceptualized in 
2010-11.  In -principle approval of the Planning Commission was 
received on 28.6.2011. The EFC Memo under finalization. 
 
Broadcasting Sector: 
(iv) International Channel: A comprehensive proposal is under 
formulation. 
 
8. While taking a serious note of late approval  of various schemes 
inspite of these being formulated in the beginning of the Eleventh Plan and 
the resultant under utilization of Outlay , the Committee had opined that 
there are serious problems in the whole planning process and emphasized 
that the Ministry should work out a more streamlined approval system so 
that the situat ion of non clearance of schemes does not persist . The 
Committee had also recommended the Ministry to take corrective measures 
so that the non -clearance of schemes is not repeated during the 

 
 
forthcoming Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee find from the Ac tion 
Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry that though major schemes ha ve 
been approved, the Ministry has not been able to get approval in respect of 
four important schemes viz. Global Film school, Setting up of National 
Centre of Excellence for Animation,  Gaming and Special Effects, National 
Film Heritage Mission under Film Sector and International Cha nnel under 
the Broadcasting Sector. The Ministry have informed that whereas a 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been prepared for the Scheme of Global 
Film School, the proposal in respect of the scheme for setting up of National 
Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects, is  
however, still under consideration. For the National Film Heritage Mission 
Scheme, the EFC Memo is under finalizatio n and for the International 
Channel Scheme, a comprehensive proposal is under formulation. Keeping 
in view the fact that these are important schemes, the Committee  
deprecate the lack of seriousness on the part of the Government for not 
having the proposals  expedited timely even as time and again the 
Committee had pursued the issue while examining the Demands for Grants 
of the Previous Years. The Committee, while expressing their displeasure 
over the delay in approval of the above four schemes reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and exhort the Ministry to address the issue more 
seriously and ensure that these important schemes are given due attention 
and approved in a time bound manner . To this end, the Committee desire 
the Ministry to work out a time bound formula for all such schemes at the 
beginning of the Twelfth Five Year Plan so that the schemes are cleared on 
time, implemented effectively and idling of funds earm arked for the 
schemes is avoided. 

 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para Nos. 3 & 4) 
II. Commonwealth Games 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The XIX Commonwealth Games were held at New Delhi from 3rd to 14th 
October, 2010. Prasar Bharati was the Host Broadcaster for the games. 
The entire coverage of the games was telecast in High Definition (HDTV) 
format. A Gross revenue of Rs. 60.48 crore was realized by Prasar Bharati 
through commercial advertisements.   
 
The Committee observe that post Commonwealth Games, various 
irregularities were reported in the media about award of contract by 
Prasar Bharati for execution of projects related to Commonwealth Games, 
2010 particularly with regard to selection of M/s SIS Live, UK to carry out 
the work for Production and Coverage facilities. It was reported in the 
media that the contract awarded by Prasar Bharati to M/s SIS Live for Rs. 
246 crore was outsourced by the entity to M/s Zoom Communications for 
Rs. 177 crore. About selection of M/s SIS Live, UK, the representative of 
the Ministry during the course of oral evidence informed the Committee 
that a transparent process was followed in the award of contract and they 
feel quite satisfied that there was no shortcoming on the part of the 
Ministry while giving its approval for the award of the contract. Regarding 
outsourcing of work by M/s SIS Live to M/s Zoom Communications, the 
Ministry have informed the Committee that neither they nor Prasar 
Bharati were aware of it and the fact came to their notice at a later stage. 
However, when the advice of the Law Ministry was sought, they opined 
that the sub-contract by M/s. SIS Live to M/s Zoom Communications was 
not in violation of the clause which existed in the contract between Prasar 
Bharati and M/s SIS Live.  
 
In the wake of irregularities being reported in the media, the Government 
on 25th October, 201 0 constituted a High Level Committee headed by 
Shri V.K. Shunglu to look into the issues relating to organizing and 
conduct of CWG, 2010 and lessons to be learnt for future. The Committee 
in January, 2011 submitted its report to the Government. The Committ ee 
have been informed that after seeking the explanation on each of the 
allegations contained in the report, the CEO, Prasar Bharati has been 
placed under suspension. The Ministry has also permitted CBI for 
registration of a regular case and initiation of criminal investigation under 
the provisions of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against the CEO, 
Prasar Bharati. The then DG, Doordarshan has also been repatriated to 
her parent cadre. The Committee also note that the views of the Ministry 
on the recommendations of High Level Committee were placed before the 
Group of Ministers in the meeting held on 24th March, 2011 and the GoM 
has decided to deliberate the issue in its next meeting.  
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned about the c ontroversy surrounding 
the award of work for Production and Coverage facilities for the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 to M/s SIS Live, UK for Rs.246 crore. The 
Ministry have justified the selection process as well as the cost estimates. 
However, the fact remain s that the contract which M/s SIS Live got from 

 
 
Prasar Bharati for Rs.246 crore was outsourced by the entity to M/s Zoom 
Communications for Rs.177 crore. The High Level Committee constituted 
by the Government under Shri V.K. Shunglu has estimated the work 
below Rs.100 crore. Although the basis for calculating the amount is not 
known to the Standing Committee, yet it raises a serious question mark 
about the reasonableness of the rate quoted by the selected firm. The 
Committee are also surprised to note the o pinion given by the Law 
Ministry that the sub -contract was not in violation of the clause which 
existed between Prasar Bharati and M/s. SIS Live. The Committee note 
that the Ministry seems to be in dilemma as the Secretary during the 
course of oral evidence before the Committee, initially stated that the cost 
was excessive but subsequently he justified the cost estimate as the same 
figure was arrived at by a Committee constituted by the Ministry. The 
High Level Committee constituted by the Government under the 
chairmanship of Shri V.K. Shunglu after in -depth scrutiny of documents 
and conducting the inquiry, has submitted its report to the Government. 
The report of High Level Committee is pending before the Group of 
Ministers. As such, the Committee, at this stage, only urge the 
Government for early decision in the matter. The Committee also note 
that CBI is conducting investigation in this regard. The Committee desire 
that the alleged irregularities in the award of work for Production and 
Coverage facilities may be scrupulously probed by the investigating 
agency and the report submitted to the Government at the earliest. The 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers and the findings of CBI 
alongwith the action taken by the Ministry in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee. “ 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
Reply of the Government 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have inter-alia stated as under:- 
“The suspension of Sh  B S Lalli, the then CEO, Prasar Bharati was based 
on the findings in the report of Central Vigilance Commission in respect of 
a reference made to it by Prasar Bharati on the directions of High Court of 
Delhi. The CVC, in its report , inter-alia, held that    Shri B S Lalli was  
responsible  in respect of four allegations pertaini ng to (1) contracts for 
management of advertisement revenue arising from the telecast of cricket 
matches on Doordarshan (DD) during 2007 (ii) non -telecast by DD of T -
20 cricket World Cup matches  held in South Africa in September ,2007 
(iii) engagement of legal entities to represent PB  and (iv) purchase of 
Radio Broadcasting  Rights for 13 Cricket series  held during 2007 -09 . 
After examination of the report, a Presidential reference has been made to 
the Supreme Court under section 7(1) of the Prasar Bhara ti Act 1990 for 
conducting an enquiry and report as to whether Sh. B.S.Lalli, CEO, PB 
ought to be removed from office of Member, Prasar Bharati on grounds of 
misbehavior.  Further, in terms of section 7(2) of the Prasar Bharati Act, 
1990, Sh. B.S.Lalli has  been placed under suspension by an order of the 
President till such time the orders are passed by the President on the 
basis of report received from Supreme Court.   Thus the suspension of Sh 
Lalli was not in respect of any matter arising out of Common We alth 
Games, 2010.  
 
With regard to the action taken on the report of the High Level 
Committee, which looked into the issues related to organizing and conduct 

 
 
of Commonwealth Games, Delhi, 2010, CBI has registered a case under 
Section 120 -B r/w sec 420 IPC r/w sec 13(1) (d) of Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 against Shri B S Lalli, Shri Wasim Ahmed Delhi, M/s 
SIS Live, M/s Zoom Communications and others and is investigating into 
various alleged acts of omission and commission as reflected in the 
Shunglu Committee report.  
 
  
In the backdrop of the  High Level Committee(HLC) on Host Broadcasting, 
the Group of Ministers (GoM), set up to examine various issues  pertaining 
to the functioning of Prasar Bharati, has also  looked into the issue of 
relationship between the Government and Prasar Bharati as also between 
Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati and the Prasar Bharati Board.  The 
GoM has examined the existing governance structure and the provisions 
contained in the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporati on of India) Act, 
1990. The GoM, inter-alia, has made recommendations with regard to the 
composition of the Board,  the eligibility criteria and the tenure of 
Chairperson and other Members of the Prasar Bharati Board, the 
procedure for appointment, suspens ion and removal of Chairperson and 
Members of Board, and the powers of Central Government to obtain 
information from and issue directions to Prasar Bharati. It is expected that 
these recommendations of the GoM will enable Government to effectively 
supervise   the functioning of Prasar Bharati, improve governance within 
Prasar Bharati and make it‟s functionaries more accountable.  
 
Based on the recommendations of the GoM, Ministry has initiated action 
for carrying out the amendments to the PB Act, in consult ation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice. The Ministry would seek the approval of the 
Cabinet for bringing out amendments to Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 3) 
 
An elaborate examination of the o verall cost estimates for Host 
Broadcasting activities for CWG 2010 was done at multiple levels in Prasar 
Bharati and the Government as per the prescribed norms and procedure. 
Prasar Bharati had on 3.7.07 initially forwarded an estimate of Rs.557 
crore for  CWG 2010. This was examined in the Ministry which directed 
Prasar Bharati to float Request for information (RFI) to seek information 
from service providers on the basis of which the cost estimates could be 
firmed up. On the basis of Request for informatio n (RFI) received, the 
estimates were brought down to Rs.445 crore in the EFC proposal. The 
IFD in the Ministry recommended a further cut of Rs.79 crore and 
recommended it for consideration of EFC chaired by Secretary 
(Expenditure). To further scrutinize an d firm up the costs estimates, a 
Cost Estimates Committee was constituted by EFC under the AS&FA, 
Ministry of I&B on 07 -04-2008 with JS (Broadcasting), Economic Adviser, 
Director (Finance) and Dir (BD) from the Ministry of I&B, JS from Ministry 
of Youth Af fairs & Sports, Chief Advisor (Costs) in Department of 
Expenditure and DDG (PD -CWG), Prasar Bharati.  The Cost Estimates 
Committee on 16 -05-2008 confirmed the cost estimates of Rs.366 crore 
for CWG, Delhi, 2010 and this was finally approved by the CCEA. Th e 
Financial Evaluation Committee of Prasar Bharati, at the time of 
evaluation of financial bids for production and coverage tender, found the 
price quoted by M/s SIS Live to be 17% lower than the similar 

 
 
components/activities in the CCEA approved budget of about Rs.254 crore 
(after taking the impact of foreign exchange variations into account). 
 
Apart from following due diligence and scrutiny for firming up cost 
estimates, the ultimate tool with any organization to discover the real 
market price is followin g a fair and transparent international bidding 
process. In response to the international EOI invitation, 10 EOI responses 
were received. Prasar Bharati recommended 4 of them to be short listed 
for issuance of RFP documents. After seeking legal advice from SG and 
AG, the Ministry added one more entity and approved 5 entities for 
issuance of RFP documents. The RFP document was drafted by a team 
constituted by the Ministry headed by DG:DD and consisting of officials 
from the HB Cell in Prasar Bharati, Engineer ing and Programme Wings of 
Prasar Bharati and officials from the Broadcasting and Finance Wings of 
the Ministry of I&B and two reputed outside consultants in accordance 
with Finance Ministry guidelines. The RFP document was then duly 
approved following fur ther examination in Prasar Bharati and Ministry. 
Only two bids were received by the closing date, of which only M/s SIS 
Live could qualify technically. The other bidder M/s NCL could not qualify 
as its lead partner which met the eligibility criteria decided not to continue 
with them. Certain representations were received from others giving 
reasons for non filing of bids. These representations were examined in 
detail in consultation with Prasar Bharati/HBMC. The HBMC expressed the 
view that the entities them selves had not been serious enough in 
engaging with the HB to settle the issues during the time they had the 
opportunity to do so, their concerns were duly taken note of and 
responded to by HB and the issues raised were in the nature of 
afterthoughts and excuses for non-submission of bids. On the issue as to 
why it was different from a single bid situation and why re -bidding should 
not be resorted to, it was clarified by HBMC/Prasar Bharati „that while, it 
could be presumed that there would have been chance s of competitive 
pricing if there had been more than one financial bid to be opened but it is 
important to note that the entity whose Technical bid has qualified, was 
submitting its bid in what was clearly a „competitive environment‟, as the 
entity was awa re that there were five short listed players who had all 
attended the pre bid meeting. It was also important that two entities had 
submitted their technical and financial bids within the stipulated time.  
Hence there was no reason also to presume that the single entity whose 
technical bid emerged valid has not submitted a competitive financial bid.‟ 
HBMC unanimously felt that re -tendering was not a viable option. The 
Ministry allowed the financial bid of M/s SIS Live to be opened.  
On the instructions of th e Ministry, HBMC/Prasar Bharati also provided a 
detailed and comprehensive assessment ascertaining, inter-alia, the rates 
obtained in similar events covered elsewhere while establishing clearly the 
reasonability and acceptability of the financial bid so re ceived. It was 
mentioned that the total evaluated cost was reasonable as it was: 
 
a) 17% lower than similar components/activities in the CCEA 
approved Budget which is Rs.253.6 crore (say Rs.254 crore), after 
taking the impact of foreign exchange variations into account. 
b) 26% lower than similar components/activities from the RFI. 
c) Though it is difficult to compare the costs with Doha Asian Games 
because of the dissimilarities mentioned in the report, the bid is 
8% lower than similar components/activities from Doha Games. 

 
 
d) It was comparable to the Melbourne CWG about four and half years 
back. 
 
On the directions of the Ministry HBMC conducted further negotiations 
with M/s SIS Live; however the entity did not agree to reduce the price 
any further. After considering th e unanimous recommendations of HBMC, 
the Ministry granted its approval to the selection of the entity. The 
Ministry on two occasions, once after taking a decision on the acceptance 
of the recommendations of HBMC on TEC report and opening of the 
financial bids and the other after granting the final approval for selection 
of the entity, also apprised CVC of the circumstances under which the 
decision to select the entity was taken.  
 
The estimation of HLC which is primarily based on the premise that the 
entire work was outsourced to M/s Zoom for Rs.177 crore and that M/s 
Zoom also made a profit of Rs.65 crore is based on wrong premise and 
facts. The HLC has relied upon the statement made before Income Tax 
authorities during income tax survey on 2010 of the office premises of M/s 
Zoom Communication where an official of Zoom had on oath declared a 
profit of Rs.75 crore on the estimated total revenue of Rs.208 crore during 
2011. It has been argued that the gross revenue of Rs.208 crore included 
receipt of Rs.177 cr ore from SIS Live.  Pro -rated, the profit of M/s Zoom 
from the contract with M/s SIS Live should at the least amount to Rs.65 
crore.  It has also been mentioned that in another survey of M/s SIS 
Live‟s accounts, a provisional assessment of Income Tax has a ssumed 
that the entire amount of difference between the SIS -Prasar Bharati and 
Zoom–SIS contract of Rs.69 crore is the profit of M/s SIS Live. It has thus 
been concluded that the profit component in the contracted amount is 
Rs.69+65 = 134 crore.  HLC has a lso listed a number of items in Para 
2.7.1 of the report and has concluded that keeping these in view the 
estimate for the total cost of contract should be less than Rs.100 crore.   
 
HLC in Volume II of its report has annexed the complete contract 
document between M/s SIS Live and M/s Zoom Communication Limited. A 
break up of the project cost – summarized budget is given at Appendix C 
& D at pages 155 & 156 in Volume II.  Appendix C shows the break up of 
Rs. 246 crore as Rs. 165.51 crore as M/s Zoom‟s cost, Rs. 58.42 crore as 
SIS cost and Rs.  22.07 crore as contingency and profit. In Appendix B, 
the break up of the project cost for M/s Zoom has been shown as Rs.  
160.75 crore as the cost with Rs.  16.55 crore as the service tax totalling 
Rs. 177. 30 crore. Though the two figures would need to be reconciled, it 
broadly appears that it would be factually incorrect to assume that M/s 
SIS did not have to spend any amount. It would also be apparent from 
the schedule that M/s SIS was required to bring in a number of key 
personnel and equipments and provide various other services at its level 
to complete the task.  As regards the reliance on the statement made 
during a tax survey, it needs to be taken into account that a number of 
presumptions have been made based on t hese preliminary statements in 
the midst of a financial year when the project was still under execution, 
the complete cost accounting was practically not possible at that stage 
and the actual filings would come only after the closure of the financial 
year. Thus a backward calculation on the basis of a statement made 
during a survey will not be factually correct and in fact would be 
misleading.  The profits made would also depend on the efficient handling 
and management of the contract by the executing entit y and it would not 

 
 
be possible to make any recoveries based on the fact that the entity has 
made high profits. 
 
The observation of the Secretary during the course of oral evidence 
referred in the para was in relation to the initial estimates furnished by 
Prasar Bharati as detailed above and not in respect of the final contract 
price of Rs 246 crore.  
 
 
As mentioned in reply to para -3 the mandate of GoM on Prasar Bharati 
was very limited and did not go into the entire report. The 
recommendations of the GoM and action taken thereon have already been 
detailed in reply to para-3 above. 
 
As per the information available with the Ministry, the matter is still under 
investigation of CBI and no findings have yet been made available to the 
Ministry.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 
11. Expressing their serious concern over the controversy surrounding the 
award of work for Production and Coverage facilities for the Commonwealth 
Games, 2010 to M/s SIS Live, UK for Rs. 246 crore, the Committee had desired 
that recommendations of the Group of Ministers and the findings of CBI along  
with the action taken by the Ministry in this regard should be communicated to 
the Committee. The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry on the issues relating 
to irregularities and the comments of the Committee thereto are as under:- 
(i) The Committee had noted that the Ministry ha d justified the selection 
process as well as the cost estimates  in the award of work for 
Production and Coverage Facilities for the Commonwealth Games, 2010 
to M/s SIS L ive, UK. However, the fact remains that the contract with 
M/s SIS Live got from Prasar Bharti for Rs. 246 crore was outsourced by 
the entity to M/s Zoom Communications for Rs. 177 crore. The High level 
Committee constituted by the Government under Shri. V. K. Shunglu had 
estimated the work below Rs.  100 crore.  In the Action Taken Note 
furnished to the Committee it has been stated that Prasar Bharti had on 
3rd July, 2007 initially forwarded an estimate of Rs. 557 crore. However 
on the basis of Request for Inf ormation (RFI) the estimates were 

 
 
brought down to Rs. 445 crore in the EFC proposal, finally the Cost 
Estimate Committee on 16 th May, 2008 confirmed the cost estimates of 
Rs.366 crore. The Financial Evaluation committee of Prasar Bharti , at 
the time of ev aluation of financial bids for production and coverage 
tender, found the price quoted by M/s SIS Live to be 17% lower than 
the similar components/activities in the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) approved budget of about Rs.254 crore (after ta king the 
impact of foreign exchange variations into account) . The Committee 
would like to be infor med about the reasons for mismatch in the 
calculation of the cost estimation occurred at various stages . As the 
matter is still under investigation of CBI, the Committee desire that the 
detailed information is placed before the Committee for their 
examination as soon as the findings are made available to the Ministry. 
(ii) From the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry, t he Committee 
are given to underst and that the Group of Ministers (GoM), set up to 
examine various issues  pertaining to the functioning of Prasar Bharati, 
had looked into the issue of relationship between the Government and 
Prasar Bharati as also between Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bh arati 
and the Prasar Bharati Board.  The GoM had examined the existing 
governance structure and the provisions contained in the Prasar Bharati 
(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. The GoM, inter -alia, had 
made recommendations with regard to the c omposition of the Board,  
the eligibility criteria and the tenure of Chairperson and other Members 
of the Prasar Bharati Board, the procedure for appointment, suspension 
and removal of Chairperson and Members of Board, and the powers of 
Central Government to obtain information from and issue directions to 
Prasar Bharati. It is expected that these recommendations of the GoM 
will enable Government to effectively supervise the functioning of 

 
 
Prasar Bharati, improve governance within Prasar Bharati and make it’ s 
functionaries more accountable. Based on the recommendations of the 
GoM, the Ministry has initiated action for carrying out the amendments 
to the Prasar Bharti Act, in consultation with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice and the approval of the Cabinet is b eing sought. The Committee 
would like to be informed about the outcome of the consultation with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice for b ringing amendments to Prasar 
Bharti (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990  and the status of 
approval from the Cabinet.  
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 5) 
III. Financial Status of Prasar Bharti 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee‟s examination of budgetary documents has revealed that 
the revenue receipts of Prasar Bharati have been gradually declining and 
the gap between the revenue receipts and expenditure has been steeply 
increasing. During the year 2009 -10, against the revenue projections of 
Rs. 1247.52 crore, the revenue receipts were Rs. 1176.26 crore and 
expenditure was Rs. 2949.40 crore thus leaving a gap of Rs. 1773.14. The 
revenue projections for 2010-11 were Rs. 1562.37 crore against which the 
revenue receipts were Rs.  968.69 crore and the expenditure was 
Rs.2506.49 crore. The Committee find that the Group of Ministers had 
recommended that 50 per cent of the annual operating expenses of Prasar 
Bharati should be borne by Prasar Bharati from its Internal Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and the remaining 50 per cent will be met 
from non -plan grants -in-aid from the Government. A ccording to the 
Ministry, however, the revenue of Prasar Bharati has not increased as per 
earlier projections while the cost, particularly under the salary head, has 
gone beyond the projections. 
  
After assessing the non -plan budgetary support provided by the 
Government during 2009-10, 2010-11 and projections for the year 2011 -
12 as also 10% growth in revenue during 2011 -12, Prasar Bharati has 
estimated a deficit to the tune of Rs.804 crores for these three years. 
According to the Ministry, if this trend co ntinues, the entire available 
reserves of Prasar Bharati would be wiped out, resulting in immense 
financial distress in the working of the corporation. Since Prasar Bharati is 
unable to bear 50 per cent to the annual expenses from its IEBR as 
recommended by GoM, it has now proposed a new funding pattern for re -
fixation of Government support to meet its financial obligations. The new 
funding pattern is likely to be decided by the Group of Ministers in its next 
meeting. 
  

 
 
The Committee expresses serious conce rn over the increasing gaps 
between the revenue projections and revenue receipts. The Ministry has 
rightly expressed apprehensions that this trend would result into wiping 
out the entire available reserve of Prasar Bharati and the organization 
may find its elf in immense financial distress. While appreciating the fact 
that Prasar Bharati is a public service broadcaster and not principally 
guided by commercial consideration, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that its mandate does not restrict it from gene rating adequate 
revenue to meet its operational cost. In fact, in the Outcome Budget 
2011-12 it has specifically been mentioned that AIR can generate revenue 
through schemes like sharing of Prasar Bharati infrastructure such as 
towers etc., building and la nd with private broadcaster, mobile service 
providers on license basis; providing value added service such as IVRS 
and SMS based service to the listeners; rationalization of rate structure of 
the rental resources; turnkey solutions for establishing 50/100 watt 
community radio stations to Universities/Colleges/residential schools etc 
and through Data Audio Channel service. It is inexplicable as to why 
Prasar Bharati has not been able to implement the above schemes which 
in their own admission can generate re venue through Public Private 
Participation for the next 10 to 15 years. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that Prasar Bharati by taking the desired initiatives as mentioned 
in the Outcome Budget as well as by adopting suitable marketing 
strategies, con tent improvement and introduction of DTH servi ces can 
reasonably enhance its revenue. The Committee exhort Prasar Bharati to 
take all the required initiatives to increase the revenue. Besides, all the 
economic measures should be taken to reduce the working  expenses of 
Prasar Bharati. The Committee at the same time would like the 
Government to bear the gap between support till Prasar Bharati is able to 
generate the mandate revenue to attain self sufficiency.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“Based upon the projections on income and expenditure provided by 
Prasar Bharati, GoM had initially recommended that 50 % of the annual 
operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be borne by Prasar Bh arati 
and the remaining 50% will be met from Non -Plan grants-in-aid by the 
Government.  However, in view of the concerns expressed by Standing 
Committee on Information Technology during the course of examination 
of Prasar Bharati Amendment Bill, 2010 as al so submissions made  by 
various employee organizations of Prasar Bharati on the future financial 
health of the corporation, the GoM had re -visited its earlier 
recommendations based on the revised projection prepared by Prasar 
Bharati and decided that during the next five years, the Government non-
Plan support would be extended for meeting 100% expenses towards 
salary and salary related expenses and augmentation /replacement of 
capital assets. All other items of operating expenses shall be borne by 
Prasar Bharati from out of its internal revenue earnings. It has also been 
decided that the Plan support by Government to Prasar Bharati may be in 
the form of grants -in-aid and not in the form of loan. Approval of the 
Cabinet will be taken on the revised funding pattern of Prasar Bharati. 
 
 

 
 
14. While expressing their concern over the increasing gaps between the 
revenue projection and revenue receipts of Prasar Bharti, the Committee had 
opined that although Prasar Bharti, a Public Broadcaster may not be 
principally guided by commercial consideration but at the same time it should 
not restrict itself for only generating adequate revenue to meet its operational 
expenses. In this backdrop, the Committee ha d recommended that Prasar 
Bharti should take the desired initiativ es mentioned in the Outcome Budget 
2011-12 which had specially mentioned that All India Radio can generate 
revenue through schemes like sharing of Prasar Bharti infrastructure such as 
towers, building and land with a private broadcaster, mobile services 
providers on license basis, providing value added services such as, IVRS and 
SMS based services to listeners, rationalization of rate structure of the rental 
resources turnkey solution for establishing 50/100 Watt Community Radio 
Station to Universities/ col leges /residential schools etc and through Data 
Audio Channel Services to enhance its revenue.  Besides, the Committee had 
also recommended that Prasar Bharti should adopt suitable marketing 
strategies to improve its earning capacity. However , the Committee  are 
dismayed to find that the Ministry  instead of addressing the specific issue of 
revenue generation as recommended by the Committee  has stated that Group 
of Ministers (GoM) had revisited its earlier Recommendations and decided that 
during the next Five Years, the Government Non - Plan support would be 
extended for meeting 100 per cent expenses items towards salary and salary 
expenses and augmentation/replacement of Capital Assets . All other items of 
operating expenses shall be borne by Prasar Bharti from out of its internal 
revenue earnings and the approval of the cabinet will be taken on the revised 
funding pattern of Prasar Bharti.  The steps taken by the Ministry on revenue 
generation by All India Radio through schemes do not find any mention in the 
action taken reply. The Committee feel that if the Ministry takes up the 

 
 
initiatives seriously as outlined in the Outcome Budget 2011 -12 it would 
certainly improve its financial health. While expressing their unhappiness  that 
the Ministry has not taken the r ecommendation in right intent and acted  on 
the lines suggested , the Committee would like to reiterate their 
Recommendation and exhort the Ministry to take all the desired initiatives as 
outlined in the Outcome Budget 2011 -12 so as to improve its revenue 
earnings. The steps taken in this direction may be informed to the Committee 
within the three months of presentation of Report.  
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para Nos. 6 & 7) 
IV. Filling up of essential categories of posts and finalization of Recruitment 
Rules in Prasar Bharati 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“One of the focal point of successive Reports of the Committee has been 
finalization of Recruitment Rules by Prasar Bharati. The Committee note 
that against the sanctioned strength of  48,172, there are 11, 498 
vacancies in various cadres as on 31st March, 2010. There are 3452 
essential categories of posts which are lying vacant in Prasar Bharati. To 
fill up such posts, the proposal submitted to the Department of 
Expenditure has been returned and Prasar Bharati has been requested to 
re-submit the proposal based on the report of National Productivity 
Council. The Committee have been informed that since Prasar Bharati is 
not in agreement with the NPC report, it proposes to reject the NPC 
report. Further Prasar Bharati has apprised the Group of Ministers about 
unacceptability of NPC Report in the meeting held on 24th March, 2011. 
The Committee find that there seems to be no solution in sight in the near 
future. The report of NPC is not accep table to Prasar Bharati and the 
Department of Expenditure had desired Prasar Bharati to submit the 
proposal for filling up of essential categories of posts based on NPC report. 
The disagreement is bound to create further problems for Prasar Bharati 
which is already reeling under shortage of manpower. While appreciating 
the administrative comments raised by the Department of Expenditure, 
the Committee desire the Department of Expenditure to realize the 
problems that Prasar Bharati is facing due to vacant ess ential posts and 
as such some relief ought to be given to Prasar Bharati so as to enable it 
to augment its staff strength.”   
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
About finalization of the Recruitment Rules, the representative of the 
Ministry during the course of oral  evidence informed the Committee that 
the regulations for all 195 cadres in Prasar Bharati have been finalized 
and the same are being forwarded to the Department of Personnel and 
the Ministry of Law. After their scrutiny, these regulations would be 

 
 
notified. The Committee are relieved that long pending issue of framing 
Recruitment Rules for various categories of Posts in Prasar Bharati, is 
coming to a logical conclusion. The Committee desire that the matter 
should be vigorously followed up with the departme nt of Personnel and 
Ministry of Law to ensure that these Recruitment Rules are urgently 
examined and thereafter notified at the earliest.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati have 
taken the following action to facilitate expeditious filling up of the vacant 
posts in Prasar Bharati: 
 
(i) A proposal approved by the Prasar Bharati Board for setting up of 
Prasar Bharati Recruitment  Board for undertaking is currently 
under inter-ministerial consultation with the Deptt. of Expenditure. 
DoP&T have already concurred in the proposal. 
(ii) Simultaneously, another proposal for formulating Recruitment 
Regulations for about 198 cadres is als o under inter -ministerial 
consultation with the DoP&T twice in August and September, 2011. 
After scrutiny of the proposal, DoP&T sought some additional 
information/documents, which have been furnished to them on 
08.02.2012. 
(iii) The GoM had initially recommended that the ban on recruitments in 
Prasar Bharati may be relaxed. Prasar Bharati was directed to send 
a proposal for filling up 3452 essential categories of posts to the 
Deptt. of Expenditure (DoE), based on the report of the National 
productivity Council giving full justification for such recruitment. As 
regards the report of the National Productivity council, Prasar 
Bharati in various review meetings at the level of the Ministry has 
informed that NPC has not been able to factor in a number of 
organizational and structuring issues and that it cannot be relied 
upon. This matter was taken up again with the GoM and after 
considering all aspects, the GoM recommended that the NPC report 
may be delinked from the proposal for filling up essential category 
posts in Prasar Bharati and the proposal should be examined by 
DoE accordingly. In this regard, the Ministry is in the process of 
seeking cabinet approval, for which a cabinet note has already 
been circulated for inter -ministerial consultation. After obtainin g 
the approval of the cabinet, Prasar Bharati shall undertake the 
process for filling up the essential category of posts.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Nos. 6 & 7) 
 
17. The Committee have been expressing their serious concern over the 
delay in finalization of Recruitment Regulations and Service Conditions for the 
employees of Prasar Bharati  and the filling up of essential posts lying vacant 
in the Prasar Bharati . During the oral evidence held in connection with the 
examination of ‘The Prasar Bharati (Broadcast ing Corporation of India) 

 
 
Amendment Bill’, the then CEO, Prasar Bharati had assured that the task of 
finalization of Recruitment Regulation and Service Conditions will definitely 
finish by 31st March, 2011. The Committee during the examination of Demands 
for Grants (2011-12) also had commented upon the need for augmenting the 
staff strength of Prasar Bharati and vigorously tak ing up the matter with 
Department of Personnel and Ministry of Law to ensure early examination and 
notification of Recruitment Rules. The Committee are however, constrained to 
note that even after an elapse of considerable time, the Ministry  are still in 
the process of seeking Cabinet approval for which Cabinet Note is being 
circulated and the process for filling up of essential catego ry of posts are yet 
to take place. While deploring the inordinate delay in the matter  particularly 
when a commitment had been made to the Committee in this regard , the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation s and exhort the Ministry to 
take all necessary steps to expedite the matter regarding filling up of essential 
category of posts and finalizing the Recruitment Rules within a time frame 
without any further delay. 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 8) 
V. Prasar Bharti Act 1990 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee in their successive Reports have been recommending the 
Ministry to implement the provisions contained in the Prasar Bharati Act, 
1990 relating to constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and a 
Broadcasting Council. Having observed that the above provisions were 
never put into operation, the Committee in their Sixth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010 -11) had observed that there were two alternatives 
before the Government i.e. either to constitute the Parlia mentary 
Committee and Broadcasting Council as per the provisions of the Prasar 
Bharati Act, 1990 or to amend the Act in view of the recommendations of 
two Committees of Prasar Bharati (Sengupta Committee report dated 
August 1996 and Narayanmurthy Committee  Report dated 20th May, 
2000) according to which there is no need for these provisions in the light 
of Standing and Consultative Committees of Parliament.  
The Committee observe that proposal with regard to comprehensive 
amendments to „The Prasar Bharati A ct, 1990‟ was placed before the 
Group of Ministers in the meeting held on 24 March, 2011. As informed by 

 
 
the Ministry, the proposal in brief seeks to amend the present provisions 
with regard to composition of Prasar Bharati Board, eligibility criteria, 
term of office and appointing authority for the Board Members, the role of 
the Government, the mandate given to Prasar Bharati, issues relating to 
status of staff as well as action procedure and grounds for removal of 
Members of the Board. The Committee find that in spite of continuous 
pursuance of the issue in various reports, the Ministry have neither taken 
action for constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting 
Council as per the provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 nor any 
mention has been made in the draft proposal for deletion of the provision 
relating to constitution of the two bodies as recommended by the two 
Committees set up Prasar Bharati. The Ministry while reviewing the 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 should have ta ken a decision in 
the matter. While deploring the way the Ministry has handled the issue, 
the Committee exhort the Ministry to take decision in this regard without 
any further delay.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The GoM had undertaken a comprehensive review of Prasar Bharati, 
1990 and recommended certain amendments to the Acts. While 
examining the Act, the GoM also considered the matter relating to the 
constitution of Parliament Committee and Broadcasting Council as per the 
provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act in view of the recommendations given 
in the Shunu Sen Committee Report. Having considered the role 
envisaged for Parliamentary Committee vis -à-vis Standing Committee, 
and after taking note of the categorical recommendations of the Shunu 
Sen Committee, the GoM was of the view that not much would be served 
by having a separate Parliamentary Committee and, accordingly, 
recommended to omit the provision relating to the constitution  of 
Parliamentary Committee in the Prasar Bharati Act. 
 
The GoM also noted that the role envisaged for the Broadcasting Council is 
advisory in nature with regard to redressal of consumer grievances and 
the discharge of functions by Prasar Bharati in accord ance with the 
objectives set out in section 12. It was also felt by the GoM that the 
Shunu Sen Committee‟s recommendations that there should be a single 
complaints redressal mechanism for all broadcasters under the aegis of 
the proposed Broadcasting Author ity, deserves merit. However, since 
Prasar Bharati cannot be equated with the private broadcasters in view of 
the mandate it carries, the proposed Broadcasting Authority can be 
assigned separate functions in relation to the private broadcasters & 
Prasar Bh arati. If this is done, then, there will be no need to have a 
separate Broadcasting Council as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act. 
Accordingly, the GoM had recommended for deletion of sections 14 & 15 
relating to the constitution of Broadcasting Council. 
 
The Ministry has prepared a Cabinet Note on various recommendations of 
the GoM and circulated the same for inter -ministerial consultation. 
Besides the GoM recommendations on financial and manpower issues of 
Prasar Bharati, the aforesaid Cabinet Note co ntained certain legislative 
proposals relating to amendments to the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, as 
suggested by the GoM. It was subsequently felt that some of the 

 
 
recommendations of the GoM in regard to financial restructuring of Prasar 
Bharati and filling u p essential category posts are to be implemented on 
priority basis with the approval of the Cabinet. Accordingly, the proposal 
for amendments to Prasar Bharati Act has been de -linked and a fresh 
cabinet note on financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati and  filling up of 
essential category posts has been prepared and circulated for comments 
from the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Ministry would prepare a 
separate Cabinet Note on the rest of the recommendations of the GoM, 
including amendments to Prasa r Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of 
India) Act, 1990.” 
 
 
20. The Committee had expressed their serious concern that inspite of 
the continuous pursuance of the issue in their various reports, the Ministry 
has neither taken action for constitution of a Pa rliamentary Committee and 
a Broadcasting Council as per the provisions of Prasar Bharti Act 1990 nor 
any mention has been made in the draft proposal for deletion of provision 
relating to constitution of the two bodies as recommended by the two 
Committees s et up by Prasar Bharti. They, therefore, had recommended 
that the Ministry should take a decision in this regard without any further 
delay. However, the Committee regret to note that the Ministry has not 
addressed the recommendation of the Committee in the  right perspective 
as could be seen in the backdrop of the recommendations of Shunu Sen 
Committee, GOM had recommended to omit the provision relating to the 
constitution of a Parliamentary Committee in the Prasar Bharti Act as well 
as deletion of Section 1 4 & 15 relating to the constitution of Broadcasting 
Council and going by GoM’s wisdom the proposal for amendments to Prasar 
Bharati Act has been de -linked and a fresh cabinet note on financial 
restructuring of Prasar Bharati and filling up of essential category posts has 
been prepared and circulated for comments from the concerned 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee are not convinced with the stand 
taken by the Ministry and are of the opinion that the Ministry should have 
addressed the issue of constituti on of Parliamentary Committee or 
Broadcasting Council along with the financial and manpower restructuring 

 
 
of Prasar Bharti through amendments to Prasar Bharti Act. They, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and emphasize that the issue of 
constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and the Broadcasting Council 
should not be sidelined and the decision for amendments to Prasar Bharti 
Act should be taken up expeditiously to resolve the issue. 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 11) 
VI. Press Council of India 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “Press Council of India is a statutory autonomous body created by 
Parliament.  In the discharge of its twin fold function of preserving the 
freedom of the press and maintaining and improving t he standards of the 
press, the Council performs a multi -faceted role.  It acts on the one hand 
as a quasi judicial authority with all powers of the civil court and on the 
other, in its advisory capacity; it guides the press as well as the 
authorities on any matter that may have a bearing on the freedom of the 
press and on its preservation. The Committee note that under Section 16 
of the Press Council Act, 1978, the Council collects levy of fees from 
registered newspapers/periodicals in the country and news agencies.  The 
total amount of fee collected by the Council during 2009 -10 was Rs.  
34,27,128 and it was Rs.  37,29,542 during 2010 -11.  The Committee 
have been informed that all the registered newspapers/periodicals and 
news agencies are not regularly payin g their dues to the Council and as 
on 31st March 2010, a total demand of Rs. 4,13,48,186 was outstanding 
as arrears.  Considering the quantum of outstanding dues involved, the 
Committee feel that not only legal action should be taken against the 
defaulters but also the matter should be pursued vigorously by the 
Council to recover the outstanding dues.  The Committee also desire that 
strict action may be taken against the habitual defaulters by the Council.”    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“Section 16(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978 provides that any fee 
payable to the Council under sub -section (1) may be recovered as arrear 
of land revenue.  As prescribed in Rule 10(2) of the Press Council Rules, 
1979, the notices in respect of demand are sent under registered A.D. 
covers to registered newspapers and news agencies calling for the 
remittance of fees. In addition to this, the matter was also taken up with 
the concerned District Magistr ates, Chief Secretaries and Director, 
Information & Public Relations Department of all State/Union Territories 
Governments requesting them to assist in the recovery of fees. Vigorous 
and earnest efforts are being made by the Press Council of India to 
recover the fees as per the procedure specified in the Press Council Act 
and the rules.” 
 

 
 
23. Having observed that all the registered newspapers/periodicals and 
news agencies are not regularly paying their dues to the Press Council of 
India, the Committee had d esired that strict legal action be taken against the 
habitual defaulters  so as to enable the Council to collect the outstanding 
arrears of Rs. 4,13,48,186 at the earliest. However , from the Action Taken 
Notes the Committee have a feeling that  the Press Council of India (PCI) 
seems to be satisfied with just issuing Notice under Rule 10 (2) of the Press 
Council Rules, 1979 to the defaulting newspapers/periodicals and newspaper 
agencies. The Committee have been informed that the matter has been taken 
up with t he concerned District magistrate, Chief Secretaries and Directors, 
Information and Public Relation Departments of all States/Union Territories 
Governments to assist in recovery of fees. The Action Taken Note is completely 
silent on the punitive action take n against the defaulting agencies. The 
Committee, while deploring the inaction on the part of the Mini stry/Council 
once again emphasiz e that strict legal action be taken against the defaulting 
newspapers/periodicals and newspaper agencies and the matter sh ould be 
pursued vigorously by the Council to recover the outstanding arrears at the 
earliest and the Committee be informed accordingly.  The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry to direct the Press Council to issue suitable 
instructions to the registered newspapers and agencies to pay their dues to 
the Council regularly on time. 
 

 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 13) 
VII. Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Established on 17th August, 1965, the Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication has been conducting a number of Post Graduate Diploma 
courses to meet the diverse requirements of rapidly changing media and 
communication industry in modern times.  As of now, the Institute cannot 
award degrees w hich is seriously hampering its potential as a premier 
institute vis-à-vis other institutions in the field of mass communication. 
Therefore, the Ministry proposes to convert IIMC into International Media 
University to allow it to award its own degree in pl ace of existing Post 
Graduate diploma courses. For that purpose an Act of Parliament deeming 
IIMC „An Institution of National importance‟ would be required, which 
according to the Ministry, is under preparation and will be finalized in 
consultation with th e Ministry of Law and introduced in Parliament after 
approval of Cabinet.  The committee also note that the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development has been requested to give its approval to make 
Post Graduate Diploma courses of IIMC equivalent to Master de gree. The 
Executive Council of IIMC have decided to start two-year course only after 
equivalence is granted by the HRD Ministry. 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that the Ministry has been 
extremely slow in implementing the scheme.  The scheme was initiated at 
the beginning of the Eleventh Plan and four years later, the committee 
find that various preparatory work and approvals are still pending.   The 
approval of the Ministry of HRD is still awaited to upgrade one year Post 
Graduate Diploma course i nto two year advance Post Graduate Diploma 
course to make it equivalent to Master degree. The Institute as of now 
cannot award degree for which an Act of Parliament is required. The 
Ministry of Law is being consulted to prepare the draft Bill for this 
purpose. The Committee are pained to note that the Ministry have not 
acted on the recommendations contained in its Sixth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) to expedite clearance of all preparatory work.  The 
Committee therefore, would like the Ministry to put the scheme on fast 
track and introduce the Bill to Parliament to enable IIMC to award its own 
degree and allow international collaboration. The committee also desire 
that the Ministry of HRD may be requested to give its approval to make 
Post Graduates Diploma course of IIMC equivalent to Master degree so 
that the two years course starts at the earliest.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
25. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“In the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) meetin g held on 15th July 
2010 to consider Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC)‟s 11th 
Plan Scheme, it was inter -alia decided that in the first instance the 
emphasis may be on seeking equivalence to Masters Degree for the Two -
Year PG Diploma Courses fro m Ministry of Human Resources 
Development.  Eventually, steps may also be taken for seeking 
Parliamentary enactment. Accordingly, IIMC had approached the Ministry 
of HRD seeking its approval to make PG Diploma courses of IIMC 

 
 
equivalent to Master degree. H owever, the Ministry of HRD/University 
Grant commission (UGC) has not agreed with the proposal and observed 
that the courses/syllabi proposed by IIMC for its PG Diploma Programmes 
have not been found to be of Masters Level in their present form. IIMC 
has been advised by the Ministry of HRD to resubmit the revised proposal 
after taking into consideration the observations of UGC so that further 
necessary action could be taken by them.  The observations/comments of 
UGC & need for an act of parliament for upgrad ation of IIMC to an 
Institution of National Importance are being examined in the Ministry.” 
 
26. While observing that various preparatory work and approvals with 
regard to converting Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) into 
International Media University are still pending and the Ministry is extremely 
slow in getting the approval to make the Post Graduate Diploma Courses of 
IIMC equivalent to Master’s Degree from the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development and University Grants Commission, the Comm ittee had 
recommended that the matter may be taken up expeditiously and measures 
should be taken for introducing a Bill to the Parliament which will enable IIMC 
to award its own degree and allow international collaboration. However, it is 
disheartening to note from the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry 
that the Ministry of Human Resource Development and University Grants 
Commission have not agreed with the proposal as the courses/syllabi 
proposed for its PG Diploma Programmes of IIMC have not been found to be of 
Master’s level in their present form and IIMC has been advised to resubmit the 
proposal. The Committee are extremely disappointed to see that IIMC which 
was established way back in 1965 has not been able to update its 
curriculum/programme and syllabi with the changing scenario and the present 
demand of information/mass media. The  Committee are also of the view that 
before advancing in the matter further, the Ministry should have been 
extremely cautious and visualized the requirement keeping in view the media 
courses in other countries. The Ministry should also have advised the IIMC 
much before so that the matter would not have come to such an impasse . 

 
 
Therefore, while taking a serious note of the way the issue has been handled 
by the Ministr y, the Committee reiterate their recommendation and impress 
upon the Ministry that the revised proposal to make the PG Diploma course of 
IIMC equivalent to the Master’s Degree is taken up on fast track and approval 
from Ministry of Human Resource Developme nt and University Grants 
Commission are taken at the earliest and the Committee be informed 
accordingly. 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Grants for the year 2011-12 
 
The Committee observe that as per Demand No.  60 relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation is for a total amount of                    
Rs. 2643.71  crore which include Rs. 861 crore as Plan Outlay and Rs. 1782.71 crore as 
non-Plan outlay.  As against this, the Budgetary support for 2010 -11 was Rs. 2604.25 
crore (Plan Rs. 850 crore + Rs. 1754.25 crore as non-Plan) which was increased to Rs. 
2618.13 crore at the Revised Estimates stage. The Committee note that on th e 
Revenue (Plan) side, the outlay has been decreased from Rs.  326.36 crore (RE) in 
2010-11 to Rs.  273.46 crore (BE) during 2011 -12.  However, on the Revenue (non -
Plan) side the outlay has been enhanced from Rs. 1768.13 crore (RE) in 2010-11 to Rs. 
1782.71 crore during 2011 -12.  On the Capital (Plan) side the outlay has been 
enhanced from Rs. 523.64 crore (RE) in 2010 -11 to Rs. 587.54 crore during 2011 -12.  
The overall outlay for 2011 -12 has been increased by Rs.  25.58 crore over the 
Budgetary Allocation (RE ) for 2010 -11, which works out to insignificant increase of 
0.97%. 
 
The Committee note that for the Eleventh Plan (2007 -12) Planning Commission 
has approved total outlay of Rs. 5439 crore.  During Mid Term Appraisal, the outlay was 
enhanced to Rs.  6311 cro re due to additional outlay for „High and Lower Power 
Transmitters for J&K Border Areas‟ and „Commonwealth Games, 2010 and Related 
Programmes‟.  The actual expenditure during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan is 
Rs. 1917.42 crore (Information Secto r Rs. 254.83 crore, Film Sector Rs.  198.25 crore 
and Broadcasting Sector Rs.  1464.38 crore) which is just 30.38 per cent of the total 
Budgetary allocation.  The figures speak out the unsatisfactory performance of the 
Ministry in utilization of outlay.  Expressing serious concern over inability of the Ministry 
to fully utilize the outlay, the Committee in their Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) had pointed out that under utilization of funds is a perennial problem with 
the Ministry, which is an in dicator of its poor budgeting mechanism and failure of 
monitoring mechanism to review the implementation of various schemes/projects.  In 
spite of that underutilization still persists under different schemes/projects in all three 
sectors of the Ministry.  Besides inability of the Ministry to fully utilize the outlay, delay 
in approval of important schemes of the Ministry, as discussed in the subsequent part 
of the report, are areas of concern.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Ministry to take ste ps to make the implementation mechanism more effective.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should endeavour to analyze the reasons 
for under utilization of outlay scheme/sector -wise and gear up its monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the allocated funds are fully utilized.  Further all the on-going 
schemes may be strictly monitored to keep pace with the expenditure.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the specific steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.     
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The suggestion of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted for strict compliance.  
All out efforts are being made to ensure full utilization of budgeted funds. To this end, 
the implementation of plan schemes and related expenditure thereon is re gularly 
reviewed at the Ministry and also by the Implementing agency.   
 

 
 
The plan performance of the Ministry depends mainly upon how Prasar Bharati 
utilizes its plan funds since 80 to 85 per cent of the plan outlay of the Ministry is 
allocated to Prasar B harati.  Certain remedial measures have been taken which are 
expected to lead to the improvement in plan utilization. Some of these measures 
include: 
 
(i) A Monitoring Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Addl. 
Secretary to monitor the progress of Plan Projects. 
 
(ii) A High Level Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of CEO, 
Prasar Bharati for project monitoring and implementation.  The Director Generals 
and Engineers-in-Chief of AIR & Doordarshan are Members of the Comm ittee.  
This committee regularly monitors the progress of execution of various projects 
and takes corrective action, wherever required. 
 
(iii)  An Empowered Committee of Finance has been constituted to examine and 
resolve all issues related to finance. The Director Generals of AIR & Doordarshan 
and Sr. General Manager (B&A) of Prasar Bharati are Members of the 
Committee. 
 
(iv) A Monitoring Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Director General, AIR to monitor the progress of implementation of AIR projects. 
 
(v) Nodal Officers have been nominated for each scheme.  
 
(vi) The sanctioning power of DG has been restored to Rs.20 crore. 
 
(vii) A Procurement Committee with DG has been constituted at AIR/Doordarshan to 
expedite equipment procuremen t.  The Procurement Committee regularly 
reviews procurement related issues.  As a result, the procurement process has 
been reduced from 52 weeks to 26 weeks.  
 
(viii) Time schedules for procurement and all other major activities have been drawn 
for each major project against which progress is monitored. 
 
(ix) Regular meetings are being held at Zonal Offices and Civil Construction Wing to 
review the implementation of various projects.  
 
[Ministry of I nformation and Broadcasting  O.M. No. 4/8/2011 -PC (Vol.III)  dated 
14.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
Information Sector 
 
 The Committee observe that out of total Plan allocation of Rs. 6311 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan, the Information sector has been allocated Rs. 314 crore, which works 
out to 4.9% of the budgetary allocation. The Committee‟s examination reveal that there 
has been under utilization of outlay. During the year 2009 -10, the RE stage allocation 
was Rs. 76 crore, which was enhanced to Rs. 85.27 crore and the actual expenditure 
was Rs. 78.49 crore  which comes to 92.04%. During the year 2010 -11, the BE stage 
allocation was Rs. 121.75 crore which was increased to Rs. 128.41 crore at RE stage 
out of which only Rs. 74.21 crore could be utilized up to February, 2011, which works 
out to 57.79%. As compar ed to the year 2009 -10, the performance during 2010 -11 
under the Information Sector is clearly unsatisfactory. The Committee desire that 

 
 
various projects/schemes being implemented under the Information Sector should be 
critically analyzed and remedial action taken to effectively utilize the outlay.   
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As stated that during the year 2010 -11, the BE stage allocation for the 
Information Wing was Rs121.75 crores which was increased to Rs.128.41 crores at RE 
stage,  out of which only Rs.74.21 crores could be utilised upto Feb. 2011 which works 
out to 57.79% . However, it is further added here that the allocation was revised again 
in Final Grant 2010 -11 ro Rs.116.63 crores and against this, Rs.114.63 crores were 
utilised till 31`st  March,2011, which comes to 98.29% and the expenditure was 
94.15% of the SBG 2010 -11, all the measure schemes in the Information Sector such 
as Setting up of Nation Press Centre (PIB ), Developmental Publicity Programme 
(DAVP), Construction of Soochna Bhavan etc. are now being monitored regularly at the 
level of Joint Secretary, Additional Secretary and Secretary in the Ministry and suitable 
remedial measures are taken accordingly.  As a result of close monitoring till the end of 
December,2011 as against SB G allocation of Rs 162.99 crores for the year 2011 -12, 
Rs.105.99 c crores  has been utilised which comes to 65.03%.  
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated ] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
  
Press Council of India 
 
 The Committee also observe that Rule 10 of thee Press Council of India Rules, 
1979 provides the structure for collection of levy fee. The Council collect levy fee from 
the registered newspapers/periodicals whose circulation figure is above 5000. The fee 
was fixed in the year 1979 and was last revised in 1988. The Committee have been 
informed that no periodicity has been laid down in the Rules for enhancement in the 
rates of levy fee. The enhancement in the rates of levy fee requires an amendment to 
Rule 10 of th e Press Council Rules, 1979 by the Central Government. Keeping in view 
the fact that no revision in levy fee has taken place since 1988, the Committee 
recommend that the same may be suitably enhanced. The Committee further 
recommend that the Press Council Act, 1979/Rules may be suitably amended to 
incorporate the provision for periodic enhancement in the rates of levy fee.  
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Regarding periodic enhancement in the rates of levy fee, it is stated that a 
provision providing for automatic increase in levy of fee upon the newspapers, @ 10% 
every three year has been suggested in the proposed „Amendment to the Press Council 
Act, 1978‟. The proposed amendments to the Press Council Act, 1978 are under 
examination in the Ministry and final view will be taken after wide consultation with all 
stake holders.  
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated _________] 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
The Film Institute was set up in 1960 in Pune, as a premier In stitute for 
imparting training in art and technique of Film making.  The Institute has been 
conducting Post Graduate Diploma in Film and Television in various disciplines, namely, 
Direction, Cinematography, Audiography, Editing etc.  FTII also runs various  short 
courses for working professionals.  The Committee have been informed that PG diploma 
courses in various disciplines of film and television, awarded by the institute do not 
enable the students to take up higher studies and research.  Therefore, the p ossibility 
of getting equivalence status for its PG Diplomas from the Ministry of HRD/Association 
of Indian Universities as in the case of National School of Drams is being explored.  
Simultaneously, recognition of FTII as an “Institute of National Importance” through Act 
of Parliament is also being considered to upgrade the position of FTII at the national 
and international levels to attract talented faculty, staff and students and to start high 
level research and innovation schemes related to Film, TV and  allied media.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that the Post Graduate Diploma courses awarded by 
the Institute do not enable the students to take up research and higher studies.  The 
Institute was set up in 1960 and no initiatives have been taken to upgrade the status of 
FTII.  The Ministry is still exploring the possibilities of getting equivalent status for its 
diploma courses from the Ministry of HRD.  Further recognition of FTII as an „Institute 
of National Importance‟ through an Act of Parliament is also being explored.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to upgrade FTII to global standards with due 
promptness.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the definite plan of the 
Ministry for completion of the proposal for this purpose at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In order to upgrade the Film & Television Institute of India, Pune to international 
standards, a new Plan Scheme was launched in the 11 th Five Year Plan for which Rs.52 
crore was sanctioned.  A consultant was appointe d to conduct a study and prepare a 
Detailed Project Report (DPR).  However, this report was not found suitable and 
therefore a Group of Experts was constituted to prepare a fresh DPR which is in tune 
with the vision and ideas of FTII.  This new DPR has bee n accepted by the Governing 
Council of FTII.  The report has been sent to the Ministry for approval.   
 
As per the DPR, the upgradation plan of the Institute includes starting of new 
courses; upgradation of infrastructure in terms of new studios, hostels f or students, 
modern equipments; having a new syllabus which is in tune with the latest practices in 
the film and television education; renovation of various buildings etc.  The DPR has 
projected an amount of about Rs.200 crores to be spent in next two to t hree Plan 
periods on the development and upgradation of the Institute.  During the last year of 
the 11th Plan and during entire 12 th Plan period, the DPR has projected to spend about 
Rs.90 crore. 
 
In terms of granting equivalence status to the Post -Graduate Diplomas awarded 
by the Institute and making them equivalent to the Masters Degree, the Institute has 
taken up the matter with the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) 
through the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.  Meetings have been held with the 
senior officials of the MHRD by officials of MIB and the matter is being pursued. 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has drafted a National Institutes of 
Film and Television Bill, 2011 for the Film and Television Institutes under the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting.  The Draft Bill is being discussed with the stake holders i.e. 
the Film and Television Institutes, Representatives of Film and Animation Industries 

 
 
Associations etc. The Draft Bill along with a Cabinet Note will be cir culated to the 
concerned Ministries before submitting to the Cabinet for approval. 
 
 
[Ministry of I nformation and Broadcasting  O.M. No .H -11013/4/2011-F(FTI) Dated 
05.10.2011] 
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
On-going and new schemes      
 
 According to the Ministry, at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan the Ministry had 
formulated 86 schemes.  However, at the time of Zero Based Budgeting exercise 
undertaken by the Planning Commission in May, 2007, the total number of schemes 
was reduced to 65.  During examination of the previous year Demands for Grants 
(2010-11), the Committee had noted that out of total 38 new schemes, 13 schemes 
were awaiting approval and out of 28 on -going schemes, approval for 2 sch emes was 
pending.  Thus in total 15 schemes were pending clearance/approval.  Having observed 
that delay in approval of the schemes was one of the factors responsible for under 
utilization of outlay, the Committee in their Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
11) had desired that the Ministry should work out a more streamlined approval system.  
In spite of that four important schemes of the Ministry which include Global Film 
School, Setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and S pecial 
Effects, National Film Heritage Mission under Film Sector and International Channel 
under Broadcasting Sector are still awaiting approval/clearance even when Annual Plan 
2011-12 is the last year of Eleventh Plan.  The Secretary of the Ministry durin g the 
course of oral evidence admitted that it is quite late particularly when the Eleventh Plan 
is going to end at the end of the current financial year.  The Committee disapprove the 
way projects are being planned by the Ministry.  All the above schemes were 
formulated at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan and in the process four precious year 
have already been lost and even then the schemes of the Ministry are awaiting 
approval/clearance.  It clearly indicates that there are serious problems in the whole  
planning process which is not conducive for the overall functioning of the Ministry.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should work out a more streamlined approval 
system so that the situation of non -clearance of the schemes does not persist.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should take corrective measures so that the 
situation of non-clearance of schemes does not repeat during the Twelfth Plan 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The suggestions of the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for compliance.   
 
The Ministry has since obtained approval for the implementation of all major 
schemes during the 11th Plan except the following four schemes: 
 
Film Sector: 
(iv) Global Film School – A Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Global Film 
School was submitted by Ms Hewitt Associates India Pvt. Ltd. in 
September, 2010.  However, the contents of the DPR were not found to 
be acceptable.  A fresh DPR has since been prepared and accepted by the 
Governing Council of FTII. 
(v) Setting up of National Centre of Excellence f or Animation, Gaming and 
Special Effects: The proposal is under consideration of EFC.   
(vi) National Film Heritage Mission: This scheme was conceptualized in 2010 -
11.  In -principle approval of the Planning Commission was received on 
28.6.2011. The EFC Memo under finalization. 

 
 
 
Broadcasting Sector: 
(iv) International Channel: A comprehensive proposal is under formulation. 
 
[Ministry of I nformation and Broadcasting O.M. No. 4/8/2011 -PC (Vol.III) dated 
15.11.2011] 
   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Commonwealth Games 
 
 The XIX Commonwealth Games were held at New Delhi from 3 rd to 14th October, 
2010. Prasar Bharati was the Host Broadcaster for the games. The entire coverage of 
the games was telecast in Hig h Definition (HDTV) format. A Gross revenue of Rs.60.48 
Crore was realized by Prasar Bharati through commercial advertisements. 
 
 The Committee observe that post Commonwealth Games, various irregularities 
were reported in the media about award of contract by Prasar Bharati for execution of 
projects related to Commonwealth Games, 2010 particularly with regard to selection of 
M/s SIS Live, UK to carry out the work for Production and Coverage facilities. It was 
reported in the media that the contract awarded b y Prasar Bharati to M/s SIS Live for 
Rs.246 crore was outsourced by the entity to M/s Zoom Communications for Rs. 177 
crore. About selection of M/s SIS Live, UK the representative of the Ministry during the 
course of oral evidence informed the Committee th at a transparent process was 
followed in the award of contract and they feel quite satisfied that there was no 
shortcoming on the part of the Ministry while giving its approval for the award of the 
contract. Regarding outsourcing of work by M/s SIS Live to M/s Zoom Communications, 
the Ministry have informed the Committee that neither they nor Prasar Bharati were 
aware of it and the fact came to their notice at a later stage. However, when the advice 
of the Law Ministry was sought, they opined that the sub -contract by M/s SIS Live to 
M/s Zoom Communications was not in violations of the clause which existed in the 
contract between Prasar Bharati and M/s SIS Live.  
 
 In the wake of irregularities being reported in the media, the Government on 
25th October, 2010 constituted a High Level Committee headed by Shri V.K. Shunglu to 
look into the issues relating to organizing and conduct of CWG, 2010 and lessons to be 
learnt for future. The Committee in January, 2011 submitted its report to the 
Government. The Committee have been informed that after seeking the explanation on 
each of the allegations contained in the report, the CEO, Prasar Bharati has been placed 
under suspension. The Ministry has also permitted CBI for registration of a regular case 
and initiation of c riminal investigation under the provisions of Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1988 against the CEO, Prasar Bharati. The then DG, Doordarshan has also been 
repatriated to her parent cadre. The committee also note that the views of the Ministry 
on the recommen dations of High Level Committee were placed before the Group of 
Ministers in the meeting held on 24 th March 2011 and the GoM has decided to 
deliberate the issue in its next meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
3.1 The suspension of Sh . B S Lalli, the  then CEO, Prasar Bharati was based on the 
findings in the report of Central Vigilance Commission in respect of a reference made to 
it by Prasar Bharati on the directions of High Court of Delhi. The CVC, in its report , 
inter-alia, held that    Shri B S La lli was  responsible  in respect of four allegations 
pertaining to (1) contracts for management of advertisement revenue arising from the 
telecast of cricket matches on Doordarshan (DD) during 2007 (ii) non-telecast by DD of 
T-20 cricket World Cup matches  held in South Africa in September ,2007 (iii) 
engagement of legal entities to represent PB  and (iv) purchase of Radio Broadcasting  
Rights for 13 Cricket series  held during 2007 -09 . After examination of the report, a 
Presidential reference has been mad e to the Supreme Court under section 7(1) of the 
Prasar Bharati Act 1990 for conducting an enquiry and report as to whether Sh. 
B.S.Lalli, CEO, PB ought to be removed from office of Member, Prasar Bharati on 
grounds of misbehavior.  
 
Further, in terms of s ection 7(2) of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, Sh. B.S.Lalli 
has been placed under suspension by an order of the President till such time the orders 
are passed by the President on the basis of report received from Supreme Court.   Thus 
the suspension of Sh L alli was not in respect of any matter arising out of Common 
Wealth Games, 2010. With regard to the action taken on the report of the High Level 
Committee, which looked into the issues related to organizing and conduct of 
Commonwealth Games, Delhi, 2010, CBI has registered a case under Section 120-B r/w 
sec 420 IPC r/w sec 13(1) (d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against Shri B S 
Lalli, Shri Wasim Ahmed Delhi, M/s SIS Live, M/s Zoom Communications and others 
and is investigating into various alleged acts of omission and commission as reflected in 
the Shunglu Committee report.  
 
3.2  In the backdrop of the  High Level Committee(HLC) on Host Broadcasting , the 
Group of Ministers (GoM), set up to examine various issues  pertaining to the 
functioning of Prasar Bharati, has also  looked into the issue of relationship between the 
Government and Prasar Bharati as also between Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati 
and the Prasar Bharati Board.  The GoM has examined the existing governance 
structure and the pr ovisions contained in the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation 
of India) Act, 1990. The GoM, inter-alia, has made recommendations with regard to the 
composition of the Board,  the eligibility criteria and the tenure of Chairperson and 
other Members of the Prasar Bharati Board, the procedure for appointment, suspension 
and removal of Chairperson and Members of Board, and the powers of Central 
Government to obtain information from and issue directions to Prasar Bharati. It is 
expected that these recommendations of the GoM will enable Government to effectively 
supervise   the functioning of Prasar Bharati, improve governance within Prasar Bharati 
and make it‟s functionaries more accountable.  
 
3.3  Based on the recommendations of the GoM, Ministry has initi ated action for 
carrying out the amendments to the PB Act, in consultation with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice. The Ministry would seek the approval of the Cabinet for bringing out 
amendments to Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, File No. 2/8/2011-B(Fin) Date 21.10.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
Commonwealth Games 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the contro versy surrounding the 
award of work for Production and Coverage facilities for the Commonwealth Games, 
2010 to M/s SIS Live, UK for Rs. 246 crore. The Ministry have justified the selection 
process as well as the cost estimates. However, the fact remains th at the contract 
which M/s SIS Live got form Prasar Bharati for Rs.246 crore was outsourced by the 
entity to M/s Zoom Communications for Rs.177 crore. The High Level Committee 
constituted by the Government under Shri V.K. Shunglu has estimated the work belo w 
Rs.100 crore. Although the basis for calculating the amount is not known to the 
Standing Committee, Yet it raises a serious question mark about the reasonableness of 
the rate quoted by the selected firm. The Committee are also surprised to note the 
opinion given by the Law Ministry that the sub -contract was not in violation of the 
clause which existed between Prasar Bharati and M/s. SIS Live. The Committee note 
that the Ministry seems to be in dilemma as the Secretary during the course of oral 
evidence be fore the Committee, initially stated that the cost was excessive but 
subsequently he justified the cost estimate as the same figure was arrived at by a 
Committee constituted by the Ministry. The High Level Committee constituted by the 
Government under the chairmanship of Shri V.K. Shunglu after in -depth scrutiny of 
documents and conducting the inquiry, has submitted its report to the Government. 
The report of High Level Committee is pending before the Group of Ministers. As such, 
the Committee, at this stag e, only urge the Government for early decision in the 
matter. The Committee also note that CBI is conducting investigation in this regard. 
The Committee desire that the alleged irregularities in the award of work for Production 
and Coverage facilities may be scrupulously probed by the investigation agency and the 
report submitted to the Government at the earliest. The recommendations of the Group 
of Ministers and the findings of CBI alongwith the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard should be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
An elaborate examination of the overall cost estimates for Host Broadcasting 
activities for CWG 2010 was done at multiple levels in Prasar Bharati and the 
Government as per the prescribed norms and procedure. Prasar Bharati had on 3.7.07 
initially forwarded an estimate of Rs.557 crore for CWG 2010. This was examined in the 
Ministry which directed Prasar Bharati to float Request for information (RFI) to seek 
information from service providers on the b asis of which the cost estimates could be 
firmed up. On the basis of Request for information (RFI) received, the estimates were 
brought down to Rs.445 crore in the EFC proposal. The IFD in the Ministry 
recommended a further cut of Rs.79 crore and recommended it for consideration of EFC 
chaired by Secretary (Expenditure). To further scrutinize and firm up the costs 
estimates, a Cost Estimates Committee was constituted by EFC under the AS&FA, 
Ministry of I&B on 07 -04-2008 with JS (Broadcasting), Economic Advi ser, Director 
(Finance) and Dir (BD) from the Ministry of I&B, JS from Ministry of Youth Affairs & 
Sports, Chief Advisor (Costs) in Department of Expenditure and DDG (PD-CWG), Prasar 
Bharati.  The Cost Estimates Committee on 16-05-2008 confirmed the cost estimates of 
Rs.366 crore for CWG, Delhi, 2010 and this was finally approved by the CCEA. The 
Financial Evaluation Committee of Prasar Bharati, at the time of evaluation of financial 
bids for production and coverage tender, found the price quoted by M/s SIS  Live to be 
17% lower than the similar components/activities in the CCEA approved budget of 
about Rs.254 crore (after taking the impact of foreign exchange variations into 
account). 
 

 
 
Apart from following due diligence and scrutiny for firming up cost estimates, the 
ultimate tool with any organization to discover the real market price is following a fair 
and transparent international bidding process. In response to the international EOI 
invitation, 10 EOI responses were received. Prasar Bharati recommended 4  of them to 
be short listed for issuance of RFP documents. After seeking legal advice from SG and 
AG, the Ministry added one more entity and approved 5 entities for issuance of RFP 
documents. The RFP document was drafted by a team constituted by the Minist ry 
headed by DG:DD and consisting of officials from the HB Cell in Prasar Bharati, 
Engineering and Programme Wings of Prasar Bharati and officials from the Broadcasting 
and Finance Wings of the Ministry of I&B and two reputed outside consultants in 
accordance with Finance Ministry guidelines. The RFP document was then duly approved 
following further examination in Prasar Bharati and Ministry. Only two bids were 
received by the closing date, of which only M/s SIS Live could qualify technically. The 
other bid der M/s NCL could not qualify as its lead partner which met the eligibility 
criteria decided not to continue with them. Certain representations were received from 
others giving reasons for non filing of bids. These representations were examined in 
detail in consultation with Prasar Bharati/HBMC. The HBMC expressed the view that the 
entities themselves had not been serious enough in engaging with the HB to settle the 
issues during the time they had the opportunity to do so, their concerns were duly 
taken not e of and responded to by HB and the issues raised were in the nature of 
afterthoughts and excuses for non -submission of bids. On t he issue as to why it was 
different from a single bid situation and why re -bidding should not be resorted to, it 
was clarified by HBMC/Prasar Bharati „that while, it could be presumed that there would 
have been chances of competitive pricing if there had been more than one financial bid 
to be opened but it is important to note that the entity whose Technical bid has 
qualified, was submitting its bid in what was clearly a „competitive environment‟, as the 
entity was aware that there were five short listed players who had all attended the pre 
bid meeting. It was also important that two entities had submitted their technical and 
financial bids within the stipulated time.  Hence there was no reason also to presume 
that the single entity whose technical bid emerged valid has not submitted a 
competitive financial bid.‟  HBMC unanimously felt that re -tendering was not a viable 
option. The Ministry allowed the financial bid of M/s SIS Live to be opened.  
 
On the instructions of the Ministry, HBMC/Prasar Bharati also provided a detailed 
and comprehensive assessment ascertaining, inter-alia, the rates obtained in similar 
events covered elsewhere while establishing clearly the reasonability and acceptability 
of the financial bid so received. It was mentioned that the total evaluated cost was 
reasonable as it was: 
 
e) 17% lower than similar components/activities in the CCEA approved 
Budget which is Rs.253.6 crore (say Rs.254 crore), after taking the impact 
of foreign exchange variations into account. 
f) 26% lower than similar components/activities from the RFI. 
g) Though it is difficult to compare the costs with Doha Asian Games because 
of the dissimilarit ies mentioned in the report, the bid is 8% lower than 
similar components/activities from Doha Games. 
h) It was comparable to the Melbourne CWG about four and half years back. 
 
On the directions of the Ministry HBMC conducted further negotiations with M/s 
SIS Live; however the entity did not agree to reduce the price any further. After 
considering the unanimous recommendations of HBMC, the Ministry granted its 
approval to the selection of the entity. The Ministry on two occasions, once after taking 
a decision o n the acceptance of the recommendations of HBMC on TEC report and 
opening of the financial bids and the other after granting the final approval for selection 

 
 
of the entity, also apprised CVC of the circumstances under which the decision to select 
the entity was taken.  
 
The estimation of HLC which is primarily based on the premise that the entire work 
was outsourced to M/s Zoom for Rs.177 crore and that M/s Zoom also made a profit of 
Rs.65 crore is based on wrong premise and facts. The HLC has relied upon t he statement 
made before Income Tax authorities during income tax survey on 2010 of the office 
premises of M/s Zoom Communication where an official of Zoom had on oath declared a 
profit of Rs.75 crore on the estimated total revenue of Rs.208 crore during 2 011. It has 
been argued that the gross revenue of Rs.208 crore included receipt of Rs.177 crore from 
SIS Live.  Pro -rated, the profit of M/s Zoom from the contract with M/s SIS Live should at 
the least amount to Rs.65 crore.  It has also been mentioned tha t in another survey of M/s 
SIS Live‟s accounts, a provisional assessment of Income Tax has assumed that the entire 
amount of difference between the SIS -Prasar Bharati and Zoom–SIS contract of Rs.69 crore 
is the profit of M/s SIS Live. It has thus been conc luded that the profit component in the 
contracted amount is Rs.69+65 = 134 crore.  HLC has also listed a number of items in Para 
2.7.1 of the report and has concluded that keeping these in view the estimate for the total 
cost of contract should be less than Rs.100 crore.   
 
HLC in Volume II of its report has annexed the complete contract document between 
M/s SIS Live and M/s Zoom Communication Limited. A break up of the project cost – 
summarized budget is given at Appendix C & D at pages 155 & 156 in Volume  II.  Appendix 
C shows the break up of Rs.246 crore as Rs.165.51 crore as M/s Zoom‟s cost, Rs.58.42 
crore as SIS cost and Rs.22.07 crore as contingency and profit. In Appendix B, the break up 
of the project cost for M/s Zoom has been shown as Rs.160.75 cro re as the cost with 
Rs.16.55 crore as the service tax totalling Rs.177. 30 crore. Though the two figures would 
need to be reconciled, it broadly appears that it would be factually incorrect to assume that 
M/s SIS did not have to spend any amount. It would also be apparent from the schedule 
that M/s SIS was required to bring in a number of key personnel and equipments and 
provide various other services at its level to complete the task.  As regards the reliance on 
the statement made during a tax survey, it n eeds to be taken into account that a number of 
presumptions have been made based on these preliminary statements in the midst of a 
financial year when the project was still under execution, the complete cost accounting was 
practically not possible at that stage and the actual filings would come only after the closure 
of the financial year. Thus a backward calculation on the basis of a statement made during a 
survey will not be factually correct and in fact would be misleading.  The profits made would 
also d epend on the efficient handling and management of the contract by the executing 
entity and it would not be possible to make any recoveries based on the fact that the entity 
has made high profits. 
 
4.2 The observation of the Secretary during the course of o ral evidence referred in the 
para was in relation to the initial estimates furnished by Prasar Bharati as detailed 
above and not in respect of the final contract price of Rs 246 crore.  
 
4.3 As mentioned in reply to para -3 the mandate of GoM on Prasar Bhar ati was very 
limited and did not go into the entire report. The recommendations of the GoM and 
action taken thereon have already been detailed in reply to para-3 above. 
 
4.4      As per the information available with the Ministry, the matter is still under  
investigation of CBI and no findings have yet been made available to the Ministry. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, File No. 2/8/2011-B(Fin) Date 21.10.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Financial Status of Prasar Bharati 
 
 The Committee‟s examination of budgetary documents has revealed that the 
revenue receipts of Prasar Bharati have been gradually declining and the gap between 
the revenue receipts and expenditure has been steep ly increasing. During the year 
2009-10, against the revenue projections of Rs.1247.52 crore, the revenue receipts 
were Rs. 1176.26 crore and expenditure was Rs.2949.40 crore thus leaving a gap of 
Rs.1773.14. The revenue projections for 2010-11 were Rs.1562.37 crore against which 
the revenue receipts were Rs.968.69 crore and the expenditure was Rs.2506.49 crore. 
The Committee find that the Group of Ministers had recommended that 50 per cent of 
the annual operating expenses of Prasar Bharati should be borne by Prasar Bharati from 
its Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and the remaining 50 per cent will be 
met from non -plan grants -in-aid from the Government. According to the Ministry, 
however, the revenue of Prasar Bharati has not increased as per earlie r projections 
while the cost, particularly under the salary head, has gone beyond the projections. 
 
 After assessing the non -plan budgetary support provided by the Government 
during 2009-10, 2010-11 and projections for the year 2011 -12 as also 10% growth i n 
revenue during 2011 -12, Prasar Bharati has estimated a deficit to the tune of Rs.804 
crores for these three years. According to the Ministry, if this trend continues, the 
entire available reserves of Prasar Bharati would be wiped out, resulting in immens e 
financial distress in the working of the corporation. Since Prasar Bharati is unable to 
bear 50 per cent to the annual expenses from its IEBR as recommended by GoM, it has 
now proposed a new funding pattern for re -fixation of Government support to meet i ts 
financial obligations. The new funding pattern is likely to be decided by the Group of 
Ministers in its next meeting. 
 
 The Committee expresses serious concern over the increasing gaps between the 
revenue projections and revenue receipts. The Ministry h as rightly expressed 
apprehensions that this trend would result into wiping out the entire available reserve 
of Prasar Bharati and the organization may find itself in immense financial distress. 
While appreciating the fact that Prasar Bharati is a public s ervice broadcaster and not 
principally guided by commercial consideration, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that its mandate does not restrict it from generating adequate revenue to meet its 
operational cost. In fact, in the Outcome Budget 2011 -12 it has specifically been 
mentioned that AIR can generate revenue throuth schemes like sharing of Prasar 
Bharati infrastructure such as towers etc., building and land with private broadcaster, 
mobile service providers on license basis; providing value added se rvice such as IVRS 
and SMS based service to the listeners; rationalization of rate structure of the rental 
resources; turnkey solutions for establishing 50/100 watt community radio stations to 
Universities/Colleges/residential schools etc and through Data Audio Channel service. It 
is inexplicable as to why Prasar Bharati has not been able to implement the above 
schemes which in their own admission can generate revenue through Public Private 
Participation for the next 10 to 15 years. The Committee are of the  firm opinion that 
Prasar Bharati by taking the desired initiatives as mentioned in the Outcome Budget as 
well as by adopting suitable marketing strategies, content improvement and 
introduction of DTH servies can reasonably enhance its revenue. The Committee exhort 
Prasar Bharati to take all the required initiatives to increase the revenue. Besides, all 
the economic measures should be taken to reduce the working expenses of Prasar 
Bharati. The Committee at the same time would like the Government to bear the  gap 
between support till Prasar Bharati is able to generate the mandate revenue to attain 
self suffiency. 
   
 

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Based upon the projections on income and expenditure provided by Prasar 
Bharati, GoM had initially recommended that 50 % of the annual operating expenses of 
Prasar Bharati should be borne by Prasar Bharati and the remaining 50% will be met 
from Non -Plan grants -in-aid by the Government.  However, in view of the concerns 
expressed by Standing Committee on Information T echnology during the course of 
examination of Prasar Bharati Amendment Bill, 2010 as also submissions made  by 
various employee organizations of Prasar Bharati on the future financial health of the 
corporation, the GoM had re -visited its earlier recommenda tions based on the revised 
projection prepared by Prasar Bharati and decided that during the next five years, the 
Government non-Plan support would be extended for meeting 100% expenses towards 
salary and salary related expenses and augmentation /replacement of capital assets. All 
other items of operating expenses shall be borne by Prasar Bharati from out of its 
internal revenue earnings. It has also been decided that the Plan support by 
Government to Prasar Bharati may be in the form of grants -in-aid and not in the form 
of loan. Approval of the Cabinet will be taken on the revised funding pattern of Prasar 
Bharati. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6 & 7) 
 
Filling up of essential categories of posts and finalization of Recruitment Rules 
in Prasar Bharati 
 
One of the focal point of successive Reports of the Committee has been 
finalization of Recruitment Rules by Prasar Bharati. The Committee note that against 
the sanctioned strength of 48,172, there are 11, 498 vacancies in various cadres as on 
31st March, 2010. There are 3452 essential categories of posts which are lying vacant 
in Prasar Bharati. To fill up such posts, the proposal submitted to the Department of 
Expenditure has been returned and Prasar Bharati has been requested to re-submit the 
proposal based on the report of National Productivity Council. The Committee have 
been informed that since Prasar Bharati is not in agreement with the NPC report, it 
proposes to reject the NPC report. Further Pr asar Bharati has apprised the Group of 
Ministers about unacceptability of NPC Report in the meeting held on 24th March, 2011. 
The Committee find that there seems to be no solution in sight in the near future. The 
report of NPC is not acceptable to Prasar B harati and the Department of Expenditure 
had desired Prasar Bharati to submit the proposal for filling up of essential categories of 
posts based on NPC report. The disagreement is bound to create further problems for 
Prasar Bharati which is already reeling under shortage of manpower. While appreciating 
the administrative comments raised by the Department of Expenditure, the Committee 
desire the Department of Expenditure to realize the problems that Prasar Bharati is 
facing due to vacant essential posts and as such some relief ought to be given to Prasar 
Bharati so as to enable it to augment its staff strength. 36  
 
About finalization of the Recruitment Rules, the representative of the Ministry 
during the course of oral evidence informed the Committee that th e regulations for all 
195 cadres in Prasar Bharati have been finalized and the same are ebing forwarded to 
the Department of Personnel and the Ministry of Law. After their scrutiny, these 
regulations would be noptified. The Committee are relieved that long  pending issue of 
framing Recruitment Rules for various categories of Posts in Prasar bharati, is coming to 
a logical conclusion. The Committee desire that the matter should be vigorously 
followed up with the department of Personnel and Ministry of Law to ensure that these 
Recruitment Rules are urgently examined and thereafter notified at the earliest.  

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati have taken the 
following action to facilitate expeditious filling up of the vacant posts in Prasar Bharati: 
 
(i) A proposal approved by the Prasar Bharati Board for setting up of Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board for undertaking is currently under inter -ministerial 
consultation with the Deptt. of Expenditure. DoP&T have already concurred in 
the proposal. 
(ii) Simultaneously, another proposal for formulating Recruitment Regulations for 
about 198 cadres is also under inter -ministerial consultation with the DoP&T 
twice in August and September, 2011. After scrutiny of th e proposal, DoP&T 
sought some additional information/documents, which have been furnished to 
them on 08.02.2012. 
(iii) The GoM had initially recommended that the ban on recruitments in Prasar 
Bharati may be relaxed. Prasar Bharati was directed to send a proposal for filling 
up 3452 essential categories of posts to the Deptt. of Expenditure (DoE), based 
on the report of the National productivity Council giving full justification for such 
recruitment. As regards the report of the National Productivity council , Prasar 
Bharati in various review meetings at the level of the Ministry has informed that 
NPC has not been able to factor in a number of organizational and structuring 
issues and that it cannot be relied upon. This matter was taken up again with the 
GoM a nd after considering all aspects, the GoM recommended that the NPC 
report may be delinked from the proposal for filling up essential category posts 
in Prasar Bharati and the proposal should be examined by DoE accordingly. In 
this regard, the Ministry is in the process of seeking cabinet approval, for which a 
cabinet note has already been circulated for inter -ministerial consultation. After 
obtaining the approval of the cabinet, Prasar Bharati shall undertake the process 
for filling up the essential category of posts. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 
 
 The Committee in their successive Reports have been recommending the 
Ministry to implement the provisions contained in the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 relating 
to constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting Council. Having 
observed that the above provisions were never put into operation, the Committee in 
their Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) had observed that there were two 
alternatives before the Government i.e. either to constitute the Parliamentary 
Committee and Broadcasting Council as per the provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 
1990 or to amend the Act in view of the recommendations of two Committees of Prasar 
Bharati (Sengupta Committee report dated August 1996 and Narayanmurthy 
Committee Report dated 20th May, 2000) according to which there is no need for these 
provisions in the light of Standing and Consultative Committees of Parliament.  
 
The Committee observe that proposal with regard to comprehensive 
amendments to „The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990‟ was placed before the Group of Ministers 
in the meeting held on 24 March, 2011. As informed by the Ministry, the proposal in 
brief seeks to amend the  present provisions with regard to composition of Prasar 
Bharati Board, eligibility criteria, term of office and appointing authority for the Board 
Members, the role of the Government, the mandate given to Prasar Bharati, issues 
relating to status of staff  as well as action procedure and grounds for removal of 
Members of the Board. The Committee find that in spite of continuous pursuance of the 

 
 
issue in various reports, the Ministry have neither taken action for constitution of a 
Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting Council as per the provisions of the Prasar 
Bharati Act, 1990 nor any mention has been made in the draft proposal for deletion of 
the provision relating to constitution of the two bodies as recommended by the two 
Committees set up Prasar Bh arati. The Ministry while reviewing the provisions of the 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 should have taken a decision in the matter. While deploring 
the way the Ministry has handled the issue, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take 
decision in this regard without any further delay. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The GoM had undertaken a comprehensive review of Prasar Bharati, 1990 and 
recommended certain amendments to the Acts. While examining the Act, the GoM also 
considered the matter relating to the con stitution of Parliament Committee and 
Broadcasting Council as per the provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act in view of the 
recommendations given in the Shunu Sen Committee Report. Having considered the 
role envisaged for Parliamentary Committee vis -à-vis Standing Committee, and after 
taking note of the categorical recommendations of the Shunu Sen Committee, the GoM 
was of the view that not much would be served by having a separate Parliamentary 
Committee and, accordingly, recommended to omit the provision re lating to the 
constitution of Parliamentary Committee in the Prasar Bharati Act. 
  
The GoM also noted that the role envisaged for the Broadcasting Council is 
advisory in nature with regard to redressal of consumer grievances and the discharge of 
functions by Prasar Bharati in accordance with the objectives set out in section 12. It 
was also felt by the GoM that the Shunu Sen Committee‟s recommendations that there 
should be a single complaints redressal mechanism for all broadcasters under the aegis 
of the proposed Broadcasting Authority, deserves merit. However, since Prasar Bharati 
cannot be equated with the private broadcasters in view of the mandate it carries, the 
proposed Broadcasting Authority can be assigned separate functions in relation to the 
private broadcasters & Prasar Bharati. If this is done, then, there will be no need to 
have a separate Broadcasting Council as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act. 
Accordingly, the GoM had recommended for deletion of sections 14 & 15 relating to the 
constitution of Broadcasting Council. 
  
The Ministry has prepared a Cabinet Note on various recommendations of the 
GoM and circulated the same for inter -ministerial consultation. Besides the GoM 
recommendations on financial and manpower issues of Prasar Bharati, t he aforesaid 
Cabinet Note contained certain legislative proposals relating to amendments to the 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, as suggested by the GoM. It was subsequently felt that some 
of the recommendations of the GoM in regard to financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati 
and filling up essential category posts are to be implemented on priority basis with the 
approval of the Cabinet. Accordingly, the proposal for amendments to Prasar Bharati 
Act has been de -linked and a fresh cabinet note on financial restruc turing of Prasar 
Bharati and filling up of essential category posts has been prepared and circulated for 
comments from the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Ministry would prepare a 
separate Cabinet Note on the rest of the recommendations of the GoM, i ncluding 
amendments to Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
Press Council of India 
 
 Press Council of India is a statutory autonomous body created by Parliament.  In 
the discharge of its twin fold function of preserving the freedom of the press and 
maintaining and improving the standards of the press, the Council performs a multi -
faceted role.  It acts on the one hand as a quasi judicial authority with all powers of the 
civil court and on the other, in its advisory capacity; it guides the press as well as the 
authorities on any matter that may have a bearing on the freedom of the press and on 
its preservation. The Committee note that unde r Section 16 of the Press Council Act, 
1978, the Council collects levy of fees from registered newspapers/periodicals in the 
country and news agencies.  The total amount of fee collected by the Council during 
2009-10 was Rs.34,27,128 and it was Rs.37,29,54 2 during 2010 -11.  The Committee 
have been informed that all the registered newspapers/periodicals and news agencies 
are not regularly paying their dues to the Council and as on 31 st March 2010, a total 
demand of Rs. 4,13,48,186 was outstanding as arrears.   Considering the quantum of 
outstanding dues involved, the Committee feel that not only legal action should be 
taken against the defaulters but also the matter should be pursued vigorously by the 
Council to recover the outstanding dues.  The Committee als o desire that strict action 
may be taken against the habitual defaulters by the Council.     
 
Action Taken by the Government 
,  
Section 16(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978 provides that any fee payable to the 
Council under sub -section (1) may be recovered  as arrear of land revenue.  As 
prescribed in Rule 10(2) of the Press Council Rules, 1979, the notices in respect of 
demand are sent under registered A.D. covers to registered newspapers and news 
agencies calling for the remittance of fees. In addition to this, the matter was also 
taken up with the concerned District Magistrates, Chief Secretaries and Director, 
Information & Public Relations Department of all State/Union Territories Governments 
requesting them to assist in the recovery of fees.   
 
Vigorous and earnest efforts are being made by the Press Council of India to 
recover the fees as per the procedure specified in the Press Council Act and the rules.     
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting I.D. No. 23/4/2010-Press, dated _________] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
Established on 17 th August, 1965, the Indian Institute of Mass Communication 
has been conducting a number of Post Graduate Diploma courses to meet the diverse 
requirements of rapidly changing media and communication industry in modern times.  
As of now, the Institute cannot award degrees which is seriously hampering its potential 
as a premier institute vis -à-vis other institutions in the field of mass communication. 
Therefore, the Ministry proposes to convert IIMC into International Media University to 
allow it to award its own degree in place of existing Post Graduate diploma courses. For 
that purpose an Act of Parliament deeming IIMC „An Institution of National importance ‟ 
would be required, which according to the Ministry, is under preparation and will be 
finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law and introduced in Parliament after 
approval of Cabinet.  The committee also note that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has been requested to give its approval to make Post Graduate Diploma 
courses of IIMC equivalent to Master degree. The Executive Council of IIMC have 
decided to start two-year course only after equivalence is granted by the HRD Ministry. 

 
 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that the Ministry has been extremely 
slow in implementing the scheme.  The scheme was initiated at the beginning of the 
Eleventh Plan and four years later, the committee find that various preparatory work 
and approvals are still pending.   The approval of the Ministry of HRD is still awaited to 
upgrade one year Post Graduate Diploma course into two year advance Post Graduate 
Diploma course to make it equivalent to Master degree. The Institute as of now cannot 
award degree fo r which an Act of Parliament is required. The Ministry of Law is being 
consulted to prepare the draft Bill for this purpose. The Committee are pained to note 
that the Ministry have not acted on the recommendations contained in its Sixth Report 
on Demands f or Grants (2010-11) to expedite clearance of all preparatory work.  The 
Committee therefore, would like the Ministry to put the scheme on fast track and 
introduce the Bill to Parliament to enable IIMC to award its own degree and allow 
international collaboration. The committee also desire that the Ministry of HRD may be 
requested to give its approval to make Post Graduates Diploma course of IIMC 
equivalent to Master degree so that the two years course starts at the earliest.  
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) meeting held on 15 th July 2010 to 
consider Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC)‟s 11 th Plan Scheme, it was 
inter-alia decided that in the first instance the emphasis may be on seeking equivalence 
to Mast ers Degree for the Two -Year PG Diploma Courses from Ministry of Human 
Resources Development.  Eventually, steps may also be taken for seeking 
Parliamentary enactment. Accordingly, IIMC had approached the Ministry of HRD 
seeking its approval to make PG Dipl oma courses of IIMC equivalent to Master degree. 
However, the Ministry of HRD/University Grant commission (UGC) has not agreed with 
the proposal and observed that the courses/syllabi proposed by IIMC for its PG Diploma 
Programmes have not been found to be of Masters Level in their present form. IIMC has 
been advised by the Ministry of HRD to resubmit the revised proposal after taking into 
consideration the observations of UGC so that further necessary action could be taken 
by them. 
 
The observations/comment s of UGC & need for an act of parliament for 
upgradation of IIMC to an Institution of National Importance are being examined in the 
Ministry. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  File No. 23/10/2011 -IP&MC Dated; 
08/11/2011]  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
Policy for introduction of mobile television 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has been working to frame a suitable 
policy enabling the private players to provide mobile television services in India. The 
proposed policy for mobile television would be based on the recommendations of TRAI. 
The policy is proposed to be finalized on availabi lity to adequate spectrum and 
resolution of other issues with the Department of Telecommunications which inter -alia 
include nature of technology to be used for used for mobile television, license area, 
tenure of license, cross holding restrictions, FDI lim its, contention regulation 
mechanism etc. The Committee have also been informed that the Ministry proposes to 
follow e-auction process in awarding mobile television. The Committee desire that all 
pending issues viz. identifying and allocation of spectrum f or mobile operators, 
determining the service area of licenses and number of service providers/licenses in 
each service area etc. may be urgently resolved with the Department of 
Telecommunications to finalized the policy for introduction of mobile televisio n. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the measures taken by the Ministry in the 
above context. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Action Taken: The Ministry has held a series of discussions with Department of 
Telecommunications to locate adequat e spectrum for Mobile TV services.  Though a 
broad solution has been arrived at, certain issues such as relocating Defence Services 
from the spectrum identified for Mobile TV are still to be completed.  The Ministry has 
requested Department of Telecommunications to sort out these issues with Ministry of 
Defence. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 5/1/2011 -BP&L dated     
28.09.2011] 
 
 
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
 20  March, 2012________ Chairman, 
 30  Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th March, 2012 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Committee Room  „C‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
10. Shri Tapas Paul 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
12. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
13. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
14. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot 
15. Shri P. Rajeeve 
16. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Action Taken Report on 
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
  
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the Draft Action 
Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Inform ation and 
Broadcasting.  It was suggested by the Members that Recommendation Numbers 6 & 
7 relating to filling up of essential categories of Posts and finalisation of recruitment 
rules in Prasar Bharati may be reiterated and commented upo n in Chapter-I of the 
Report.  The Committee then adopted the Draft Report with  the above modification 
and also authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the Report to the House at 
a date convenient to him.  
  
 
4. xxx    xxx     xxx 
 
5. xxx    xxx     xxx 
6. xxx    xxx     xxx 
7. xxx    xxx     xxx 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SECOND 
REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 3 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:-   1, 10, 12 & 14  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 28.57 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:-  Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,  8, 11 & 13  
 Total 09 
 Percentage 64.28 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  9  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 7.15 
 
 
 