STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION) SECOND  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011  
 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2012/ Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
36 


 
 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION) SECOND  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011  
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 August, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 August, 2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2012/ / Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ii 
ABBREVIATION iii 
INTRODUCTION iv 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. History and Background of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’ 1 
II Analysis of ‘The cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’. 5 
 (i) Consultations held by the Ministry before finalizing and bringing the legislation to the 
Parliament 
9 
 (ii) The technological option to address the issue of showing illegal channels by Cable Operators 12 
 (iii) The Comparative data of consumers watching TV through various available technologies and 
the future perspective 
14 
 (iv) Criteria for identification of ‘anti-national’ contents 15 
 (v) Different provisions for different service providers with regard to regulating the contents 
which are found to be not conducive to the security environment of the Country 
17 
 (vi) Existing position with regard to the Regulations in respect of Cable TV 19 
 (vii) Deadline with regard to digitization of cable TV and its effect on regulation of Cable industry 23 
 (viii) Contradiction in some of the  contents of the amending legislation with the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons of the Bill 
25 
 (ix) Concerns of the stakeholders regarding coverage of local content by the amending legislation 27 
 (x) Issues related to implementation of the provisions made in the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 
28 
 (xi) International experience with regard to Regulating Transmission of Anti National content on TV 29 
 (xii) Enforcement Agencies in the context of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 29 
 (xiii) State/District Level Monitoring Committees 30 
 (xiv) Setting up of Expert Body 32 
 Part-II 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations 
 
33-46 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011 47-51 
II. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting held on 24th February, 2012 52-56 
III. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting held on 7th March, 2012 57-59 
IV. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting held on 7th June, 2012 60-62 
V. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting held on 18th June, 2012 63-64 
VI. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting held on 25th June, 2012 65-66 
VII. Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting held on 20th July, 2012 67-69 
VIII. Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting held on 22nd August, 2012  
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
  Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Dr.  Charles Dias 
* 7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
#14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
@ 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
24. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
**27. Dr.  Bhushan Lal Jangde 
28. Shri Prabhat Jha 
  29. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
@ 31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
              1.    Shri Brahm Dutt  -  Joint Secretary 
              2.    Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
    3.    Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Committee Officer 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice  Shri P. Rajeeve, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
#   Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17th May, 2012   
@    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11th July, 2012 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar and Shri Ravi 
Shankar Prasad, M.P. Rajya Sabha 

 
 
 
ABBREVIATION 
 
AC : Advertisement Code  
CoS : Committee of Secretaries 
CTN :  Cable Television Networks 
DAS : Digital Addressable System 
DD : Doordarshan 
DM : District Magistrate 
DoP : Department of Posts 
DTH : Direct to Home 
EMMC : Electronic Media Monitoring Centre 
IB : Intelligence Bureau 
ITU : International Telecommunications Union 
IT : Information Technology 
IPTV : Internet Protocol Television  
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs 
MSO : Multi System Operators 
NGO : Non Governmental Organisation 
NOCC : Network Operations Control Centres  
NTRO : National Technical Research Organisation 
PC : Programme Code 
TRAI : Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
TV : Television 
WPC : Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing 
 
  
    
 
 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2011-12) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirty -sixth Report on ‘The Cable Television 
Networks (Regulations) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’, relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 
2011 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15 December, 2011 and referred to the 
Committee on 5 January, 2012 for examination and report thereon by the 
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha within three months.  On 
the request of the Committee, the time given was extended till the last week 
of Monsoon Session of Parliament by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to 
enable the Committee to have wider consultations and present the Report to 
the House. 
 
3.  The representatives of the Ministry of Informat ion and Broadcasting 
briefed the Committee on the provisions of the Bill on 24 February, 2012.  
The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the cable 
associations, broadcaster associations, and individuals at their sittings held 
on 7 March, 7 Jun e and 25 June, 2012. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) at their 
sitting held on 18 June, 2012. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadc asting at their 
sitting held on 20 July, 2012 and the representatives of the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Departments of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) 
assisted the Committee in clarifying the legal position with regard to the 
aforesaid amending legislation.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 22 August, 2012. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Telecom Regulat ory 
Authority of India (TRAI) for tendering evidence before the Committee and 
providing information that the Committee desired in connection with 
examination of the Bill. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to 
the representatives of the Ministr y of Law and Justice (Department of Legal 
Affairs and Legislative Department) in assisting the Committee.  The 
Committee further wish to express their thanks to the 
organizations/individuals who furnished written information/views as well as 
those who appeared before the Committee and furnished valuable inputs for 
consideration of the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
24 August, 2012 Standing Committee on  
02 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
  

 
 
REPORT 
 
PART-I: NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
History and Background of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second 
Amendment Bill, 2011’ 
 
 The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011 
(Appendix-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15 December, 2011 and was referred to 
the Standing Committee on 5 January, 2012 by Hon’ble Speaker for examination and 
report to the House within three months i.e. by 4 April, 2012. The Committee at their 
sitting held on 3 April, 2012  decided that Hon’ble Speaker might be requested to give 
extension of time for presentation of Report on the aforesaid Bill till the last week of the 
Eleventh Session of Parliament so as to facilitate wider consultations on the provisions 
made under the Bill. Hon’ble Speaker , accordingly, agreed to the request of the 
Committee.  
 
2. The Committee have  been informed that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting has received several complaints against cable operators showing illegal 
channels which have neither been permitted to uplink from India nor 
permitted/registered to downlink into India as per the Uplinking and Downlinking 
Guidelines.  Intelligence Bureau had identified around 25 such channels and informed 
the Government that the contents of these channels are not conducive to the security 
environment in the country and pose a potential security hazard.  
 
3. The Ministry in their Background Note has also stated that i n view of the gravity 
of the matter, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has taken various measures 
within the ambit of the extant law to stop carriage of these illegal chan nels. Besides 
taking up the matter with the State Governments, the Ministry has issued advisories to 
Associations of Multi System Operators as well as Cable Operators asking them to 
transmit only those channels that are registered with the Ministry of Info rmation and 
Broadcasting. The transmission of unregistered channels by cable operators, however, 
continued.  

 
 
4. In view of the seriousness and sensitivity of the issue , on a directive from PMO,  a 
meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was held on 25  October, 2010 to look 
into the various options for preventing carriage of illegal channels. Pursuant to the 
decision taken by the Co S, a group was constituted in the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on 18  November, 2010 under the Chairmanship of A dditional Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to examine whether technological 
intervention is feasible for blocking of signals of illegal channels on a pan India basis and 
suggest appropriate technological solution for the same. The Group came to the 
conclusion that technical options to block satellite signals of unregistered channels 
though available cannot be resorted to as localized blocking of a  particular TV channel is 
neither feasible nor financially viable. Moreover, the option to bl ock any particular 
channel on a pan India basis by disturbing/jamming the downlink frequency is not 
internationally acceptable and contravenes the existing provisions of International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) constitution as well as provision of Artic le 21 of Radio 
Regulations. Any counter interference may even adversely impact the entire Indian 
Satellite networks/systems. 
 
5. Subsequently, a meeting of the CoS was held on 31  December, 2010 to review 
the actions taken by the Ministry of Information and  Broadcasting in pursuance of the 
decisions taken by the CoS in its meeting held on 25  October, 2010 and it was decided 
inter-alia that the Ministry of Information and Broadcas ting in consultati on with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Home A ffairs will take action towards 
incorporating necessary amendments for preventing Cable operators from carrying 
unregistered channels by suitably amending the CTN (Regulation) Act, 1995. 
 
6. The approval of the Cabinet was then solicited for introduction of the Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Bill 2011 in Parliament and the Cabinet 
considered the proposal in its meeting held on 30  August, 2011 and approved the 
proposal of the Minist ry of Information and Broadcast ing. It has been mentioned i n the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons that the Bill seeks to bring in necessary amendments 

 
 
in the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 to make its provisions more 
stringent and also to enhance the punishment to have necessary deterrent effect.  
 
7. The Cable Television Network (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011 
containing certain amendments to address the problem of illegal channels was then 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 15 December, 2011 and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Information Technology for examination and report to the House.  
 
8. The preliminary meeting of the Committee was held on 24  February, 2 012, 
whereby, the representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting briefed 
about the various provisions made in the Bill.  Considering the immense importance of 
the Bill, the Committee invited memoranda containing views/suggestions from various 
individuals /experts /organisations /stakeholders interested on the subject matter of the 
Bill through advertisements in print and electronic media. Accordingly, various 
memoranda from various stakeholders and public at large were received.  4 selected 
associations/individuals which include cable association s, broadcaster association s, 
individuals having legal background deposed before the Comm ittee at the sittings held 
on 7 March, 2012, 7  June, 2012 and 25  June 2012. The aforesaid stakeholders and 
individuals raised serious reservations/concerns on the provisions made under the Bill.  
The Committee held detailed interaction s with the representative s of the T elecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (T RAI) at their sitting held on 18 June, 2012. TRAI also 
furnished written replies to the various issues related to the Bill raised by the 
Committee. The representatives of the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting deposed before the Committee at the sitting held on 20 July, 2012. 
The Committee in the process of examination of the Bill called for written replies to 
various issues that emerged during the course of deliberations on the provision s made 
under the Bill fr om the nodal Ministry i.e the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
The representatives of the Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs of 
the Ministry of Law and Justice assisted the Committee in clarifying the various legal 
issues.  

 
 
9. Having examined the provisions made under the Bill after due deliberations and 
in consultation with the various stakeholders, public at large, Telecom Regulator (TRAI) 
and in the light of the clarifications /written responses made by the Nodal Ministry  as 
well as clarifications given by the Legislative Department and Department of Legal 
Affairs, the Committee could arrive at their views on the provisions made under the Bill. 
The detailed position with regard to the deliberations along with the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee with regard to the provisions made 
under the Bill is given in the succeeding chapters of the Report. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
II. Analysis of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment 
Bill, 2011’. 
 
10. ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 ’ was enacted for the 
purpose of regulating the operations of cable television networks in the country so as to 
bring uniformity in their operations, avoid undesirable programmes from being made 
available to viewer s as well as to enable the optimal exploitation of the technology 
which had the potential of making available to the subscribers a vast pool of information 
and entertainment. 
 
11. It has been mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill th at 
the amending legislation has been brought to address the issue of cable operators 
showing illegal channels which pose potential threat to the peace and security of the 
country. To achieve the aforesaid objective , the proposed amendment seeks to make 
the provisions of the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995 more stringent. 
 
12. While elaborating about the proposed amendment in this regard, the Statement 
of Objects and Reasons states as under:- 
“The Bill, inter alia, proposes to amend the aforesaid Act so as to— 
(i)  prohibit transmission or re-transmission of unregistered channels 
irrespective of the manner of reception of such satellite or terrestrial television 
broadcast or channel by any cable operator; 
(ii)  enhance the punishment provided for contravention of the provisions of 
the Act as provided in section 16 thereof— 
(a)  from imprisonment for a term of two years or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees or with both, as at present for the commission of 
the first offence, to imprisonment for a term of two years or with fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both; 
(b)  imprisonment for a term of five years and with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees or with both, as at present for the commission of the 
subsequent offence, to imprisonment for a term of five years and with fine 
which may extend to three lakh rupees or with both.” 

 
 
13. The Ministry elaborated about the amendments in the written note as under:- 
 
“(i)   A new section is proposed to be inserted in the  Cable Act, namely 
section 5A, which prohibits cable operators from carrying unregistered 
satellite or terrestrial channels on their cable service networks irrespective 
of manner of reception of these channels.  
 
(ii)  It is proposed to amend sub -section(1) of  section 11 to empower the 
Authorized Officers to seize the equipments of the Cable operators if it is 
found that cable operators indulge in re -transmission of illegal channels 
i.e. violation of section 5A.  
 
(iii) Financial penalties provided under  sub -section (1) of  section 16  of 
the Cable Act  for violation of the provisions of the  Act  are proposed to be   
enhanced  from  Rs 1000/ -  to Rs 1,00,000/ - for the first offence and Rs 
5000/- to Rs 3,00,000/ - , on each  subsequent offence. It further provides 
that in  case of violation of section 5A, fine imposed for the first offence 
shall not be less than fifty thousand and for every subsequent offence it 
shall not be less than one   lakh rupees. 
 
(iv) It is p roposed to amend sub -section (2) of section 16 to make 
contravention of section 5A a cognizable offence.” 
 
14. The comparative position with regard to the existing provisions as well as the 
amending provisions as proposed in the Bill as made available to t he Committee by the 
Ministry is as under:- 
Existing Provisions in the Cable TV 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
Amending Provisions in the Cable TV 
Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Bill, 2011 
5. Programme code : No person 
shall transmit or re -transmit 
through a cable service any 
programme unless such 
programme is in conformity with 
the prescribed programme code: 
Below  this section ,  the following addition is 
proposed as section  5A: 
 
5A. Prohibition on re -transmission of 
unregistered channels: (1) No cable operator 
shall carry or include in his cable service any 
satellite or terrestrial television broadcast or 
channel unless such broadcast or channel 
has been – 
(a) registered with, or permitted by, the 
Central Government for being viewed within 
the territory of India, in accordance with the 

 
 
policy guidelines for downlinking of 
television channels as may be specif ied by 
the Central Government from time to time; 
or 
(b) approved by Central Government for 
being viewed within the territory of India; or 
(c) allowed in accordance with the provisions 
of any Central Act or rules made thereunder 
for being viewed within the territory of 
India. 
(2)  The provision contained in sub -section 
(1) shall be applicable irrespective of the 
manner of reception of such satellite or 
terrestrial television broadcast or channel, as 
the case may be by the cable operator. 
 
11. Power to seize equipment 
used for operating the cable 
television network : - (1) If any 
authorised officer has reason to 
believe that the provisions of 
section 3, 4A, 5, 6 or 8 have been 
or are being contravened by any 
cable operator, he may seize the 
equipment being used by such 
cable operator for operating the 
cable television network. 
 
11. Power to seize equipment used for 
operating the cable television network : - (1) 
If any authorised officer has reason to 
believe that the provisions of section 3, 4A , 
5, 5A  6 or 8 have been or are being 
contravened by any cable operator, he may 
seize the equipment being used by such 
cable operator for operating the cable 
television network 
16. Punishment for contravention 
of provisions of this Act -- (1) 
Whoever contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act shall be 
punishable,-  
(a) for the first offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or with 
fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees or with both;  
(b) for every subsequ ent offence, 
with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and 
with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees.  
16. Punishment for contravention of 
provisions of this Act - (1) Whoever 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
shall be punishable,-  
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years or 
with fine which may extend to one  lakh  
rupees or with both;  
(b) for every subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend 
to three lakhs  rupees. 
 
[ New Proviso] 
Provided that in case of violation of section 
5A, fine imposed for the first offence shall 

 
 
not be less than fifty thousand rupees and 
for every subsequent offence it shall not be 
less than one   lakh rupees. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974), the 
contravention of section 4A shall 
be a cog nizable offence under this 
section.] 
(2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 
1974), the contravention of section 4A and 
5A shall be a cognizable offence under this 
section.] 
 
15. The Ministry further clarified the provisions made in the Bill as under:- 
“The Bill seeks to insert a new section, namely section 5A, and to amend 
section 11 and section 16. The amendments proposed in the Act will act as 
a deterrent and discourage cable operators from carrying illegal channels. 
 
The proposed new section 5A prohibits the cable operators from carrying 
unregistered satellite or terrestrial channels on their cable service 
networks irrespective of manner of reception of these channels. This 
provision will also prohibit cable  operators from picking up illegal channels 
via broadband/internet and re -transmitting them. As  is evident in sub -
section(1) of  section 5A, a cable operator is allowed to carry only those 
channels which are indicated at clause (a), (b),(c) of sub -section(1) of 
section 5A. Section 5A(1)(a) covers all  satellite  channels  registered with  
Ministry of I&B while 5A(1)(b) covers channels approved by the Cabinet  
such as channel being operated by Indira Gandhi National  Open University 
(IGNOU) [Gyandarshan Cha nnels], Lok Sabha Channel etc. Channels of 
Prasar Bharati (Doordarshan) are covered under 5A (1) (c). Sub -section (2) 
of section 5A will address the issue of cable operators picking up content 
of TV channels, which are not permitted to be downlinked into t he 
country, channels from the internet/broadband and re -transmit the same 
over the cable networks. 
 
The proposed amendments in section 11 empower the Authorized Officers 
to seize the equipments of the cable operators if they violate section 5A i.e 
if it is  found that cable operators indulge in re -transmission of illegal 
channels. 
 
The proposed amendments in sub -section (1) and sub -section (2) of 
section 16 seek to enhance the existing financial penalties for 
contravention of provisions of the Cable Act. Keeping in view the gravity of 
offence of carriage of illegal channels, it has been proposed to impose a 
bench mark fine for violation of section 5A.  In sub -section(1) of section 16 

 
 
of the Act, it has been proposed to enhance financial penalties for 
violation of  the  provisions of the Act  from  Rs . 1000  to Rs . 1,00,000 for 
the first offence and Rs . 5000   to Rs . 3,00,000, on each  subsequent 
offence. A new proviso has been add ed under section 16 specifying the 
bench mark fine by prescribing a minimum penalty of Rs fifty thousand for 
the first offence and Rs one lakh for each subsequent offence for violation 
of section 5A i.e.  carriage of illegal channels. Moreover, in sub -section (2) 
of section 16, section 5A has been inserted to make violation of section 5A 
a cognizable offence, along with section 4A.” 
 
(i) Consultations held by the Ministry before finalizing and bringing the legislation 
to the Parliament 
 
16. The details of the consultations held by the Ministry in the context of the 
aforesaid Bill as submitted by the Ministry in the written note are as under:- 
 
Views of Prime Minister’s Officer Comments of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting 
It is seen that a number of audio/video 
broadcasters are available on the internet , 
even in case of those TV channels which are 
not permitted to be downlinked into the 
country.  The matter is available both as 
archive (Youtube) and also being streamed 
live.  It is, therefo re, important  that cable 
operators are also barred from relaying 
audio/video feed available on the internet in 
case of those channels which are not 
permitted to be downlinked into India. 
 
     The Ministry may consider the following 
suggestions: 
 
(a) Amend Section 5A as under: 
(addition in bold) 
“Prohibition on re -transmission of 
unregistered channels:  No cable operator 
shall carry or include in his cable service any 
satellite or terrestrial television broadcast or 
channel which has not been registered by the  
Central Government or any such audio/video 
content available on the internet, for being 
viewed within the territory of India.” 
 
(a) It is mentioned that internet is, by and 
large, unregulated, except for certain 
restrictions under the Information 
Technology Act.  The content on the web 
available on youtube, facebook, twitter gets 
picked up regularly by various news TV 
channels and gets shown on their channels.  It 
is pertinent to mention here that news 
channels enjoy rights of fair use under 
copyright provisi ons for the purpose of 
carrying copyrighted content on their 
channels without seeking any separate 
authorization from the rights holder.  Such 
content, therefore, can also be picked by 
cable operators for their local cable channels 
which also carry news.  However, 
responsibility of conformity of such content 
carried on local cable channels to Programme 
and Advertisement Codes vests with the 
cable operators.  Further digitalization will 
enable triple play and the cable operator may 
also seek ISP license for providing internet 
services, whereby the subscriber will have 
access to all such content available on the 
internet like other internet users.  The 
wordings suggested therefore will come in 
conflict with these rights. 

 
 
 
The concern of the Government is carri age 
of unregistered foreign satellite or terrestrial 
broadcast channels, per se, which may be 
received by cable operator either via satellite 
or terrestrial transmission signals from 
neighbouring countries or if such channels 
come via the broadband route t hrough fibre 
optic cables.  This can be suitably addressed 
if a provision is incorporated stipulating that 
the prohibition to carry such channels will 
apply irrespective of the manner of 
reception by cable operator of such 
channels.  Legislative Department  has also 
recommended that the term “registered” be 
further elaborated and that section 5A be 
split into two parts.  Accordingly the 
proposed section 5A has been re -drafted.  
Legislative Department has vetted the 
following formulation for section 5A: 
“5A.  Prohibition on re -transmission of 
unregistered channels:  (1) No cable 
operator shall carry or include in his cable 
service any satellite or terrestrial television 
broadcast or channel unless such broadcast 
or channel has been – 
 
(a) registered with, or permi tted by, the 
Central Government for being viewed 
within the territory of India, in accordance 
with the policy guidelines for downlinking 
of television channels as may be specified 
by the Central Government from time to 
time; or 
(b) approved by the Central Gove rnment 
for being viewed within the territory of 
India; or 
(c) allowed in accordance with the provisions of 
any Central Act or rules made thereunder for 
being viewed within the territory of India. 
(2)    The provision contained in sub -section 
(1) shall be appli cable irrespective of the 
manner of reception of such satellite or 
terrestrial television broadcast or channel, as 
the case may be by the cable operator.” 
Thus, Section 5A(1) (a) covers all satellite 
channels registered with Ministry of I& B while 
5A(1)(b) covers channels approved by the 

 
 
Cabinet such as channel being operated by 
Indira Gandhi National Open University 
(IGNOU).  Channels of Prasar Bharati 
(Doordarshan) are covered under 5A(1) (c). 
  
(b)   In Section 16, the floor value of fin e can 
be specified.  Under Section A the floor value 
could be Rs. 50,000  and under Section B, it 
could be Rs. 1.00 lakh.   
(b) As regards the suggestion of 
prescribing a floor value for penalty for section 
16(a) and 16(b).  It is mentioned that section 
16 pertains to all offences under the Act which 
may not deserve such high penalties.  It is, 
therefore, appropriate if a provision is given 
under section 16 prescribing floor value for 
the penalties for violation of section 5A i.e. 
illegal carriage of unregistere d channels.  The 
section 16(1) is proposed as under:- 
 
16. Punishment for contravention of 
provisions of this Act: - (1) Whoever 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
shall be punishable,- 
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to two years or with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or 
with both; 
(b) for every subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years and with fine which may extend to 
three lakh rupees. 
After clause (b), a new proviso is proposed as 
follows: 
Provided that in case of contravention of the 
provisions of section 5A, the fine for the first 
offence shall not be less than fifty thousand 
rupees and for the second or any subsequent 
offence, shall not be less than one  lakh 
rupees.”; 
The above formulations have since been 
vetted by Legislative Department. 
 
  

 
 
In addition to the above suggestions, it is 
mentioned that the problem of availability of 
non permitted TV channels available for 
viewing over the internet needs to be taken 
cognizance of , and the Ministry may take 
further action as appropriate in this regard.   
As already stated above, internet is, by and 
large, unregulated, except for certain 
restrictions under the Information Technology 
Act, which is being administered by Ministry of 
Communications and IT.  Cable Act deals with 
content broadcast by cabl e operators through 
cable and does not deal with internet.  As 
such, no proposal for regulation of internet 
has been include.   
Views of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) Comments of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting  
 
Draft Cabinet Note for amen dment of the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act 
1995 has been examined and Ministry of 
Home Affairs endorses the same.  However, 
Ministry of Home Affairs is of the opinion that 
mere enhanced financial penalty for violation 
may not be adequate deter rent in view of 
potential to make huge money by illegal 
broadcasting even after paying the penalty.  
As such, Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting is therefore advised that for the 
second violation, the punishment in terms of 
imprisonment should be made mandatory by 
stipulating that:  For the second violation 
punishment could be “imprisonment for a 
term up to_________years, or fine, or both.”  
The M/o Information & Broadcasting may 
decide/work out on the quantum of 
imprisonment in consultation with M/o Law.  
While concurring with the proposal contained 
in the draft cabinet note.  MHA has also 
expressed the view that mere enhanced 
penalty for violation may not be adequate 
deterrent and has suggested that for the 
second violation, the punishment in terms of 
imprisonment be made mandatory.  In this 
context, under section 16 of the Act, for any 
violation of the Act, besides financial penalty, 
imprisonment has already been provided for 
and the amendment proposed here is only to 
enhance to financial penalty while  other 
penalties already provided in the Act remain 
the same.  Hence, the suggestion of MHA is 
already provided for in the Act.   
 
(ii) The technological option to address the issue of showing illegal channels by Cable 
Operators 
17. When enquired whether technological intervention can address the issue 
proposed to be addressed by the amending legislation, TRAI informed that technological 
intervention may not address the issue proposed to be addressed by the amending 
legislation. 
 
18. Further, when asked as to how far international convention treaty can address 
the issue of illegal carriage of terrestrial channels through availab ility of signals of 
foreign television channel satellite, the Committee have been apprised by TRAI that the 

 
 
footprints of the satellite cannot be strictly restricted to specific geographical 
boundaries of any territory or country in such a way that one has full signal strength 
within the boundary and has zero signal strength just outside the boundary. Generally 
the signal strength fades in a gradual manner. Therefore, the international conventions, 
treaties may not be able to fully address the issue. 
 
19. When enquired whether the consultations with the Department of Electronic and 
Information Technology were unde rtaken to address the serious issues raised by PMO 
as stated above, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“The Cabinet Secretary had taken a meeting of the committee of 
Secretaries on 25 October, 2010 to discuss the issue of illegal broadcasting 
of channels in  India and in the course of the meeting, it was decided that 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting constitute a Group consisting 
of representatives of National Technical Research Organization (NTRO) 
CERT-In, and Intelligence Bureau to explore possib ility of technical 
solutions to block illegal channels. The Group met twice to discuss the 
matter and sought the comments of Wireless Planning and Coordination 
(WPC) Wing of the Ministry of Communication and Information technology 
on various technical and regulatory matters and the Deputy Wireless 
Advisor was co-opted as Member of the Group. After exploring the various 
technical options, the Group was of the unanimous view that localized 
blocking of a particular TV channel using terrestrial transmitter is n either 
feasible nor financially viable option and secondly that although it is 
technically feasible to block any particular channel on a pan India basis by 
disturbing/jamming the downlink frequency of a particular TV channel, 
such actions are not internati onally acceptable and are against provision 
197 of ITU as well as provision of Article 21 of Radio Regulation.” 
 
20. When asked whether consultations with various stakeholders which include cable 
associations and public at large w ere undertaken by the Mini stry, the Committee were 
informed that such consultation was not undertaken since the entire process of 
identification of illegal channels and their proliferation in the country was based on an 
Intelligence Bureau Report in 2009 which had identified a list  of unauthorized foreign TV 
channels down linked and transmitted by Cable Operators in different places. 
 
21. TRAI during the course of deliberations  informed the Committee that no 
consultation has been undertaken by TRAI either on its own or on the insta nce of the 

 
 
Ministry of information and Broadcasting on the issue s covered under the aforesaid 
amending legislation. 
 
(iii) The Comparative data of consumers watching TV t hrough various available 
technologies and the future perspective 
 
22. Today there are various options available for watching TV. Such options include 
terrestrial transmission, Cable TV, DTH, DSL etc.  The Ministry has informed that as per 
the FICCI- KPMG Indian Media Entertainment Industry Report 2012, the total number of 
subscribers of Cable TV, DD Direct and DTH, for the year 2011 are provided as under:- 
 
 
23. With regard to IPTV subscribers, the Committee have been informed that the 
data is not available. 
 
24. With regard to future perspective, the Ministry in the written note apprised the 
Committee that as per the aforesaid Report projected subscribers of Cable TV, DTH, DD 
Direct and IPTV for the years 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 are as under:- 
 
Note: Figures in bracket are percentage share of the projected subscribers in each year  
 
 
Platform Total Number of households (In million) % share 
Cable 74 62% 
DTH 37 31% 
DD Direct 8 7% 
Total 119 100% 
Platform/Year  Projected  Number of subscribers (In million) 
 
2012 2013 2014 2015 
Cable 78 (59%) 82(57%) 81 (52.2%) 79 (47.3%) 
DTH 46 (35%) 53 (37%) 64 (41.3%) 78 (46.7%) 
DD Direct 8 (6%) 8 (5.5%) 8 (5.2%) 8 (4.8%) 
IPTV  - 1 (0.5%) 2 (1.3%) 2 (1.2%) 
Total 132 144 155 167 

 
 
(iv) Criteria for identification of ‘anti-national’ contents 
 
25. As per the Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the contents of about 
25 channels are found to be not conducive to the security environment of the country 
and may pose a potential threat to the peace and security of the Country. 
26. Further in  the Background Note furnished by the Ministry, it is stated that 
Intelligence Bureau had identified around 25 channels and informed the Government 
that the contents of these channels are not conducive to the security environment in 
the Country and pose a potential security hazard. 
27. When enquired how it is decided that the television contents are ‘anti -national’, 
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence informed the Committee as under:- 
 “It is certainly subjective and it is not so simple. Now th at you have raised 
this issue, let me give very specific examples. In certain border areas, 
certain foreign channels are regularly seen. If you stop them there, the 
whole place would erupt. It has happened, we are approached and asked 
not to create such a crisis.”  
 
28. In this context, the Ministry in the written note stated as under:- 
The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules 
promulgated thereunder at present regulate broadcast of programmes 
and advertisements on private satellite  TV channels.  The Act does not 
provide any pre -censorship of the programmes and advertisements 
telecast on such TV channels.  However, all programmes and 
advertisements telecast on these channels are required to adhere to the 
Programme Code and Advertising  Code provided in the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and Rules framed thereunder.  The 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has also notified guidelines for 
down-linking and up-linking of various TV channels in India.” 
  

 
 
 
29. When enqu ired about the yardstick  to conclude that the contents shown by a 
channel are not conducive to the security environment of the country/anti -national and 
the agency who makes the decision in this regard, the Ministry did not respond the 
matter categorically. Explaining it further, the Ministry has submitted as under:-  
 
“The issue of illegal transmission of foreign TV channels by cable operators 
emanated from the report of the Intelligence Bureau (IB). Intelligence 
Bureau, while providing a S tate-wise list of some channels being illegally 
carried, had also brought to the notice of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting that the contents of some of these channels are not 
conducive to the security environment in the country and pose a potential 
security hazard if the continuance of these illegal channels are allowed in 
India. Identification of illegal channels, therefore, is based on the report of 
IB that the contents on these channels are not suitable to the security 
environment in the country.” 
 
30. On the query of the Committee regarding action that has been taken against 25 
channels identified by Intelligence Bureau showing the contents not conducive to the 
security environment in the country , the Ministry in the post evidence reply  stated as 
under:-  
“The report of the Intelligence Bureau which has been forwarded to this 
Ministry has been taken serious note of. Keeping in view the sensitivity 
involved in the matter, a CoS has considered this issue and looked into 
various options to tackle this menace.  The CoS has finally recommended 
that provisions in the Cable Act may be made so as to incorporate the 
offence of illegal transmission/ re -transmission of channels an offence and 
make existing financial penalties stringent so as to serve as a deterrent for  
such offenders. There has been no action reported on such offences so far 
however, the incorporation of such legislation in the Cable Act would 
provide the Authorised Officers under the act to take suitable action 
against erring cable operators. It is, th erefore, imperative that such a 
legislation should be part of the Cable Act so that offences of the nature 
pertaining to transmission/re -transmission of illegal channels are 
effectively dealt with and action can be taken thereon.”  
 
 

 
 
(v) Different provisions for different service providers with regard to regulating the 
contents which are found to be not conducive to the security environment of 
the Country 
 
31. The representatives of the cable and MSO associations , during the course of 
consultations, raised reservations about the provisio ns made in the Bill which intend  to 
regulate the cable television network. The stakeholders apprised the Committee that 
besides cable network there are other ways where viewers receive the illegal channels . 
Unregistered channels are also carried through IPTV, Mobile TV and video streaming, 
direct to subscribers without the help of a cable operator.  It was suggested that the 
offensive content in this regard should be banned in its entirety.  
 
32. With regard to the guidelines/rules, legislative framework to address the issue of 
transmission / retransmission of illegal channels by various service providers, the 
Ministry apprised as under:- 
 
“The relevant provision to address the issue of transmission or re -
transmission of illegal channels under IPTV guidelines is as follows:- 
    
(vi)  Telecom licensees while providing TV channels through IPTV shall 
transmit only such broadcast satellite television channels in exactly same 
form (unaltered) which are registered with or are otherwise permitted by 
the Ministry of Information and Broad casting. In such cases, the 
responsibility to ensure that content is in accordance with the extant laws, 
rules, regulations etc shall be that of the broadcaster and telecom licensee 
will not be held responsible. The IPTV service provider shall not carry an y 
broadcast satellite television channels prohibited either permanently or 
temporarily or not registered with the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting.  
 
(vii) The Telecom Licensee while providing TV services through IPTV shall 
receive the satellite sign als of a registered TV channel directly from the 
broadcasters and in no case such satellite signals of TV channels be taken 
directly from the Multi System Operators. In other words, the telecom 
operators providing IPTV will be eligible to obtain/receive sa tellite signals 
of registered TV channels only from the broadcaster.  
 

 
 
(viii) Telecom service providers providing IPTV will show only those News 
and Current Affairs television channels which have been registered with 
Ministry of Information and Broadcastin g. They will not produce or 
provide any other broadcast or non-broadcast channel having any element 
of News and Current Affairs.  
 
(ix) The provisions of Programme code and Advertisement code as 
provided in Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act 1995 an d Rules 
thereunder shall be applicable even in the case of contents other than TV 
Channels from broadcast provided by the Telecom IPTV service provider. 
Since it is the telecom licensee who will be providing this content, 
therefore, he shall be responsible  for ensuring compliance to the codes 
with respect to such content. In addition to this, such licensees will also be 
bound by various Acts, instructions, directions, guidelines issued by the 
Central Government from time to time to regulate the contents.  
 
(x) If the content is being sourced from content providers other than 
telecom service provider, then it will be the responsibility of the telecom 
service provider to ensure that their agreements with such content 
providers contain appropriate clauses to en sure prior compliance with the 
Programme Code”. 
 
The relevant provision to address the issue of transmission or re -
transmission of illegal channels under DTH guidelines is as follows: 
“ Article-5- Compliance with Programme and Advertising Codes 
5.1 The Licensee shall ensure adherence to the Programme Code (PC) and 
Advertisement Code (AC), laid down by the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting from time to time.  
 
5.2 The Licensee shall invariably ensure that the subscribers of the service 
do not have access to any pornographic channel or to secret/ anti -national 
messaging and the like. If the Licensee fails to do so , the License shall 
stand cancelled.  
 
Article-6- Prohibition of certain activities  
6.1 The Licensee shall not carry any channels prohibited by the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting.  
 
6.2 The Licensee shall ensure that its facilities are not used for transmitting 
any objectionable or obscene conte nt, messages or communication 
inconsistent with the laws of India. The use of the facility or service for anti 
national activities would be construed as an offence punishable under the 

 
 
Indian Penal Code and applicable laws and will attract immediate 
termination of License.  
 
6.3 The Licensor reserves the right to prohibit the transmission or 
reception of programmes in the interest of national security or in the 
event of emergency/war or similar type of situation. Notwithstanding any 
agreement between the Li censee and the content providers, the Licensee 
shall stop forthwith, transmission of TV channels or any content, as and 
when directed to do so by the Licensor or any other designated lawful 
authority.” 
 
33. With regard to regulation of internet in this reg ard, the Secretary of the Ministry 
during the course of deliberations apprised the Committee as under:- 
 
“There are also provisions in the IT Act, 67 and 67 A which provides for 
punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic 
form, punishment for publishing or transmitting a material cons isting 
sexually explicit act, etc. in electronic form, punishment for publishing or 
transmitting material depicting children in sexually explicit act, etc. in 
electronic form, etc. So, there are provisions in the IT Act.” 
 
(vi) Existing position with regard to the Regulations in respect of Cable TV 
 
34. As per Section 5 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 , no 
person shall transmit or re -transmit through a cable service any program me unless such 
programme is in conformity with the prescribed programme code . Further,  Rule 6 of 
the  Cable Television Networks Rules 1994 explains about the Programme Code. Rule 6 
(6) in this connection provides as under:- 
 
“ No cable operator shall carry or include in his cable service any television 
broadcast or channel, which has not been registered by the Central 
Government for being viewed within the territory of India: 
[Provided that a cable operator may continue to carry or include in his 
cable service any television broadcast or channel, whose application for 
registration to the Central Government was made on or before 11 May, 
2006 and is under consideration, for a period up to 15 June, 2009 or till 
such registration has been granted or refused, whichever is earlier. 
 
Provided further that channels uplinking from India, in accordance with 
permission for uplinking granted before 2 December, 2005, shall be 

 
 
treated as “registered” television channels and can be carried or  included 
in the cable service.” 
 
35. Further, Section 4(6) and (7) of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2011 provides as under:- 
“(6) Without prejudice to the compliance of eligibility criteria for 
registration of cable operators, the Central Government may prescribe, 
having regard to the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality, foreign relations or contempt of court, defamation or 
incitement to a n offence, such terms and conditions or registration 
including additional criteria or conditions to be fulfilled by the cable 
operators.” 
 
“(7) The Central Government may suspend or revoke the registration 
granted under sub-section (5) if the cable operator violates one or more of 
the terms and conditions of such registration: 
Provided that no such order of suspension or revocation shall be made 
without giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the cable 
operator.” 
 
36. When enquired about the number and details of the registered channels/un 
registered channels State/UT wise in the country, the Ministry furnished the detailed list 
of the such channels. The Ministry also stated that the list of permitted channels is 
available on the website of the Ministry www.mib.nic.in and is periodically updated. 
 
37. With regard to the definition of illegal channels, the Ministry clarified that the 
channels which are not reflected in the list of registered channels are considered as 
unregistered illegal channels. 
 
38. When enquired about the commonality of regulatory framework for various TV 
service providers, t he Ministry has stated that the Cable Act and Rules thereunder 
prescribe the ‘Programme Code and the Advertisement Code’ which is a common 
legislative framework applicable to all the platforms.   
39. While explaining how the cable operators pick  illegal channels, the Ministry 
clarified as under:- 

 
 
“TV Channels reach subscriber homes through various platform service 
providers like cable operators, DTH operators and IPTV service providers.  
If the satellite footprints cover India, it is possible for these service 
providers to downlink an y foreign TV Channel which is uplinked from 
abroad. It is also possible that cable operator in the border areas can take 
the feed of the terrestrial channels of neighboring countries which are not 
allowed to be shown in India. It is also possible that cabl e operators can 
pick illegal channels via broadband/internet or IPTV, Mobile TV, video 
streaming, etc and retransmitting them. Presently, the control over the 
carriage of such channels is exercised by mandating that a foreign TV 
channel cannot be distribut ed in India unless it is registered with the 
Ministry of I&B under downlinking guidelines.” 
 
40. While justifying the proposed amendments to regulate only the cable TV network 
so as to make the provisions for them more stringent, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“As the channels carried on DTH services and IPTV services can be 
centrally monitored as these are addressable, these service providers do 
not indulge in carriage of unregistered channels. Thus, the problem of 
carriage of illegal channels is mainly wi th the cable operators as they 
provide localized services. The objective of the Bill is to prevent 
transmission/re-transmission of unregistered illegal foreign TV channels by 
cable operators on their networks due to easy availability of satellite 
footprints over India and terrestrial feed or though internet.” 
 
As far as DTH and IPTV operators are concerned as per the licensing 
conditions they are required to maintain the recordings of programmes 
and advertisements carried on the platform for a period of 90 days from 
the date of broadcast and produce the same to the Licensor or its 
authorised representative, as and when required. The guidelines for DTH 
include the eligibility criteria, period of license, basic 
conditions/obligations, terms and conditions of l icense, the procedure for 
obtaining the DTH license as also the conditions for prohibition of certain 
activities, technical standards and other obligations, monitoring and 
inspection conditions, and condition related to national security etc.  DTH 
and IPTV  licenses are granted by the Central Government and these 
operators are required to enter into a license ag reement with Central 
Government. The terms and conditions of these license agreement is such 
that any violation of one or more terms and conditions w ould render their 
license liable to be cancelled/terminated or revoked depending on the 
nature of violation. In view of these stringent licensing conditions, these 
services providers do not indulge in carriage of illegal channels.   
  

 
 
Ministry also has a m echanism of monitoring the content on the DTH 
platform through its Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC).  
Therefore, the possibility of illegal channels being transmitted on such 
platforms is ruled out.” 
 
41. The Committee during the course of interaction with various cable industry 
stakeholders have been given the impression that the cable operators are being 
overburdened with penalties, punishments with so many regulations that small cable 
operators would not be able to protect themselves. When asked about the comments of 
the Ministry on the aforesaid observation  of small cable operators, the Ministry stated 
as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has no bias towards small or large cable operators.  The 
Cable Act has been enacted with a view to being uniformity in the cable TV 
operations.  Any violations of the Cable Act attract penalties enjoined in 
the Cable Act uniformly for any violators irrespective of their business 
size.” 
 
42. While justifying the position that DTH an d IPTV service provider s do not indulge 
in carriage of illegal channels, the Ministry in the written reply stated that:- 
 
“DTH and IPTV licenses are granted by the Central Government and these 
operators are required to enter into a license agreement with Central 
Government .The terms and conditions of these license agreement is such 
that any violation of one or more terms and conditions would render their 
license liable to be cancelled/terminated or revoked depending on the 
nature of violation. In view of these stringent licensing conditions, these 
services providers do not indulge in carriage of illegal channels.” 
 
43. The Broadcaster Association  during the course of consultation in the context of 
the present legislation stated that cable operators  do not come under the purview of 
Uplinking and Downliking Guidelines and suggested that the cable operators should also 
be subject to guidelines in this regard.  
 
44. When the issue of licensing for cable operators was raised, t he Secretary , 
Ministry of Informa tion and Broadcasting during the course of deliberations clarified as 
under:- 

 
 
‘It is good idea. The TRAI did mention about licensing. They had actually 
considered this and brought it under regulator. When we formulated the 
Bill we had said that the regulat or will actually be a licensing authority as 
well. The problem today is that we have 60,000 cable operators.  If you 
licence, you also really need to do their renewals, ensure that the licence 
conditions are fulfilled, etc.  It becomes a far more formal ar rangement at 
this point of time.  You will require a huge mechanism. Or you delegate to 
District Magistrates which again has its own problems about licensing and 
following the licence conditions . S o, we are creating say five hundred 
regulators across the country if we do the licensing.  So, there are practical 
problems.  All of these perhaps can be addressed collectively, if we are 
able to really agree to have a media regulator, not a media regulator in the 
negative sense but a media regulator who addresses  all questi ons of 
technology for instance.” 
 
45. While elaborating on the infrastructure constraints, the Ministry in the post 
evidence written replies submitted as under:- 
“The Cable operators are providing localized services throughout the 
country. The M inistry presently does not have any agency under it which 
has local presence. The  Ministry had , in the past, consulted with the 
Department of Posts  (DoP) as to whether they could  act as a licensing 
agency for  60000 cable operators. While  DoP had agreed to limit its role 
to function as a licensing authority it was not ready, however, to take up 
the responsibilities relating to Appellate jurisdiction, follow up work 
related to litigations in various Courts as also enforcing the orders passed 
by the licensing Authorities.”   
(vii) Deadline with regard to digitization of cable TV and its effect on regulation of 
Cable industry 
 
46. Section 4A (1) of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2011 passed by Parliament on 19 December, 2011 and notified on 31 December, 2011 
provides as under:- 
“4A (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in 
the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make it obligatory for every cable operator to transm it or re -transmit 
programmes of any channel in an encrypted form through a digital 
addressable system with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
notification and different dates may be specified for different States, 
cities, towns or areas, as the case may be: 
 

 
 
Provided that the date specified in the notification shall not be earlier than 
six months from the date of issue of such notification to enable the cable 
operators in different States, cities, towns or areas to install the 
equipment required for the purposes of this sub-section.” 
 
47. With regard to the deadline for implementation of digitization in cable TV sector, 
the Ministry furnished the following information:- 
“The process of implementation of digitalization in cable TV sector has 
been planned in a phased manner leading to complete switch over off of 
analogue cable services in the country by 31st December, 2014.The 
following timelines have been fixed by the Ministry for the 
implementation of DAS: 
 
 Phase-I : Four Metros of Delhi, Mum bai, Kolkata and Chennai by 31 
October ,2012 
 Phase-II: Cities with a population more than one million by 31st 
March,2013 
 Phase-III : All urban areas (Municipal Corp./ Municipalities ) by 30th 
September,2014 
 Phase-IV: Rest of India by 31st December, 2014. 
 
48. As can be seen from the phases explained above, the areas nearing the borders 
of India would be covered in the Phase III and Phase IV of the timeline which is by 30th 
September, 2014 and 31st December, 2014 respectively.” 
 
49. On a query, whether it wo uld be possible to control , monitor or regulate all the 
services provided through the cable network with digitization, the Secretary 
acknowledged that it would be possible to a large extent.  
 
50. The Chairman, TRAI during the course of deliberations in th is regard stated as 
under:- 
“xxxxx........really speaking, is that we have two options. Either we wait till 
everything is digitised and then because digitisation leaves a trail, we 
would be able to catch somebody. But that is very far off in the future – 
2014 or 2015. My understanding today at least, not as TRAI Chairman but 
as a citizen, is that the intelligence agencies are saying that we have a 
problem on the border and we want to stop this happening at the border 
because otherwise people are beaming sig nals which are causing 
disaffection. If it is an intelligence requirement, we would say ‘go ahead 

 
 
with it now because it is simply not possible for us to give you any 
technical solution to the problem in the immediate future.” 
 
51. When specifically asked whether it is prudent to expedite digitization 
deadline in case of border areas by taking pro -active initiatives by the 
Government instead of resorting to legislative option for the interim period after 
which the law may become redundant, the Secretary dur ing the course of oral 
evidence further stated as under :-  
“xxxxx……….It is not difficult to catch it. In fact, technology is available 
where you can be able to detect which particular channel has been shown 
by a cable operator at what period of time. This  technology is there and 
there is nothing unusual about it. So, from our perspective, the problem is 
serious and we really need to deal with it. When we really moved this 
Amendment to the Act, at that point of time, to the best of my knowledge, 
the Parliam ent had not passed the Digitization Amendment in the Cable 
Act. So, these two linkages are getting established now. Now that the 
Parliament has passed the Act amending the Cable Act for compulsory, 
mandatory digitization, why can we not really wait? That p recisely is the 
issue that you are raising. My response to it would be that even if there is 
a provision that may become redundant after a while, it is better to have 
the provision rather than not to have it.” 
 
52. The Ministry in the post evidence replies  further submitted that these provisions 
should be in place in the Act at all times even if the technological advancement in the 
DAS regime may make such an offence redundant.  
 
(viii) Contradiction in some of the contents of the amending legislation with the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill  
 
53. Certain contradictions in the provisions made in the amending legislation with 
the Objects and Reasons of the Bill have been noted  by the Committee during the 
course of examination.  One of the contradictions was that marginal heading of Clause 2 
states ‘insertion of new Section 5A Prohibition of re -transmission of unregistered 
channels’, whereas the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the legislation states that 
the Bill proposes to amend Cable Act to prohibit transmission or re -transmission of 
unregistered channels.  In this connection, the Secretary during the course of oral 

 
 
evidence clarified that the legislation covers both trans mission and re -transmission and 
there may be some editorial corrections which are possible to make. The representative 
of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) during the course of oral 
evidence acknowledged that little addition in the margi nal heading may save a lot of 
litigation. 
 
54. Another contradiction pointed out during the course of deliberations was that 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons states about Uplinking and Downlinking whereby 
it is stated that several complaints have been received by the Central Government 
against cable operators showing illegal channels which have neither been permitted to 
uplink from India nor permitted or registered to downlink into India, as per the 
Uplinking and Downlinking Guidelines, the issue being addressed by the amending 
legislation.  The proposed Section 5A(a) talks about only downlinking of television 
channels.  The representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) clarified that there would be same interpretation.  In t he written replies 
furnished by the Ministry , when it was asked why the amending provisions have been 
restricted only to ‘downlinking’, it is stated as under:- 
 
‘The issue of illegal channels and its transmission emanates from 
downlinking of signals origin ated from territory outside the boundaries of 
India.  Intelligence Bureau has identified a list of 25 illegal foreign channels 
whose origin is in foreign territory and, therefore, such channels require 
downlinking permission for transmitting the channel le gally over the TV 
network.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons refers to complaints 
received by Central Government against Cable Operators showing illegal 
channels which have neither been permitted to uplink from India nor 
permitted or registered to down link into India as per the 
uplinking/downlinking guidelines.  The uplinking permission is accorded to 
companies to uplink only those TV channels which are specifically 
approved or permitted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
for uplinking from India, after obtaining necessary security clearance from 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  Thus, there are no instances of illegal channel 
being uplinked as it would not get the requisite permission from the 
Ministry.” 
 

 
 
55. TRAI also in the written replies clarified as under: 
“A television channel re -transmitted through any television network in 
India may be uplinked either from within the territory of India or from 
outside the Indian territory. However, in both the cases it is mandatory 
that the channel is permitted under the downlinking guidelines.  In view of 
this, the inclusion of the world ‘Uplinking’ in the Bill, may not be 
necessary.” 
 
56. The Ministry in the post evidence reply in this regard further submitted as under:- 
“Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has two sets of Policy 
Guidelines for granting permission to private satellite TV channels in India. 
While regulation of foreign TV channels uplinked from abroad and 
distributed in India for public viewing is governed by "Policy Guidelines for  
Downlinking of Television channels", private TV channels which are 
uplinked from India are governed by "Guidelines for Uplinking from India".  
These two guidelines are together known as “uplinking and downlinking 
guidelines”. This is the reason the words “the uplinking/downlinking 
guidelines” has been mentioned in the Statement of Objects and reasons. 
A satellite channel to be viewed within the territory of India has to be 
registered with the Ministry of I&B under downlinking guidelines with the 
exception of those channels which are approved/allowed by the Central 
Government, operating by or on behalf of Parliament and channels 
operated by Doordarshan (DD). The issue of illegal channels arises on 
account of two reasons which are  availability of   satellite  footprints over 
India which are illegally downlinked by cable operators and secondly from 
the  re -transmission of terrestrial feed from neighboring countries.  This 
situation does not arise in the case of uplinking of channels as only 
registered channels approved by Ministry of I&B are allowed to uplink 
from India.  Necessary clearances are required from WPC, Department of 
Telecom and Department of Space for uplinking of channels. Moreover, 
the teleport through which the channel is uplinked is coordinated with 
Network Operations Control Center (NOCC) of Department of 
Telecommunications. This eliminates the possibility of any illegal channel 
being uplinked from India.  In view of this, there is no need for including 
guidelines for uplinking in the proposed Bill.” 
  

 
 
(ix) Concerns of the stakeholders regarding coverage of local content by the 
amending legislation 
 
57. The Cable Association in the memorandum stated that t he new clause 5(A)(2) 
makes the sub -section (1) applicable irrespective of the manner of rec eption of such 
satellite or terrestrial television broadcast or channels. This Clause should not include 
video channels, which a cable operator is permitted under Section 2(g) of the Cable 
Operator Networks (Regulation) Act 1995 but there are no guidelines to register them. A 
cable operator may receive these video channels from an MSO or generate his own, 
adhering to the programme and advertisement code mentioned in the Rules of the 
Cable TV Act. 
 
58. On the apprehension of the stakeholders, the Ministry clarified as under:- 
“The proposed provision does not cover the programming services 
generated at the level MSO/cable operator under the section 2(g) of the 
Cable Act.  The Cable operator can under section 2(g) the Act transmit 
programme on his network and t he  “ Programme” as defined in the Cable 
Act can be both pre -recorded content and live content. There is no 
restriction on the nature of the programme allowed to be transmitted 
subject to it being in compliance with the Programme Code and 
Advertisement Cod e as prescribed under Rule 6 and Rule 7 of the Cable 
Rules. Therefore, these programmes are excluded from the ambit of the 
proposed section 5A.” 
 
(x) Issues related to implementation of the provisions made in the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
 
59. The existing Cable Television Network Act provides certain penalties for 
transmission or re -transmission of illegal channels.  When asked about the number of 
cases whereby the penalties have been imposed, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in the written information could not furnish the specific data. TRAI has 
stated that whenever a complaint regarding re -transmission of illegal channels is 
received in TRAI, it is forwarded to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for 
appropriate action by them as the issue pertains to content regulation.  When asked 
about such complaints received from TRAI, the Ministry has stated that they have not 

 
 
received any complaints from TRAI.  Now it has been stated that the efforts would be 
made to compile the information from the States.   
60. Further, when asked whether survey by any organization has ever been made to 
see the impact of implementation of the Cable Television Act particularly the 
implementation of Section 16 which provides the penalty fo r contravening any of the 
provisions of the Cable Act, the Ministry has stated that no such survey has been made.   
61. TRAI has submitted that as per the provisions of the Cable Act the Authorized 
Officer is competent enough to take action against the err ing cable operators.  The 
Authorized Officer  may seize equipments of the erring cable operators or lodge 
complaint in the competent Court of Law. When asked whether the Ministry is aware of 
the number of cases pending in various Courts in the aforesaid con nection, the Ministry 
has stated that no data has been compiled in the Ministry.   
62. Further, when asked about the action taken against the 25 channels identified by 
Intelligence Bureau as showing the contents not conducive to the security environment 
of the Country, the Ministry in the post evidence written reply stated that there has 
been no action reported on such actions so far.  
 
(xi) International Experience with regard to Regulating Transmission of Anti 
National content on TV 
 
63. When asked how the issue of transmission of anti -national content by various 
service providers is being addressed internationally, the Ministry has mentioned that 
they don’t have any such information.   
(xii) Enforcement Agencies in the context of the Cabl e Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 
 
64. While emphasizing on the need for enforcement of provisions made in the Cable 
Act through the Authorised Officers, the Chairman TRAI during the course of oral 
evidence stated as under:- 

 
 
“Within the CTV Act,  there are officers called Authorised Officers.  Like all 
other laws, people will obey the law if it is enforced.  If it is not enforced, 
people will ignore it.  The Authorised Officers have powers under Section 
11 to go and seize the equipment....I suspec t the way they have worked 
the legislation is that they have increased the deterrent, but at the end of 
the day, the answer will lie only in this.  If our primary concern is to 
prevent such channels, then the Authorised Officers have to do what they 
are expected to do under the law.  If they do not catch them, where is the 
question of levying fine or putting them in prison?  Ultimately it is at that 
level that something needs to be done.” 
 
65. The Ministry in the Background Note has also stated that althoug h the 
Authorized Officer s have been adequately empowered to stem the problem of illegal 
beaming of channels by local cable operators, relevant provisions of the Act for 
preventing such carriage have seldom been exercised in letter and spirit due to local 
pressure or due to apprehension that such stoppage may trigger law and order 
problems. 
66. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence in this context stated as under:- 
‘Now, the authorised agencies are local agencies or local authorities. I 
would not  have any hesitation in saying that in a large number of cases, 
while the problem has been very real, there has been reluctance on the 
part of local administration to act against them. In some cases where the 
local administration has acted, it has raised s uch a socio -political crisis in 
that area that post-haste this had to be really withdrawn. But the problem 
is there and it has to be really handled. Therefore, the view was to actually 
create a deterrent kind of a provision’. 
 
(xiii) State/District Level Monitoring Committees 
 
67. The Committee have been apprised that with a view to facilitate the Authorized 
Officers in enforcing the Act, particularly in curbing illegal channels, the Ministry of I& B 
has formulated a detailed guideline for setting up of State and District level Monitoring 
Committees to monitor the content transmitted by the cable operators. The 
compositions of these Committees include  representation of academicians, 

 
 
psychologists, so ciologists, NGOs working for women and child welfare, etc. These 
Committees are intended to provide a forum for deliberations with regard to the 
content and channels carried through Cable Network. The deliberations are publicized in 
the local press for pub lic knowledge. Any action recommended by such Committees to 
the Authorized Officer  and consequent action has wider social acceptance. In view of 
the fact that Authorized Officers are well known officers of the area as also the fact that 
members of the State and District level Monitoring Committees are well known persons 
of the region and their deliberations are given wider publicity. 
68. The Ministry in the post evidence written reply has further stated that  in order to 
enforce the Cable Act and Rules at th e State/District level, the Ministry issued order on 
6 September, 2005 for “Monitoring Committee for the Programme and Advertisements 
telecast by Cable TV channels” at the State, District/local level. Subsequently, detailed 
guidelines were issued by this M inistry on 19  February, 2008 providing for District level 
Monitoring Committee and State level Monitoring Committee. The State  and District 
level Monitoring Committee are headed by Secretary, Information & Public Relations 
and District Magistrate (or Police Commissioner) as Chairman  respectively. 
 69. The District Level Committee looks into complaints of public in  regard to content 
telecast by TV channels. Thus, there is already a provision that Consumer can  lodge the 
complaint with the Authorized Officer designated or with the District/State Level 
Committee set up for the purpose. The composition of the District level Committee is 
fairly wide to cover not only the concerned District authorities but also the enlightened 
members of the public, viz, Principal of one of the Women’s College in the District (to be 
selected by the DM), representative of a leading NGO working for children welfare (to 
be nominated by the DM), representative of a leading NGO working for Women welfare 
and Academicians/Psycholo gists/Sociologists. So far, Fifteen (15) States. viz, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh , Meghalaya, Mizoram, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal have set up Sta te level Committees. When enquired about the mechanism 
available with the Ministry to monitor the working of these Committees, t he Ministry in 

 
 
the post evidence written note stated that it did not maintain centralized data about 
functioning of these Committees.  
 
70. With re gard to the status of setting up of District Level Monitoring Committee, 
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence apprised that at least 266 District Level 
Committees have been set up. 
(xiv) Setting up of Expert Body  
  
71. The Secretary during the course of deliberations stated as under:- 
‘Today broadcasting issues of technological nature are addressed by the 
TRAI. But there are issues which are very specialized. There are issues 
that we confront when we talk of digitization . There are many 
technological issues-must carry, must provide provisions, etc., which have 
very strong technological implications. And then we realize that we need 
expert bodies to really advise and guide the Ministry on these matters.’ 
  
72. In the post evidence reply, the Ministry clarified that by Expert Body, the 
Secretary meant the proposed media regulator envisaged in the Broadcasting Bill, 2007. 
It was also replied that  TRAI being a regulator has requisite expertise in the matters of 
broadcasting and cable services. 
73. On the future plan of the Ministry to set up such body, the Ministry in the post 
evidence written reply stated that no proposals presently are under consideration of the 
Ministry.  
74. Further, when enquired whether the Ministry has any inter -Ministerial 
coordination mechanism with the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology and the Department of Telecommunications particularly in the context of 
regulating content on internet and having level playing field for all the television service 
providers, the Committee have been apprised that no such mechanism has been set up 
so far. However, consultation takes  place with the Department of Electronic and 
Information Technology and the Department of Telecommunication on a need basis. 
 

 
 
Part-II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
 The Committee note that several complaints have been received by the 
Central Government against cable operators showing illegal channels.  
Intelligence Bureau had identified around 25 such channels and informed the 
Government that the contents of these cha nnels are not conducive to the 
security environment of the country and pose a potential threat to the peace 
and security of the Country.  There have also been instances of illegal carriage of 
terrestrial channels by cable operator s in some border areas of the country.  
Inspite of various measures taken with in the ambit of the extant law to stop 
carriage of these illegal channels, the transmission of illegal channels by 
operators continued.  It is in this background, the Government considered 
necessary to br ing the necessary amendments in the Cable Television Network 
(Regulation) Act 1995 to make its provisions more stringent and also to enhance 
the punishment to have necessary deterrent effect.   
2. So far as the details of proposed amendments are concerned,  a new 
Section 5A is to be inserted in the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995 namely s ection 5 A which prohibits cable operator from carrying 
unregistered satellite or terrestrial channels on their cable service networks 
irrespective of manner of reception of these channels.  The Bill further proposes 
to amend sub-section(1) of  section 11 to empower the Authorized Officers to 
seize the equipments of the Cable operators if it is found that cable operators 
indulge in re -transmission of illegal c hannels i.e. violation of section 5A.  
Besides, financial penalties provided under sub -section (1) of  section 16  of the 
Cable Act  for violation of the provisions of the  Act  are proposed to be   
enhanced  from  Rupees one thousand  to Rupees  one lakh for the first offence 
and Rupees five thousand to Rupees three lakh, on each  subsequent offence. 

 
 
The amending legislation further provides that in case of violation of section 5A, 
fine imposed for the first offence shall not be less than  Rupees Fifty thousand 
and for every subsequent offence it shall not be less than  Rupees one lakh. The 
Bill also proposes to amend sub -section (2) of section 16 to make contravention 
of section 5A a cognizable offence. 
3. With the enactment of the proposed amendments, a cable operator 
would be allowed to carry only those channels which are indicated at Clause 
(a)(b)(c) of sub-Section (1) of section 5A as elaborated below:- 
 "5A. (1) No cable operator shall carry or include in his cable service 
any satellite or terrestrial  television broadcast or channel unless 
such broadcast or channel has been— 
 
(a) registered with, or permitted by, the Central Government for 
being viewed within the territory of India, in accordance with the 
policy guidelines for downlinking of television cha nnels as may be 
specified by the Central Government from time to time; or 
 
(b) approved by the Central Government for being viewed within 
the territory of India; or 
 
(c)  allowed in accordance with the provisions of any Central Act 
or rules made thereunder for being viewed within the territory of 
India.” 
 
4. The Ministry in the written note has clarified that s ection 5A (1)(a) covers 
all satellite channels registered  with the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting.  Section 5A prohibits the cable operators from carrying 
unregistered satellite or terrestrial channels on their cable service networks 
irrespective of manner of reception of these channels. This provision will also 
prohibit cable operators from picking up illegal channels via broadband/internet 
and re-transmitting them. As  is evident in sub -section(1) of  section 5A, a cable 
operator is allowed to carry only those channels which are indicated at clause 

 
 
(a), (b),(c) of sub -section(1) of section 5A. Section 5A(1)(a) covers all  sate llite  
channels  registered with  the  Ministry of I nformation and Broadcasting  while 
section 5A(1)(b) covers channels approved by the Cabinet  such as channel being 
operated by Indira Gandhi National  Open University (IGNOU) [Gyandarshan 
Channels], Lok Sabha Channel etc. Channels of Prasar Bharati (Doordarshan) are 
covered under section 5A (1) (c).   
 
5. Technology provides varied options for viewing TV channels.  TV channels 
reaches subscribers’ homes through various service providers like cable 
operator, DTH operator, DD Direct, IPTV , etc.  Besides, TV channels can also be 
watched through internet.  While explaining how the cable operator picks up 
illegal channels, the Ministry stated that cable operator in the border areas can 
take the feed of the terrestrial channels of neighbouring countries which are not 
allowed to be shown in India.  It is also possible that cable operator can pick 
illegal channels via broadband/internet or IPTV, mobile TV, video streaming and 
re-transmitting them. 
 
6. The Committee have further been apprised by the Ministry that the list of 
registered channels is maintained in the Ministry and is available on the website 
of the Ministry.  Besides, the list is periodically up dated.  The channels which are 
not reflected in the list of registered channels are considered as unregistered / 
illegal channels. 
 
7. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been apprised 
that the Group consisting of representatives of National Technical Rese arch 
Organisation (NTRO), CERT-in and Intelligence Bureau explored various technical 
options to address the issue of showing illegal contents by the Cable Network s. 
The Group was of the unanimous view that localized blocking of a par ticular TV 
channel using terrestrial transmitter is neither feasible nor financially viable 

 
 
option and secondly that although it is technically feasible to block any particular 
channel on a pan India basis by disturbing/jamming the downlink frequency of a 
particular TV channel, such actions are not internationally acceptable and are 
against provision 197 of I nternational Telecommunication Union (ITU) as well as 
provision of article 21 of the Radio Regulations.  TRAI was also of the view that 
technological intervention as well as international conventions/treaties may not 
address the issue fully as proposed to be addressed by the amending legislation 
 
8. Even though the Secretary , Information and Broadcasting  during the 
course of evidence before the Committee  acknowledged that there are many 
technological issues which have strong technological implications for which 
there is a need for an expert body to advise and guide the Ministry, the Ministry 
did not bother to consult the various stakeholders which inter-alia include cable 
associations and broadcaster associations etc. Although the proposed 
amendments related to content for which the Government was not mandated 
to consult TRAI, the Ministry could have consulted TRAI particularly when the 
digitalization of cable has great implications on the proposed amendments.  But 
the Ministry chose not to consult TRAI before bringing the amendments.   
   
9. The Committee’s examination has further revealed that the Ministry has 
never bothered to monitor the implemen tation of the Cable Act which is the 
Central legislation.  Not only that the Ministry never attempted to know as to 
how the issue of transmission of anti -national content by various service 
providers is being addressed internationally.    Moreover, no survey  has ever 
been made to see the impact of implementation of the Cable Television Act 
particularly the implementation of s ection 16 which provides the penalty for 
contravening any of the provisions of the Cable Act.  The Committee deplore the 

 
 
way the amen ding legislation has been brought without knowing the ground 
reality.  
10. Considering the immense importance of the Bill , the Committee  
undertook detailed consultation s on the provisions made in the Bill. The 
Committee during the examination had consulta tions with various stakeholders 
which include cable associations, broadcaster associations, public at large and 
the expert body and the Telecom Regulator i.e., Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India.  The Committee also sought clarifications and details fro m the nodal 
Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  The Committee’s 
examination of the proposed amendments has revealed several  infirmities and 
inconsistencies with regard to the proposed provisions as well as the 
enforcement mechanism in the context of the amending legislation which have 
been highlighted in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. The concerns about level playing field 
 
The Committee’s attention  during the course of examination has 
been drawn to inequitable treatment with various service providers 
viz. cable operator s, DTH, IPTV, internet in the context of the 
amending provisions made in the proposed legislation.  The cable 
associations were of the view that unregistered channels are 
carried through platforms other than cable like DTH, IPTV, mobile 
TV, video streaming , internet  whereas the legislation has been 
brought only for the cable operator s.  The Committee during the 
course of deliberations with the cable industry stakeholders have 
been given the impression that the cable operator s are being over 
burdened with penalty , punishment and with so many regulations 
that small cable operator s are unable to protect themselves.  The 
broadcaster associations on the other side had given the impression 
to the Committee that in their case stringent license conditions are 
applicable whereas in the case of a cable operator the requirement 
is only of registration.   The Committee understand that the ext ant 
legislative framework/guidelines with regard to regul ating 
unregistered/illegal channels has the commonality through the 

 
 
Cable Act and rules thereunder which prescribe the Programme 
Code and Advertisement Code.  The common legislative framework  
is applicable to all the platforms as acknowledged by the Ministry. 
 
The Committee during the course of deliberations tried to analyze 
the specific reasons for bringing the proposed amendments in the 
Cable Act that would be applicable to only cable operator s in the 
context of showing illegal/unregistered channels.  The Ministry has 
justified the proposed amendments on the pretext that the DTH 
and IPTV services providers do not indulge in carriage of illegal 
channel as the channels carried on DTH service and IPTV service can 
be centrally monitored as these are addressabl e and leave a digital 
trail.    
 
The Ministry in their own documents while explaini ng how illegal 
channels reach  subscribers’ homes through cable network has 
stated that it is possible that cable operator can pick illegal 
channels via broadband, internet, IPTV, mobile TV, video streaming 
etc. and re -transmit them.  The Committee fail to understand the 
assertion of the Ministry t hat these service providers other than 
cable operator do not indulge in carriage of illegal channels when 
their own document states that the source of illegal channels re -
transmitted by the cable operator can be broadband, internet, 
IPTV, mobile TV, video streaming etc.   
 
The Committee further note that even the Prime Minister’s Office 
had drawn the attention of the Ministry to address the issue of 
showing non -permitted channels by the internet.  In the views 
furnished by the PMO to the Ministry at the consultations stage, it 
was specifically mentioned that the problem of availability of non -
permitted TV channels available for viewing over the internet needs 
to be taken cognizance of and the Ministry may take further action.  
The Committee are surprised to note that in the comments column  
as elaborated in Part -I of the Report , the Ministry has tried to 
ignore the important concern expressed by PMO . Instead of 
examining the issue, the Ministry has stated that the internet is, by 
and large, unregulated, exc ept for certain restrictions under the 
Information Technology Act.  The Committee fail to understand 
how the issue of transmitting illegal/unregistered channels can be 
addressed in entirety without regulating the source i.e. internet.   
 

 
 
The other basis for the assertion of the Ministry that DTH and IPTV 
service providers do not indulge in carriage of illegal channel is 
stringent licensing conditions for DTH and IPTV .  When the issue of 
licensing of cable operators to bring all the service providers on th e 
level playing field was raised, the main constraint as expressed by 
the Ministry in licensing to cable operators was the infrastructure 
needed to provide licence to 60,000 cable operators. The 
Committee observe that considering the emerging technologies, the 
scenario of TV watching may change drastically.  As per the FICCI - 
KPMG Indian Media Entertainment Industry Report 2012, the 
percentage of cable share which is 62 per cent at present may 
reduce to 47.3 per cent by the year 2015.  During this period th e 
DTH percentage may increase from 31 per cent to 46.7 per cent.  
With the multiple transformation undergoing world over in the 
technologies available in the media and entertainment sector, the 
whole scenario of watching TV may change in future.  The Minis try 
need to keep a constant watch on the new and emerging 
technologies and the international legislative framework in this 
regard to address the multiple challenges coming in the way.  
Moreover, to provide the level playing field to various service 
providers, the extant legislation guidelines need a constant review 
in the light of the technological changes so a s to avoid legal 
complications in managing the issue of illegal transmission. 
 
B. Contradiction in the amending legislation with the Objects and Reasons of 
the Bill 
  
One of the contradiction s noted by the Committee during the course of 
deliberations was that marginal heading of c lause 2 states ‘insertion of 
new Section 5A Prohibition of re -transmission of unregistered channels’, 
whereas the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the legislation states 
that the Bill proposes to amend Cable Act to prohibit transmission or re -
transmission of unregistered channels.  In this connection, the Secretary 
during the course of oral evidence clarified that the legislation covers 
both transmission and re -transmission and there may be some editorial 
corrections which are possible to make. The repre sentative of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) during the course of 
deliberations acknowledged that little addition in the marginal heading 
may save a lot of litigation. 
 
 

 
 
C. Contradiction with regard to Uplinking and Downlinking Guidelines 
 
Another contradiction pointed out during the course of 
deliberations was that whereas the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons states about Uplinking and Downlinking , the proposed 
section 5A(a) mentions about only downlinking of television 
channels.  The representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) during the course of oral evidence clarified 
that there would be same interpretation.   
 
The extracts from the Statement of Objects and Reasons in this 
regard inter-alia provides ‘several complaints have been received 
by the Central Government against cable operators showing illegal 
channels which have neither been permitted to uplink from India 
nor permitted or registered to downlink into India, as per the 
Uplinking and Downlinking Guidelines’. Although it may be a matter 
of technical interpretation, referring to both uplinking and 
downlinking in the Statements of Objects and Reasons whereby the 
Bill states only about downlinking has created confusion.   
 
D. Constraint in enforcement in the provisions made under the Cable Act 
 
The Secretary during the course of deliberations has acknowledged 
that there has been reluctance on the part of local administration 
to act against the cable operators. In some cases, where the local  
administration has acted, it has raised such a soci o-political crisis in 
that area that post -haste this had to be really withdraw n. The 
Committee fail to understand as to how the amending legislation 
would address the issue in the aforesaid scenario and a ct as a 
deterrent when it has not been possible to take action against the 
cable operator although sufficient provision s exist in the Cable Act 
to penalize the cable operators for not adhering to the provision s 
made under the Cable Act which include adhere nce to Programme 
Code. Further, no action could be taken pursuant to Intelligence 
Bureau feedback about 25 channels, the contents of which were 
found as not conducive to the security environment  of the country 
and posed  a potential security hazard , although sufficient 
provisions are ther e under the extant Cable Act and Rules 
thereunder to take action in this regard. Moreover, the Ministry 
could not categorically respond as to how and by whom the content 

 
 
being ‘anti-national’ is decided. The Ministry also could not respond 
categorically when asked about the para meters on which 
Intelligence Bureau decided that the content s shown by channels 
are not conducive to the security environment of the Country and 
pose a potential security hazard. 
 
The Ministry  further opined that the purpose of the amending 
legislation was to actually create a deterrent  kind of a ct. The 
Committee are unable to understand how the proposed provisions 
would act as a deterrent without being able to enforce the 
provisions. In this connection , the Committee endorse the views 
expressed by the Chairman, TRAI that the Authorized Officers have 
to do, what they are expected to do under the law and unless that 
is done the cable operator would never learn what he is not 
supposed to do.  
 
E. The re quirement of amending legislation for the transit period till 
digitization of Cable Network takes place 
 
One of the fundamental reasons for ruling out transmission of 
illegal/unregistered channels by TV service providers other than 
cable network as stated by the Ministry is the programmes being on 
addressable mode leaving a digital trail.  The cable network so far is 
on analogue mode.  The Committee fail to understand that even 
when the digitalization of cable network can provide the solution to 
address the issue of showing illegal/unregistered channels through 
the cable network as acknowledged by the Secretary as well as 
Chairman TRAI during the course of evidence, the Ministry could 
not foresee the linkages between the two during the process of 
consultations.  The Secretary during the course of evidence 
acknowledged that the linkages could not be established as the 
Parliament has not pass ed the digitalization amendment in the 
Cable Act when the proposed amending legislation was moved.  
The Committee note th at the concerned legislation with regard to 
digitalization amendment in the Cable Act was passed by 
Parliament on 19 December, 2011 and notified on 30 December, 
2011 and the proposed legislation was introduced on 15 December, 
2011. Although it is a fact that digitalization amendments were not 
notified by the time amending legislation was introduced, t he 
Government could have visualized the linkages between the two.   
 

 
 
It came out during the course of deliberations that perhaps the 
amending legislation ha s been brought to address the issue of 
showing illegal/unregistered channels by cable operator s for the 
transit period till when the cable services would be digitalized.  
Since the problem particularly relates to border areas, the 
Committee inquired about the deadline of digitalization in border 
areas.  The Ministry in the written reply has informed that the areas 
near the borders in India would be covered in Phase -3 and Phase-4 
of the timeline for which is by 30 September, 2014 and 31 
December, 2014 respec tively.  The transit perio d as such would be 
from the date  of notification of the amending legislation till 30 
September, 2014 or 31 December, 2014.  The Committee are 
further concerned to note that the Ministry did not visualize to 
expedite digitalization  deadline in case of border areas by taking 
proactive initiatives by the Government and instead  resort ed to 
legislative option for the interim period after which the law may 
become redundant  as acknowledged by the Ministry . Now, when 
the issue has been  analyzed threadbare by the Committee,  the 
Ministry still acknowledges that the amending provisions should be 
in place in the Act at all times even if the technological 
advancement is in the DAS regime may make such a offence 
redundant.   
 
11. The Committee have made the aforesaid observations after exhaustive 
examination of several issues involved with the proposed amendment in the Bill 
in the light of various documents procured and consultations held with the 
stakeholders, the Ministry of Informat ion and Broadcasting and Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India.  The Committee strongly recommend that various 
inconsistencies and infirmities pointed out with regard to amending legislation 
as well as the issues relating to enforcement of the provisions made in the Cable 
Act should be given due attention in consultation with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice and other concerned Department s/Agencies before the amending Bill is 
taken up for consideration by the Parliament.  Moreover, the Committee may 
also lik e to strongly emphasize that the digitalization deadline in the border 
areas should be advanced by taking proactive initiatives by the Government 

 
 
particularly when as per the Ministry’s own assertion digitalization can provide 
mechanism to regulate/monitor the problem of showing illegal channels by the 
cable operators, whic h the proposed amendments seek to address as emerged 
during the course of the deliberations.    
 
The constraints with regard to implementation of the provisions made under 
the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
 
12. The Committee during the co urse of deliberations have analyzed the 
enforcement issue in the context of the existing provisions made under the 
Cable Act. As elaborated in the earlier part of the Report , the Secretary himself 
acknowledged that in large number of cases while the problem has been very 
real there has been reluctance on the part of local administration to act against 
such cable operators. In some cases where the local administration has acte d, it 
has raised such a soci o political crisis in that area that post -haste this had to be 
really withdrawn.  The Committee in this context feel that there is an urgent 
need to involve the consumer/subscriber in the whole process of 
implementation of the pr ovisions made under the Cable Act. Besides, the 
involvement of the elect ed representatives would also address the constraints 
being faced in implementation of the provisions made under the Cable Act. 
Moreover, there is an urgent need to create awareness ab out the provisions 
made in the Cable Act that prohibit the cable operator to show the illegal 
channels. The information relating to registered channel is al though available 
on the website of the Ministry, with the scenario of poor broadband 
connectivity in border areas, it may be difficult to ac cess the information by the 
agencies involved as well as by the public at large. The  Committee may like to 
recommend that the pamphlets contai ning the information should be made 
available to the agencies involved in enforcement of the provisions of the Cable 
Act. Besides, for wider dissemination , the local bodies should also be supplied 

 
 
the copies of the pamphlets and also made aware about the positions in this 
regard. The Committee are of the firm view that by tak ing certain pro active 
initiatives the authorized agencies would be able to enforce the provisions 
made under the Cable Act and the issue of showing illegal channels by cable 
operators can be addressed.  
13. The Committee further note that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting  has formulated detailed guideline s for setting up State and 
District Level Monitoring Committees to monitor the content transmitted by the 
cable operator s. The composition of these Committees include representation 
of academicians, psychologists, sociologists, NGOs working for women and child 
welfare, etc. The State and District Level Monitoring Committees are headed by 
Secretary, Information and Public Relations of the State and District Magistrate 
or Police commissioner as Chairman respectively. The Committee are 
constrained to note that the elected representatives do not find any place in the 
State and District Level Monitoring Committees. The Committee as such 
strongly recommend that the respective guidelines should be ame nded so as to 
include the elected representatives including local MPs of Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha as well as MLAs and MLCs in the composition of the State and District 
Level Monitoring Committees.  
14. The Committee further note from the information furni shed by the 
Ministry that initial order for constitution of State and District Level Monitoring 
Committees was issued on 6 September, 2005. Subsequently, detailed 
guidelines were issued on 19 February, 2008. The Committee are constrained to 
note that only 15 States and 266 Districts have so far been able to set up these 
Committees. With regard to the State-wise position of status of these 
Committees, the Committee note that in North Eastern States, Arunachal 
Pradesh is the only State which has set up the State Level Committee.  

 
 
15. The Committee are further constrained to note that the Ministry does not 
maintain centralized data about the functioning of these Committees. The 
Committee feel that various issues confronting implementation of the 
provisions made  in the Cable Act can be addressed by ensuring effective 
functioning of State and District Level Monitoring Committees. The Ministry 
should persuade the State Government s particularly the bordering States to set 
up these Committees expeditiously. Besides, the position of setting up of these 
Committees as well as their function ing should be constantly monitored by the 
Ministry.  
Setting up of Expert Body 
  
16. The Secretary  during the course of deliberations has apprised the 
Committee about the constraints being faced by the Ministry in handling the 
issues of technological nature. The Secretary himself acknowledged the need to 
set up Expert Bodies to really advise and guide the Ministry on the matter. The 
Committee observe that with the multiple transformation going world over in 
the technologies available in the media and entertainment sector, there is an 
urgent need to have expertise to assist and advise the Ministry in handling the 
issues related to emerging technologies . The Committee , accordingly 
recommend that the Government should look into the matter urgently to find 
the solution in this regard by setting up some Expert Body or widening the 
mandate and infrastructure of the existing expert body i.e. TRAI. 
 
17. The Committee during the course of deliberations have noted that the 
administrative Ministry for legislative framework with regard to internet is the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology. Wherea s, the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting is the nodal Ministry for media, internet plays 
an important role and in the context of the present legislation one of the 

 
 
medium for watching TV is internet. The Committee are constrained to note 
that there is no mechanism to have inter -Ministerial coordination between the 
various related Ministries viz. the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology , the Department of 
Telecommunications etc. The Committee strongly recommend that there is an 
urgent need to have some structured mechanism to have inter -Ministerial 
consultations and coordination between the various Ministries/Agencies 
dealing with technological issues related to media transmission. 
 
Involvement of Consumer/Subscriber in the implementation process 
 
18. The Committee observe that the most important factor for enforcement 
to address the issue of illegal channels being shown by cable operators is how to 
get the information in this regard. As stated in the earlier part of the Report, the 
active involvement of consumers/subscribers in the implementation process 
can certainly help in identifying the offender and addressing the issue of 
transmission/retransmission of illegal channels. The Comm ittee have been 
apprised that individual subscriber can lodge complain t in this regard to 
Authorized Officer  or report the matter to District/State Level Monitoring 
Committees. The Committee feel that to facilitate the consumer/subscriber to 
lodge the comp laint in this regard to the Authorized Officer  or report to 
State/District Level Monitoring Committee, toll free helplines should be 
provided. Besides, a National Helpline should also be set up to facilitate  lodging 
of complaint by the individual consumer/subscriber from all over the country.  
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
24   August, 2012 Standing Committee on 
02   Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Information Technology 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
  
 
 
  


 
 
 
  


 
 
Appendix-II 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 24 th February, 2012 from 1100 hours to 1245 hours in 
Committee Room  No. ‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shri Tapas Paul 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
11. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
15. Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for briefing meeting with the representatives of Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in connection with examination of ***** and ‘The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’.  
 
3. The Chairman, then, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations till the Reports on the Bills are presented to 
the House. The Chairman also took note of the absence of Secretary, Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting from the meeting and desired that prior approval for such absence from the 
meeting in future should be sought by the Secretary himself in conformity with rules.      
 
4. *****                 *****                 *****                  *****.  
 
5. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry briefed the Committee about ‘The Cabl e 
Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’  highlighting various issues 
relating to the Bill such as broadcast of unlicensed channels by Cable Television Networks, 
steps being taken to check satellite signals of unregistered channels i ncluding practical 
difficulties being faced and provisions as it exist in other Countries to check this menace, power 
and role of authorized officers for violation of any provision of the Act, measures adopted to 
stop broadcasting of content available in internet/you tube by cable operators, etc.  
 
Sl. No Name Designation 
 
1.  Shri Rajiv Takru  Additional Secretary  
2. Ms. Supriya Sahu Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vijay Sharma Director 
4. Shri T. Jairaj Press Registrar 

 
 
6.  The Members of the Committee during the course of deliberations raised pertinent 
issues related to the aforesaid Bills and the representative responded to the same.  
 
7. It was also decided that the next sitt ing of the Committee would be held on 7 th March, 
2012 *****   and take oral evidence of the stakeholders in connection with the examination of 
‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’.  
  
 A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 
 

 
 
Appendix-III 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7 th March, 2012 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
16. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
17. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
18. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
19. Dr. Charles Dias 
20. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
21. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
22. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
23. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
24. Shri Tapas Paul 
25. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
26. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
27. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
28. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot 
29. Shri P. Rajeeve 
30. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
5. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
7. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
8. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened  ***** as well as to take oral evidence of the two stakeholders 
in connection with examination of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) 
Second Amendment Bill, 2011’.  
 
3. *****                    *****               *****                  *****.  
  
-   The aforesaid two witnesses were then called in   - 
 
4. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the two stakeholders to the sitting of 
Committee and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker about the confidentiality of the matter till the report is presented to the 
House.  The two st akeholders, then, put forth their views before the Committee on 
various issues in connection with the examination of ‘The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’ which inter-alia, included justification for 
imposition of penalty  on cable operators, hardship being faced by Cable operators 
due to various regulations, inclusion of IPTV, Mobile TV, DTH, MSOs in clause 5(A) 
(1) of the proposed amendment Bill,  policy guidelines relating to uplinking and 
downlinking of unregistered Cha nnels, guidelines for the broadcasters, public 
awareness campaign by the Government about the unregistered channels etc.  
Besides their comments on ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second 
Amendment Bill, 2011’, the stakeholders also brought befo re the Committee various 
contentious issues on the Cable I ndustry as a whole which included problems 
relating to digitization of the Cable TV network, shortage of Set -Top Boxes for 
broadcasting of TV Channels, the emergence of cross media holding/vertical 
monopoly in India, content regulation and need to regulate the broadcasters, etc. 
 
Sl. NO Name Designation 
 
1. Shri Atul B. Saraf  CMD, ABS Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. 
 
2. Mrs. Roop Sharma President,  
Cable Operators of India Association 
 

 
 
5. The witnesses in their presentation highlighted certain issues relating to 
digitization, Set -Top Boxes etc.  During the course of deliberations on related 
aspects such as DTH services, availability of Set-Top Boxes and payment of taxes by 
local cable TV operators etc., I ndustrialist and Member of Parliament  Shri Rajkumar 
Dhoot withdrew from the sitting of the Committee on the issue of conflict of interest.  
 
6. During the cou rse of deliberations Members raised several pertinent issues 
related to the aforesaid Bill and the Cable Television Industry as a whole and the 
stakeholders responded to the same.  The Chairman requested the two stakeholders 
to submit written suggestions containing their views separately on the amending Bill 
and the various issues relating to Cable industry as a whole. 
 
7. The Chairman then thanked the stakeholders for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing valuable information in connection with the  examination 
of the aforesaid Bill. 
  
 A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 
 
 

 
 
 Appendix-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 7 th June, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1700 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
                                                                                                       
M.P. Achuthan – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
9. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  
12. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
14. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee under Rule 258(3) chose Shri 
M.P. Achuthan, M.P., and a Member of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology to preside over the meeting. 
 
3. At the outset, the C hairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the Experts /Organizations in connection 
with the examination of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment 
Bill, 2011’. *****. 
 
4. The Committee then to ok evidence of the following experts/witnesses one by 
one. 
 
1.  Pulak Bagchi, Vice President, Legal and Regulatory,  STAR India Private 
Limited, Gurgaon. 
 
2. Naseem Ahmad, Managing Partner, Naseem & Associates Consultants, 
Noida and Ravi Gupta, Proprietor, Delhi Distribution Co. (MSO). 
 
5. After welcoming the Witnesses , the C hairman drew their attention to the 
provisions of Direction 55(I) of the Directions by the speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House. 
 
6. The experts/witnesses then presented their views and made suggestions  on the 
aforesaid Bill. The Members raised pertinent issues relating to the Bill during the course 
of deliberations and the witnesses responded to the same. 
 
7. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
and furnishing valuable information that the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the aforesaid Bill. 
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
 Appendix-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th June, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1 645 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Rao Inderjit Singh– Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
16. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
17. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
18. Dr. Charles Dias 
19. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
20. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
22. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
23. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
24. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
25. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  
26. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
27. Shri Salim Ansari 
28. Shri  Mohammad Adeeb 
29. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
30. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
31. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
32. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
4. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
5. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
 
  

 
 
List of Witnesses 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
 
 
Sl. No. Names Designation    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
1. Dr. Rahul Khullar Chairman, TRAI 
 
3. Shri R. Ashok Member, TRAI 
 
4. Shri R.K. Arnold Member, TRAI 
 
5. Shri Rajeev Agrawal Secretary, TRAI 
 
6. Shri N. Parameswaran Principal Advisor (B&CS) 
 
7. Shri Wasi Ahmad Advisor (B&CS) 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the C hairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. *****. 
[The witnesses were then called in] 
 
7. The Chairman welcomed the aforesaid witnesses and drew their attention to the 
provisions of Direction 55(I) of the Directions by the speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House. 
 
8. The Chairman, TRAI at the outset explained that TR AI is primarily concerned 
with carriage, which is physical movement of radio signals or telecommunication signals 
and not concerned with the content of that signals. The content is controlled by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. He, thereafter,  elaborated the nitty gritty and 
technical aspects related to the provisions made under 'The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’.  The Members of the Committee raised 
pertinent issues which he responded during the course of t he deliberations. Further the 
Chairman, TRAI assured the Committee to furnish the information which was not readily 
available.  
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
and furnishing valuable information that the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the aforesaid Bill.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
 
Appendix-VI 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 25 th June, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1850 hours in 
Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthy 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
9. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
14. Shri Salim Ansari 
15. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
16. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
17. Shri Bhushan Lal Jangde 
 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  
 
- Additional Director 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the experts/organizations/stakeholders, in connection with 
examinations  of ‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill , 2011’ and 
*****.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of representatives of the following organisation on   
‘The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’ :-  
 
1. News Broadcasters Association                 
Mrs. Annie Joseph                                           1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. 
Secretary General, NBA  
and colleagues                
 
 
  
4. After welcoming the Witnesses, the Chairman drew their attention to the provisions of 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
deliberations till the report on the subject is presented to the House. 
 
5. The representatives of News Broadcasters Association then presented their views and made 
suggestions on various issues related t o the examination of ‘The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’. The Members raised pertinent issues relating to the 
Bill during the course of deliberations and witnesses responded to the same.  The Chairman then 
thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable information in 
connection with the examination of the aforesaid Bill. 
 
  [The above Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
6. *****           *****              *****                 *****.  
 
 
7. *****           *****              *****                 *****. 
  
 
8. *****           *****              *****                 *****. 
 
9. *****           *****              *****                     *****.      
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
 Appendix-VII 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 20th July, 2012 from 1130 hours to 1330 hours 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh– Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
33. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
34. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
35. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
36. Dr. Charles Dias 
37. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
38. Shri Rajen Gohain 
39. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
40. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
41. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
42. Shri Tapas Paul 
43. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
44. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
45. Shri Joy Abraham 
46. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
47. Shri Salim Ansari 
48. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
49. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
50. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
51. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
6. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
7. Shri Y.M. Kandpal           -        Additional Director 
8. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

 
 
List of Witnesses 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
1. Shri Uday Kumar Varma 
 
Secretary 
2. Shri Rajiv Takru 
 
Additional Secretary 
 
3. Ms. Supriya Sahu  
 
Joint Secretary (Broadcasting) 
2. The following representatives from the Ministry of Law and Justice were present 
to assist the Committee:- 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) 
 
 Dr. Sanjay Singh Additional Secretary 
   
 (Department of Legal Affairs) 
 
 Dr. S.S. Chahar Additional Secretary 
 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting in connection with examination of ‘The Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Second Amendment Bill, 2011’.  
 
[The witnesses were then called in] 
 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Law and Justice and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 
55(I) of the  Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House. 
 
5. The Committee thereafter took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting on  the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second 
Amendment Bill, 2011. The Chairman in his opening remarks raised the issue of 
differential treatment of various television service providers such as Cable, IPTV, DTH on 
the issue of transmission of content  not conducive to the security environment of the 
country in the context of the examination of the aforesaid Bill as has emerged during the 
course of deliberations. The Secretary thereafter, made a presentation covering the 
various issues raised by various  stakeholders before the Committee as well as issues 
raised by Hon’ble Chairman in his opening remarks. The representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting also responded to the questions raised by members during  
 
 

 
 
 
the course of deliberat ions. The representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
clarified on the legal issues raised during the course of deliberation.  
 
6. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the Ministries of Information 
and Broadcasting and Law and Justice for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
the information which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the 
aforesaid Bill. 
 
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 
 

 
 
 
Appendix-VIII 
 
(Not appended to the Report updated on the website) 