i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS BILL, 2011 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
42 


ii 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS BILL, 2011 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2012  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 

iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE iv 
INTRODUCTION v 
REPORT  
I. Introductory 1 
 A. Brief History and Previous Attempts to Review the Act 2 
 B. Consultations by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting before Bringing the Legislation 4 
 C. Consultations with Select Stakeholders on Specific Clauses of the Bill 5 
 D. Consultations by the Committee during the Course of Examination of the Bill 7 
II. Definitions 12 
 A. Book 12 
 B. Editor 15 
 C. Facsimile Edition 16 
 D. Newspaper 17 
 E. Printing 18 
 F. Publication 18 
 G. Syndication 19 
III. Provision relating to Who May Bring out a Publication 20 
IV. Provisions relating to Known Foreign Publication 24 
V. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Syndicate Related Issues 29 
VI. Operational/Procedural Aspects 34 
 A. Owner of Printing Press to make Declaration 34 
 B. Timeline for the Specified Authority to verify the Antecedents 36 
 C. Communication of Reasons for Rejection of Title 37 
 D. Decision of Press Registrar General Final 38 
 E. Transfer of Titles 39 
 F. Annual Statement of Publications 40 
 G. Circulation Verification by Authorised Auditor 46 
 H. Penalty 48 
 I. Delegation of Powers by Press Registrar General to any Subordinate Officer  52 
VII. Chapters III and IV relating to Books  - Role of Ministry of Human Resource Development 54 
 A. Administrative Ministry for implementation of the Act – Inter Ministerial Co-Ordination 55 
 B. Implementation of the Act by State Governments 57 
VIII. Powers of the Central Government/State Governments to make Rules 60 
IX. Power of State Governments to exclude any class of Books and Publications from the purview of the 
Act 
62 
X. Miscellaneous 64 
 A. e-Books, e-Publications and Online Edition of Newspaper 64 
 B. Overlapping with Trade Marks Act 65 
 C. Errors and Mistakes 68 
 APPENDIX  
I. The Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011 71 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Sitting held on 24 February, 2012 103 
II. Minutes of the Sitting held on 25 June, 2012 106 
III. Minutes of the Sitting held on 31 July, 2012 109 
IV. Minutes of the Sitting held on 5 November, 2012 113 
V. Minutes of the Sitting held on 7 December, 2012 115 
VI. Minutes of the Sitting held on 18 December, 2012 117 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
10. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
11. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
12. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13. Shri Tapas Paul 
14. Shri Khagan Das*  
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 13th December, 2012 vice Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa vide Lok Sabha 
Bulletin Part II dated 13th December , 2012 
 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2012 -
13) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Forty -second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on ‘The Press and 
Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  
 
2. The Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ as 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 16 th December, 20 11 was referred by the Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 5 th January, 2012 to the Standing 
Committee on Information Technology for examination and report within three 
months. On the request of the Committee, the initial time for presentation of 
the Report was extended till the last week of Monsoon Session of Parliament. 
Hon’ble Speaker granted further extension of time till last week of Winter 
Session of Parliament so as to enable the Committee to have wider 
consultations and present the Report to the House.  
  
3. Keeping in view the immense importance and wide ramifications of the 
Bill, the Committee invited Memoranda containing views/suggestions from 
individuals/experts/organizations/stakeholders interested on the Bill through 
issue of Press Release in Print and Electronic Media. The Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting briefed the Committee on the provisions of the Bill on 24 th 
February 2012. The Committee received comm ents/suggestions from various 
organisations/stakeholders and based on the response, the Committee took 
evidence of select stakeholders on 25th June 2012.  
 
4. Considering the important role of Press Council of India (PCI) and 
Registrar of Newspapers for In dia (RNI) with regard to the Bill, the Committee 
heard their views at the sitting held on 31 st July, 2012. The Ministry of Human 
Resource Development being the nodal Ministry for two Chapters concerning 
Books, the Committee took evidence of the Ministry of  Human Resource 
Development on 5 th November, 2012. The Committee took the evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting at their sitting 
held on 7 th December 2012. The representatives of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Depa rtments of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) assisted the 
Committee in clarifying the legal position in the Bill as and when required.  
 
 
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 18 th December, 2012 considered 
and adopted the draft Report. The Com mittee were immensely benefitted by 
the suggestions/contributions made by the Members of the Committee for 
which I express my sincere thanks to them. 

vi 
 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Br oadcasting, the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, the representatives of Press Council of India (PCI), 
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI)  and stakeholders who tendered their 
evidence before the Committee and furnished written information which was 
of great help in arriving at conclusions. The Committee also wish to express 
their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) who clarified the 
legal position as referred from time to time on various Clauses of the Bill.  
 
7. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of 
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
8. For facility of  reference and convenience, the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH  
New Delhi  Chairman,  
17 December, 2012  Standing Committee on  
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)  Information Technology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 
 The Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011 
(Appendix-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2011 and was 
referred to the Standing Committee on Information Technology on 5 January, 
2012 by Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report to the House.  Extension 
of time for presentation of the Report was sough t initially up to last week of 
the Eleventh Session of Parliament and subsequently up to last week of the 
Twelfth Session of Parliament so as to facilitate wider consultations on the 
various provisions made under the Bill. Hon’ble Speaker agreed to the 
requests of the Committee.  
 
1.2 The proposed Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 
2011 contains 57 Clauses in Seven Chapters and once enacted it will replace 
the existing Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867. Enumerating the 
objective of the legislation, the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill 
inter-alia provides as under:- 
  
“The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 was enacted for 
the regulation of Pri nting Presses and Newspapers for the 
preservation of copies of books and newspapers printed in India, 
and for the registration of such books and newspapers. Though 
the aforesaid Act has been amended several times between 
1870 and 1983, the existing provisi ons of the Act are not 
adequate to cater to the phenomenal growth of the print media 
sector in view of the liberalised policy of the Government. 
 
xxxxx………..xxxxx………….xxxxx………..xxxxx……………xxxxx 
 
In view of the liberalised policy of the Government, the Print 
Media has not only attracted the foreign direct investment but 
also led to a phenomenal increase in the availability of the 
foreign scientific and technical magazines in India. The Print 
Media Policy of 1955, which so far prohibited bringing out of 
foreign publications in India, has since been reviewed from time 
to time and the issues of foreign direct investment, facsimile 
editions, Indian edition of foreign newspapers, syndication, etc., 
are now being regulated through executive orders which needs 
to be s upported with the statutory provisions to elicit optimum 
results and hassle free entry of foreign publications. Thus, in 

2 
 
order to give statutory backing to the Print Media Policy and 
various guidelines, it is proposed to enact a new legislation to 
amend an d consolidate the laws relating to press and 
registration of books and publications.” 
 
A. Brief History and Previous Attempts to Review the Act 
 
1.3 The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 was passed in the year 
1867 to enable the Government to keep a list of the printing presses and 
newspapers by a system of registration, and to preserve copies of books and 
other matter printed in India. The Press and Registration of Books is the 
oldest Press Law in the country. 
 
1.4 Major amendments were carried out  in the Act in 1955 and the Office 
of the Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) was created.  Another attempt 
to amend the Act was made in 1988 based on the recommendations of the 
Second Press Commission (in May 1982), recommendations contained in the 
study conducted by the Department of Personnel and Public Grievances and 
the suggestions made in the State Information Ministers Conference held in 
1985. A Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 5 December, 1988.  
1.5 Certain provisions of the proposed Bi ll attracted a lot of criticism from 
some sections of Press who apprehended that the proposed amendment for 
providing details of their assets, machines and other data might jeopardize 
their business interests. Few sections of Press feared that the amendmen ts 
would impinge on the freedom of Press.  In view of the criticism, the Ministry 
felt that before proceeding with the amendments, further discussions should 
be held with the Press and, therefore, the Bill was withdrawn on 12.12.1991. 
1.6 1991 onwards in the wake of economic liberalization, it was decided to 
review the existing laws and bring them in line with the emerging economic 
environment.  As a consequence, a Special Review Group (SRG) was 
constituted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on 12.08.1993 to 
review the provisions of the Press & Registration of Books Act, 1867 and to 
identify and recommend necessary changes in the Act.  The SRG submitted its 
Report with recommendations in December 1994 after holding meetings with 
the representati ves of various Newspaper Organizations, small, medium as 

3 
 
well as big Newspapers, publishers and editors etc. at different places in the 
country.  The Ministry examined the SRG Report and the recommendations in 
detail.  The major recommendations for simplif ication of the provisions for 
registration and streamlining the procedures to ensure steady growth of 
newspapers in the country were accepted by the Ministry. 
1.7 In order to streamline the various processes and to give statutory 
backing to the 1955 Print Media Policy coupled with new guidelines, a Note 
for the Cabinet dated 17 September, 2004 was moved by the Ministry with 
the proposal to amend the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867.  The 
Cabinet, in its meeting held on 29 September, 2004 considered  the Note and 
directed that the matter may, in the first instance, be considered by a Group 
of Ministers.  Accordingly, a Group of Ministers was constituted under the 
Chairmanship of the then Minister of Home Affairs. 
1.8 A Note for the Group of Ministers dated 6 December, 2004 containing 
proposed amendments to the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 was 
moved by the Ministry.  The Group of Ministers in its meeting dated 
31.12.2004 considered the said Note and desired that the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting should bring a new proposal for amendments to 
the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 to clothe itself with necessary 
regulatory authority to implement its policies effectively and monitor 
compliance.   
1.9 Consequent to the directive of the first meeting of the Group of 
Ministers, a Note for the Group of Ministers dated 9 May, 2005 was proposed 
by the Ministry containing proposals for certain amendments to the Press & 
Registration of Books Act, 1867.  The second meeting of the Group of  
Ministers held on 12  May, 2005 considered the said Note.  The Group of 
Ministers recommended to the Cabinet that the proposed amendments to 
the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 may be agreed to. 
 
 
B. Consultations by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting before 
Bringing the Legislation 
 

4 
 
1.10 On the process of consultations held in connection with amendment to 
the Press and Registration of Books Act, the Ministry has informed that a 
number of consultations were held with various stakeholders/newspapers 
Associations in 2006 on draft amendment s to the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867. 
 
1.11 During 2008 and 2009 series of internal meetings and discussions were 
held with Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) on the proposed  
amendments. The amendments proposed to the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867 was one of the agenda items in the 27 th Conference of State 
and UT Ministers of Information and Cinematography (SIMCON XXVII) on 5 
December, 2009. Based on the discussion s held with RNI, a revised draft of 
the proposed amendments to PRB Act, 1867 was prepared. The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting also invited suggestions/comments from all the 
stakeholders by placing the draft Amendment Act on its Website as well as  
the Website of the Registrar of Newspapers for India. RNI also wrote to 
various Newspaper Associations inviting suggestions on the proposed 
amendments. RNI received suggestions/comments from various stakeholders 
viz. the Indian Language Newspapers Associa tion, the Times of India, The 
Indian Newspapers Society, Financial Times, Indian Express, Sage 
Publications, HT Media, Association of Indian Magazines, Press Council of 
India, etc. 
  
1.12 The Ministry also consulted the Books Promotion and Copyright 
Division of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology, Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology and Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal 
Affairs, etc. 
 
C. Consultations with Select Stakeholders on Specific Clauses of the Bill 
  
1.13 The Ministry has informed that though the Cabinet had first approved 
the amendments to the PRB Act, 1867 on 10  February, 2011, various 
stakeholders such as the Indian Newspaper Society (INS) and the Times of 
India had raised strong objections to some of the proposed amendments 
concerning following three issues:   

5 
 
 
(a) Details of advertisement income and source of income as 
proposed in section 31 of the proposed Act should not be asked 
for by RNI as part of the Annual Statement; 
(b) Circulation verification of newspapers should not be got done 
through private auditors; 
(c) The penalty in section 38   provides for suspension of 
publication up to 30 days for not conforming to section 3 of the 
proposed amendment Act.  Section 3 provides for printing the 
name and place of the printer or publisher.  The penalty of 
suspension of publication according to INS was excessive.  
1.14 As regards the point at (a) above, i.e. the disclosure of advertisement 
income in the Ann ual Statement under section 31 of the proposed 
Amendment Act, INS wanted it to be removed as it entails a huge volume of 
information to be furnished by them, given the fact that large number of 
display and classified advertisements are published in every e dition.  
Moreover, according to them, this information is not of much use to the 
Government.  On examination, the Ministry came to the view that the 
difficulties expressed by the INS in compiling and providing such information  
have merit and section 31 of the proposed Act was partly amended by 
dropping the specific reference to the furnishing of details of advertisement 
income.   
1.15 As regards the point at (b) above, INS delegation was of the opinion 
that the circulation verification should be got done by  RNI officers only and 
not through private auditors as private persons would not be reliable and are 
likely to disclose the trade secrets.  This was examined in the Ministry and it 
was found that it is practically neither possible nor feasible for the RNI to 
carry out circulation verification only through its officials, as it does not have 
the requisite manpower to carry out this gigantic task in view of the large 
number of registered newspapers in the country.   Besides, even now Audit 
Bureau of Circulation (ABC), a private body, carries out circulation verification 
for the newspapers.  
1.16 As regards (c) above, the penalty clause in the proposed amendment 
Act at section 38 is actually a dilution of the earlier section 12 of the Act 
wherein the penalty was  much harsher, i.e. imprisonment for a period of up 

6 
 
to six months.  Now, only suspension of publication has been proposed, and 
that too, for a limited period of 30 days.    
1.17 In view of the above, it was proposed to revise only clause (a) of sub -
section (1) of section 31 of the draft Bill which was approved by the Cabinet 
on the 10 February, 2011.   Accordingly, the provision in section 31(1)(a) of 
the Bill “ To furnish to the press Registrar General an annual statement in 
respect of the publication at such time and containing particulars relating to 
advertisement, if any, in such publication and amount of moneys received 
in respect of such advertisement and the person from whom such moneys 
has been received and such other particulars referred to in sub -section (2) 
of section 29 as may be prescribed  has been changed as follows: “To furnish 
to the Press Registrar General an annual statement in respect of the 
publication at such time and containing such other particulars referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 29, as may be prescribed.” 
  
1.18 The Cabinet approved the above amendment in the earlier approved 
Bill on 30 September, 2011. 
 
1.19 The Bill has since been introduced in Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2011 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Information Technology by 
Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report to the House. 
 
1.20 Salient features of the Press and Registration of Books and Publications 
Bill, 2011 are as under:- 
 
a. The new title is Press and Registration of Books and Publications 
(PRBP) Act, 2011; 
 
b. Many new definitions to the words such as ‘publications’, 
‘newspapers’, ‘magazines’, 'journals', 'newsletter', etc.  have 
been inserted; 
 
c. Internet edition of newspapers has been covered under the 
proposed legislation; 
 
d. Those convicted of terrorist act or have done anything against 
the security of the State are being prevented from bringing out a 
publication;   

7 
 
 
e. Detailed provisions for verification of a title; 
 
f. Provisions to prevent blocking of titles to discourage non-
serious publishers; 
 
g. Making statutory provision for circulation verification; 
 
h. More powers to Press Registrar and re-designation of "Press 
Registrar" as "Press Registrar General"; 
 
i. Provisions with respect to limits on foreign news content 
(syndication), foreign investments and facsimile editions; 
 
j. Filing of annual statements by publishers to be made 
compulsory. 
 
D. Consultations by the Committee during the Course of Examination of 
the Bill 
  
1.21 Keeping in view the immense importance and the sensitive nature of 
the Bill, the Committee invited memoranda containing views/suggestions 
from individuals/ experts/ organizations/stakeholders interested on the 
subject matter of the Bill by issuing press re leases in print and electronic 
media. In response thereto a number of memoranda from various 
stakeholders and public at large were received. Suggestions, so received were 
sent to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for examination and 
furnishing their comments.   
 
1.22 Considering that as per Clause 20 (i) relating to Appellate authority, the 
Press Council of India (PCI) has an important role with regard to Press an d 
Registration Appellate Board and also the important role being played by PCI 
in preserving the freedom of press as well as maintaining and improving the 
standards of newspapers and news agencies in India the Committee heard 
the views of Press Council of India on the proposed legislation.  
 
1.23 The Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI), being the implementing 
agency in respect of various provisions in the proposed legislation viz. 
verification of titles, registration of titles, circulation verification of 
newspapers/periodicals, obta ining Annual Statements from publishers etc. 

8 
 
the Committee also heard the considered views of RNI on the aforesaid 
legislation. 
 
1.24 As the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) is the 
administrative Ministry with regard to Chapters III and IV of t he proposed 
legislation i.e. provisions relating to Delivery of Books and Publications and 
Registration of Books respectively, the Committee held consultations with 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The representatives of the 
nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting deposed 
before the Committee at the sitting held on 7 December, 2012 for a 
conclusive evidence on the proposed legislation. 
 
1.25 The Committee in the process of examination of the Bill called for 
written replies to various issues that emerged during the course of various 
deliberations from all the above Ministries/Organizations/bodies. The 
representatives of the Legislative Department and the Department of Legal 
Affairs of the Ministry of Law and Justice assiste d the Committee as and 
when desired in clarifying the various legal issues.  
 
1.26 The Committee have considered the views/suggestions received from 
individuals/experts/organizations and stakeholders and those placed before 
them during the course of oral evidences, the views placed by other 
Ministries/organizations and bodies and individuals and the  response by the 
nodal Ministry. The Committee’s findings alongwith 
recommendations/observations  on several provisions of the Bill are detailed 
in subsequent Chapters of the Report. 
 
1.27 On being enquired as to how many times the Bill had been introduced 
in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha in the past and the specific reasons for the 
withdrawal of the Bill, the Ministry of Information and Broadca sting has 
informed that as per records available in the Ministry, the Press and 
Registration of Books Act (Amendment) Bill, 1988 was introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on 5 December, 1988. The Bill inter alia sought to further facilitate the 
commencement of pub lication of a newspaper; to make provision for de -
freezing of the blocked titles; to make the Office of RNI a repository of 
comprehensive information with regard to the Newspaper industry etc. 
However, immediately after the introduction of the Bill it was criticized by the 

9 
 
newspaper industry. A number of Articles/ write-ups criticizing the provisions 
of the Bill appeared in leading newspapers. Representations were received 
from Indian Federation of Working Journalists, All India Newspaper Editors 
Conference and Indian Federation of Small and Medium Newspapers. The 
Press Council of India also made a study of the Bill and commented that some 
of the proposed amendments were fraught with mischief leading to 
consequences perilous to the freedom of the Press. The proposed Bill would 
have brought about substantial improvement in procedures relating to 
registration and publication of newspapers. However, in view of the 
controversial nature of some of the provisions, the Ministry considered it 
appropriate to withdraw the proposed amendments. 
 
1.28 Asked as to whether the controversial issues raised in the Amendment 
Bill, 1988 have been dealt with in the present Bill, the Ministry informed that 
the controversial issues raised in the previous Bill have been addressed 
suitably in the new Bill. 
 
1.29 The Committee heard the views of Chairman, Press Council of India on 
31 July 2012 wherein he stated that proposals in the Bill are very serious in 
nature and many of them may have adverse effect on freedom of the Press, 
which i s a Fundamental Right under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. 
Various Press organizations like Indian Newspaper Society, Indian Languages 
Newspapers Association (ILNA) and other bodies are strongly opposed to 
various provisions of the Bill. Press Council had considered the provisions and 
forwarded its views to the Government of India. The Government did not 
respond to it. As i t did not receive the feedback o n what stand the 
Government has taken on the proposal of the Council, the Press Council 
could not formulate their views on the aforesaid Bill.* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the draft Report, t he Ministry vide their OM dated 18.12.2012 ha s 
stated that the Ministry vide their letter dated 08.12.2010 had informed PCI of the suggestions  received from 
various stakeholders including a member of PCI of the suggestions received from various stakeholders including a 
member of PCI and provided a copy of the comparative statement of the existing Act and the proposed bill. The 
comments of PCI were received in January, 2011. The same were duly examined/considered in this Ministry and the 
suggestions found feasible were incorporated in the Bill. 

10 
 
1.30 The Committee were informed that the Ministry of I nformation and 
Broadcasting did not have any det ailed consultations with the State 
Governments separately except that it was part of the agenda item in the 
Conference of State Information Ministers held in December, 2009. In view of 
changes since 2009, the role of D istrict Magistrate as specified author ity in 
the Bill and the Chapters III and IV to be implemented by the State 
Governments, the Committee desired to know whether a need was not felt 
to have more detailed consultation with the State Governments before 
tabling of the Bill in the Parliament, th e Ministry informed that in the 
Conference of State Information Ministers held in 2009 all the State 
Governments supported the amendments. Some State Governments wanted 
to maintain status-quo on books related provisions in the Act. 
 
1.31 The Committee find that the Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications Bill, 2011 has been proposed to amend and consolidate the 
laws relating to press and registration of books and publications. The Act 
once enacted will replace the existing Press and Registratio n of Books Act, 
1867. The Committee are given to understand that though the aforesaid Act 
has been amended several times between 1870 and 1983, the provision s of 
the PRB Act, 1867 were not adequate to cater to the phenomenal growth of 
print media sector. A s per the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the 
proposed Act aims at giving statutory backing to Print Media Policy of 1955 
and various guidelines and consolidate the laws relating to press and 
registration. The Committee have also been informed that due t o absence 
of clear cut provisions, the existing Act is deficient in several respects 
particularly on title verification, foreign publications and circulation 
verification etc. It also lacks measures to counter the problem of squatting 
of titles. There is absence of time frame for disposal of title application and 
authentication of declaration by dist rict authorities, which usually causes 
avoidable delay. The Bill intends to replace the existing Act, in order to 
eliminate the aforesaid deficiencies. While ap preciating the efforts of the 
Ministry in bringing out a comprehensive legislation which will replace an 
pre-Independence legislation and considering the fact that provisions have 
a direct bearing on the Fourth Estate i.e. Press and Print Media, the 
Committee feel that the Government should move ahead with enough 

11 
 
caution and take all necessary steps in addressing the concerns and try to 
make best efforts in accommodating the views of diverse sections of the 
press and media including small and medium newspap ers before the Bill is 
finally passed in the Parliament.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
  
1.32 On the issue of the consultations with the stakeholders, though the 
Ministry has maintained that it has consulted a number of stakeholders and 
industry at large, the Committee have found that the Ministry has not taken 
the entire press and newspaper indust ry into confidence. For instance, the 
Chairman, Press Council of India, a representative body of press had stated 
that even though Government had consulted them at one point of time, 
after the Press Council of India sent their views, the Government did not get 
back to their suggestions so as to enable PCI to formulate their views on the 
Bill. The Ministry has, however, stated that PCI’s suggestions were duly 
examined/considered and suggestions found feasible were incorporated in 
the Bill. Similarly, the Ministry’s consultations with the State Governments 
look half hearted as the Government did not feel the necessity of having a 
formal consultation with the State Governments exclusively on the various 
provisions of the proposed legislation in general and more  with regard to 
sections concerning books in Chapter III and IV in particular. Considering the 
fact that lot of changes have taken place since the last SIMCON Conference, 
District Magistrate has been given an important role as specified authority 
in the Bi ll and also the provisions have to be implemented by State 
Governments, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should have 
engaged in a wider and focused consultation with State Governments and 
taken their views and suggestions into consideration before bringing in the 
said legislation.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
II. Definitions 
A. Book  
 Clause 2(b) 
 
Clause 2(b) provides the definition of “book” as under: 
 
“book” includes every volume, part or division of a volume and 
pamphlet in any language and every sheet of music, map, chart or 

12 
 
plan separately printed, other than newspaper, magazine, journal 
and newsletter, and has no definite periodicity; 
 
2.2 The Minis try of Human Resource development has suggested the 
inclusion of the word “electronic form” in the definition of book as it has 
been done in respect of publications. Asked as to whether the aforesaid 
suggestion was made to the Ministry of Information and B roadcasting at the 
consultation stage which was not agreed to or it is a new suggestion, the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development informed that it did not include 
the suggestion of inclusion of the word ‘electronic form ’ in their earlier 
comments furnish ed to the Ministry of Information and technology in the 
year 2010. This is a new suggestion.  
 
2.3 When asked about the views of Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to the above suggestion, they have replied that as per chapter 
III of the proposed bil l, it will be difficult to deliver the books, which are 
available in the electronic form only. Hence it is not a viable suggestion. 
 
2.4 One of the stakeholders suggested that the definition of book and 
pamphlet may be modified as under: 
“A Book may be defined as expression of the subject matter in a 
printed form in a printing press and the matter consisting of 
more than 50 pages and printed more than 1000 copies. Other 
presentations printed in printing press having up to 50 pages are 
the pamphlets.” 
 2.5 He opined that pamphlets are the economic mode of expressions for a 
common man and small entrepreneur. Common man cannot bear 
advertisement expenses in the media. Basically, pamphlets are the form of 
letters of communication with limited public. Hence pa mphlets should not 
come under any regulation of registration. If anybody prints any 
objectionable material by way of pamphlet it is taken care by other existing 
laws. 
2.6 Another stakeholder expressed similar views by stating that the 
proposed Bill in tota lity seeks to restrict the freedom of expression of its 
citizens beyond reasonable limits, giving a serious b low to its freedom in 
operation. He submitted that the first victim of this would be publications, 
books, and booklets, pamphl ets at the district a nd the sub -divisional level 

13 
 
that generally are single hand ventures of no n- commercial nature with very 
slender means of personal nature. 
2.7 When the Committee enquired about the reasons for bringing even 
ordinary booklets, pamphlets/tracts under the ambi t of the legislation the 
Ministry in their written replies stated that this is not a new provision. Rather 
the existing definition of books has been retained wherein pamphlet is also 
included in the definition. 
2.8 To a further query as to how far it is ju stified to include pamphlets 
which are being published in large numbers and whether it is feasible to fulfill 
the formalities, the Ministry of I &B informed that it is practically feasible to 
fulfill the formalities in respect of pamphlets as prescribed in  Chapters III and 
IV and it will not restrict free flow of information. 
2.9 The Committee note that with regard to definition of book and 
pamphlet there is no clear cut distinction and pamphlets have been 
included in the definition of books. The inclusion of pamphlet in the 
definition of books has generated a debate and some of th e stakeholders 
have argued that it should not form part of the definition of books and it 
should be defined separately. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
has justified the inclusion by stating that this is not a new provision and the 
existing definition of books has been retained in the proposed legislation. 
Going by the aforesaid definition, pamphlets should also undergo the same 
process of delivery and registration as prescribed for the books. As such, 
there is an ambiguity as to whether rules for delivery of books and 
registration of books should also be followed for pamphlets are not clear in 
the Bill. Since large number of pamphlets are being brought out these days, 
the Committee feel that the provisions applicable for books may not be 
feasible to follow for all pamphlets . Therefore, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to revisit the definition of ‘book’ particularly with regard to the 
inclusion of pamphlet in the definition. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 

14 
 
B. Editor 
Clause 2(c) 
 
2.10 Clause 2 (c) provides the definition of Editor as under: 
“editor” means a person, whether called editor, chief -editor, 
sub-editor or by whatever name called, who is a citizen of India 
and ordinarily resides in India, who controls the selection of the 
matter that is brought out in a publication; 
 
2.11 Members of Press Council of India have raised objections to the above 
definition of editor by stating that sub -editor cannot be held responsible for 
selection of any matter for any publication. If that is done the Editor a nd the 
Chief Editor will have a chance to sneak clear in the case of selection of 
matter.  
2.12 During the course of oral evidence, the representative of the Press 
Council of India (PCI) submitted that under the e xisting Act in case of any 
defamation case,  the Chief Editor is responsible. However, under the 
proposed legislation the Chief Editor, sub editor have been differentiated. If 
there is any case of defamation in the court and there will be question of 
fixing responsibility for any piece of news, the owner of the publication may 
easily pass down the responsibility to sub ed itors. As such, there is scope for 
passing the responsibility at junior level.* 
2.13 The Committee desire the Government to examine this aspect afresh 
and modify the definition suitably. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the draft Report, the Ministry vide their OM dated 18.12.2012 ha s 
clarified that “Owner has to decide a person as editor responsible under the Act and his name has to be written on 
the imprint line of the publication. Such person appointed by owner, as the editor under the definition clause will be 
responsible for the content selection”. 

15 
 
C. Facsimile Edition 
 Clause 2(e) 
 
2.14 Clause 2(e) of the proposed Bill defines facsimile edition as under: 
(e) “facsimile edition” of a publication means an exact replica in 
full or in part of the original edition of a foreign publication; 
subject to the condition that any page is not published in part; 
 
2.15 The Times of India has suggested that the eligibility and methodology 
should be clearly defined to avoid any confusion.  No facsimile edition of the 
foreign publication should be permitted, which has title same or similar to 
already published newspaper in India. They have suggested that the Facsimile 
edition should be redefined as under: 
 
“Facsimile edition of a newspaper means an exact copy, 
counterpart, representation or replica in whole printed and 
published in India in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and such rules and guidelines as may be issued in this regard  by 
the Central Government from time to time, of an original  
newspaper preserving as it is and without any change the marks, 
including the title, masthead and content of such original 
publications, and having as its printer and publisher Indian 
citizens residing in India . Provided always that the title of such  
facsimile edition would have been verified and registered as 
required under this Act and the Rules framed hereunder.” 
 
2.16 The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology in their 
comments to the above suggestions stated that the definition of facsimile 
edition is adequate and eligibility conditions are to be as per approved 
guidelines. 
2.17 The expression of the word ‘exact replica’ in the definition seems 
appropriate as far as the content of the publication is concerned. However, 
when it comes to the title it may lead to conflict with Indian publications 
having same or similar titles.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to address this issue and the definition may be changed to  that 
extent. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 

16 
 
D. Newspaper 
Clause 2(l) 
 
2.18 Clause 2(l) of the proposed legislation defines ‘newspaper’ as under:- 
“newspaper” means a publication of loose folded sheets usually 
printed on newsprint brought out daily or often or  atleast once 
in a week, containing public news  or comments on public news; 
 
2.19 Indian Newspaper Society has suggested that the definition of 
‘newspaper’ should delete “loose folded sheets usually printed on newsprint” 
as it would narrow down the definition and the definition should also include 
“news, views, opinions and write -ups on matters of general public 
importance and current and contemporaneous affairs”. 
2.20 The Ministry has reacted to the above suggestion by stating that a 
‘newspaper’ is always published in ‘loose folded sheets and is expected to be 
printed on ‘newsprint’ and also such an elaboration is not required as “public 
news and comments on public news” includes every such aspect.  
 
2.21 The Committee are satisfied with the explanat ion and endorse the 
definition as given in the Bill. However, since online edition of newspapers 
are included under the proposed legislation , the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to expand the definition to include word ‘electronic form ’ 
suitably in the definition. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
E. Printing 
Clause 2(q) 
2.22 Clause 2(q) of the proposed legislation defines “printing” as under: 
“printing” means reproduction through any technology involving 
mass production of copies excluding photocopying; 
2.23 The Financial Times raised the following issue with regard to the 
definition of “printing”: 

17 
 
The definition of “printing” does not make reference to the 
output of a hard copy, tangible “printed” product. If one ignores 
the word “printing” in the definition,  the words “reproduction 
through any technology involving mass production of copies 
excluding photocopying” could be applied to the publication of 
online web pages, because “mass copies” of those pages can be 
cached or reproduced digitally. 
We believe the definition of “printing” is relatively easily 
amended. For example, we suggest the words “hard copy” could 
be inserted either before the word “reproduction” or before the 
word “copies”.  
 
F. Publication 
 Clause 2(r) 
 
2.24 Clause 2(r) of the proposed legislation defines “publication” as under: 
“publication” means newspapers, magazines, journals or 
newsletters printed   periodically and published in India 
including its reproduction in electronic form, or any syndication, 
facsimile edition, and Indian ed ition of periodical published 
outside India; 
 
2.25 With regard to the definition of “publication”, the Financial Times 
submitted the following suggestion: 
“The definition of “publication” is more complex and difficult to 
suggest amendments to without knowi ng the intent of the PRB 
Bill. For example, it includes the words “including its 
reproduction in electronic form”. Is it intended that only (i) 
newspapers which are printed in India and which also have a 
related news website should fall within the definiti on of 
“publication”? But that (ii) newspapers which are not printed in 
India and which also have a related digital edition news website 
should not fall within the definition? If this assumption is 
correct, then the wording should be clearer to avoid 
ambiguities. Again, if that assumption is correct, then we would 
like to explore further as to what the intended scope of the PRB 
Bill is in respect of the first category we identify above -- i.e. 
newspapers which are printed in India and which have a related 
news website. Finally, regarding the definition of “publication”, 
we note the inclusion of the word “syndication in the definition. 
It is our understanding that the syndication of foreign news in 

18 
 
India is governed by the “Guidelines for Syndication 
Arrangements by Newspapers” issued by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. The entire premise of a 
syndication arrangement is that it allows for a foreign publisher 
(content provider) to license its content for publication in a 
newspaper printed/published in India by an India publisher. 
Syndicated content is therefore almost by definition either a 
page or part of a page (or even just a few articles) provided by a 
third party foreign publisher to an Indian publisher for inclusion 
in the Indian newspaper. The  inclusion of the word 
“syndication” within the definition of “publication” does not 
seem to logically work.” 
 
G. Syndication  
 Clause 2(v) 
 
2.26 Clause 2(v) of the proposed Bill defines syndication as under: 
(v) “syndication” means sourcing content from other 
publications which has been or is being published and the credit 
is given for the source in the byline of publications; 
 
2.27 With regard to the above definition, the Times of India suggested as 
follows: 
 “syndication” may be redefined as “means sourcing of content by a 
publication (the ‘user publication’) from other publications or sources, 
which content has either been already published or is being published 
simultaneously or exists otherwise (the ‘sourc e’) under any financial, 
editorial, syndication or joint venture agreement, and credit for which 
is necessarily given  to the content provider source  as a  by-line  in  the 
user publication, in accordance with such rules and guidelines, 
including prescrib ed content limits, as the Central Government may 
issue fr om time to time in this respect  provided that the user 
publication shall not use or print or reproduce in any manner 
whatsoever the title, the masthead or the full copy of the editorial 
page or the f ront page of the source publication, whether on its front 
page or inside pages or in the caption of the sourced content published 
by it or in its supplements, and whether in full or in abbreviated form 
or as subtitles, and whether or not in conjunction wit h expressions like  
‘in association with’ or ‘in collaboration with’ or ‘by arrangement with’ 
etc. and whether in the main publication or in its supplements.” 

19 
 
2.28 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their comments to the 
above three suggestion s on definitions stated that the definitions of 
‘printing’, ‘publication’ and ‘syndication’ are comprehensive and adequate.  
2.29 The Committee recommend the Ministry to have a relook at the 
definitions of ‘printing’, ‘publication’ and ‘syndication’ keepin g in view the 
suggestions of stakeholders so as to avoid any ambiguity. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
III. Provision relating to Who May Bring out a Publication 
 Clause 5 
  
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides as under:- 
 
“A person, being an entity incorporated and registered in India 
under any law for the time being in force, or a citizen of India, 
may bring out a publication: 
Provided that no person who has been convicted by any court 
for an offence 
(i) Involving terrorist act or unlawful activity; or 
(ii) for having done anything against the security of the State, 
shall bring out a publication. 
 
Explanation—For the purpose of this section, the expression 
“terrorist act” or “unlawful activity” shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in clauses (k) and (o) of sub -
section (1) of section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967.” 
 
3.2 Having noted that the aforesaid provision is a new provision which was 
not there in the PRB Act of 1867, the Committee desired to know the 
mechanism proposed in the Bill to prohibit the person convicted by any Court 
for an offence involving terrorist act and unlawful activity from bringing out a 
publication. To this, the Ministry in their written replies stated that in the title 
application form and form of decl aration framed under the rules, a Clause 
would be made to elicit information on this aspect from the prospective title 
seekers. 
3.3 On being enquired as to how the aforesaid provision would be 
implemented and monitored, the Ministry in their written repl ies informed 

20 
 
that District Magistrate/Specified Authority would see the implementation 
and monitoring of the provision when verifying the antecedents of an 
applicant. 
 
3.4 The Times of India in its written Memorandum submitted to the 
Committee suggested the following with regard to the provision on ‘who may 
bring out a publication’:- 
 
(a)  A legal entity incorporated and registered in India under 
any law for carrying on any commercial, charitable, 
philanthropic or other public service activities in India, or 
an individual who is a citizen of and resides in India, or 
any other person as defined in Section 2 of this Act shall 
only be eligible to own and bring out a publication in 
India, except the following persons: 
(i)  a minor 
(ii)  a person of unsound mind; 
(iii) an insolvent       
(iv) a person not ordinarily resident in India 
(v) a company more than 20% of whose total share capital, 
including long term loans having a tenure of more than 
three years, is held or provided directly or indirectly by 
persons  who  are not Indian citizens or whose Chairman, 
Managing Director and  more than 20% of the remaining 
other Directors on the Board, are not Indian citizens. 
(vi) a partnership firm or an association of persons or a body 
of individuals more than 20% of whose pa rtners or 
members are not Indian citizens. 
(vii) Any entity including the above which does not have its 
principal place of business or other activities in India. 
3.5 The Indian Newspaper Society through a written memorandum 
submitted to the Committee stated that the elaboration in the proposed Bill 
on who may bring out a publication is unnecessary ( Clause 5). The simple 
answer to who may bring out a publication is any citizen who has attained 

21 
 
the age of majority, resides in India, is not an insolvent or a p erson of 
unsound mind. 
  
3.6 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting responded to the above 
suggestions as under:- 
 
 “People who are convicted of terrorist or unlawful activities and 
also those who have done anything against the security of the 
State are prohibited to bring out a publication under Section 5. 
It is imperative to have this clause as such elements may use the 
medium to harm the national interests. ‘Minor’ and ‘who does 
not ordinarily reside in India’ have been barred for filing a 
declaration under Section 8. Since authentication of declaration 
qualifies a publisher for registration of a title, absence of 
declaration as a natural corollary prohibits a person to bring out 
a publication. ‘Insolvent’ and ‘unsound mind’ had been included 
in the initial draft(s) but subsequently after detailed discussions, 
these restrictions were withdrawn as they cannot stand 
challenges with reference to the Constitution of India. Article 19 
of the Constitution provides for freedom of press. Reasonable 
restrictions on this freedom can be imposed only in the interest 
of public order, security of State, decency or morality etc. under 
the Constitution. There is no scope to restrict freedom of 
expression on the grounds of insolvency and unsoundness of 
mind. Hence, ‘insolvent’ and ‘unsound mind’ were dropped later 
on from the draft Bill.”  
 
3.7 The Committee pointed out that a person who has been involved in 
the terrorist activity and has been convicted by the court, awaiting the final 
judgment may want to give express ion to his experience of negative 
movement of his life. In such a situation if he wants to bring out any kind of 
book/publication from jail whether his positive thought should not be 
welcomed and he should not be given an opportunity to write from the jail . 
Asked to respond to such a situation and whether there is a need to insert 
such a provision in the proposed Bill, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in their written reply clarified as under:- 
 “Only those people who are convicted of terrorist or 
unlawful activities and those who have been convicted for 
having done anything against the security of the State are 
prohibited to bring out a publication under Section 5. People 

22 
 
convicted of other offen ces have not been prevented. It is 
imperative to have this Clause as such elements may use the 
medium to harm the national interests.” 
 
3.8 The Committee note that this is a newly crafted provision in the 
proposed legislation which seeks to clearly define as to who may bring out a 
publication. The Committee during their examination of the Bill found that 
there is more or less  general consensus on  the provisio n except that the 
Times of India Group forwarded a detailed version of who may bring out a 
publication suggesting alternate definition of the provision with respect to 
minor, unsound mind, insolvent, non -resident Indians etc. The Indian 
Newspaper Society ( INS) on the other hand has narrowed down the 
definition. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has examined the 
provision keeping in perspective conditions such as ‘minor’, ‘insolvent’, 
‘unsound mind’ and persons not residing in India. The Committee a lso 
observe that reasonable restrictions on the freedom of press on the 
grounds of terrorist and unlawful activities  has been given prominence in 
the wording of the Clause.  While agreeing to the provision, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to also addr ess to a situation where the convict 
under Clause 5 may like to write from jail his positive thought s with good 
intent. The Committee’s suggestion in this regard is the person may be 
allowed a freedom of expression. However, the publishing of such content 
may be considered on case to case and after scrutinizing the content.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
IV. Provisions relating to Known Foreign Publications 
 Clause 2(i), 6(4)(d) and 9(1)(b) 
 
 Serious concerns have been expressed by various stakeholders to 
Clause 2(i) where a new definition has been given i.e. ‘Known Foreign 
Publications’ meaning thereby such foreign publications as may be 
prescribed. The expression is linked to various other clauses of the proposed 
legislation and the same appears in several Clauses i.e. 6(4)(d), 9(1)(b). 
 
4.2 The Times of India held the view that there is no such concep t as 
‘known foreign publication’  and therefore, the  sub-clause that the title be 
denied if it is same or similar to a ‘known foreign publication’ may be deleted 

23 
 
from the proposed legislation . The main grounds on which the objections 
have been raised by the Times of India are as under:- 
  
“Since the PRB Act, like any other Indian Law, applies to India 
and does not, and cannot, apply to any foreign country, the 
concept of “known foreign publication”, as incorporated in the 
2011 Bill, is alien to the concept of the PRB Act.  It is thus a 
totally meaningless Clause and an Indian newspaper cannot be 
regulated with reference to a foreign newspaper and an Indian 
Law cannot be subservient to a foreign law.  To do so, would 
simply be an attempt to strangulate Indian business and 
suppress Indian Media. 
 
That there is no comity of Nations and there are no re ciprocal 
arrangements in this regard between India and other countries 
of the world to protect each other’s newspaper titles.  There is, 
therefore, no reason at all for the Government of India to be 
eager to pander to the desire of foreign nations in this regard. 
 
Foreign newspapers have no allegiance to the Indian 
Constitution and they do not respect the Indian Laws.  That 
being so, the foreign newspapers cannot seek the protection of 
the Indian Laws and the Government of India should not 
encourage such protection by amending its own Laws 
unilaterally just to appease the foreign media. 
 
The word “known” is very vague and subjective.  Many 
questions will arise as to known to whom, known in what 
manner and known by what yardsticks.   
Foreign newspapers continue to disrespect the sovereignty and 
integrity of India.  They continue to publish wrong maps of 
Indian Territory. 
 
Newspaper titles are highly territorial in nature and newspapers 
with the same or similar titles are being published 
simultaneously within various parts of the same country abroad 
and also within different countries which judicial notice have 
taken note of. Hence protecting foreign newspaper titles in India 
makes no sense. 
The commonality of titles of newspapers is a phenomenon 
prevalent in the newspaper industry all over the world.” 
  

24 
 
4.3 Similarly, the Indian Newspaper Society (INS) pointed out that 
definition of ‘known foreign publication ’ may be removed as this is not a 
global practice and no country in the world maintains a list of known  foreign 
publications so as to protect the foreign titles at the cost of domestic 
industry. There is no such concept as ‘ known foreign publication ’ and 
therefore the sub Clause that the title be denied if it is same or similar to a 
‘known foreign publication’ may be deleted from the new Act. The Press and 
Registration of Books Act is an Indian Act applies to only the territory of 
Indian Union and to Indian Newspapers. The re is no c ountry of nations and 
there are no reciprocal arrangements between India and other countries of 
the world for protecting each other’s newspaper titles. Therefore, this 
concept needs to be deleted.  
 
4.4 When asked to react to the above objections, the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting stated as under: 
 
“(i) Indian newspapers  are not sought to be regulated with 
reference to ‘known foreign publication’ clauses.  It is only to 
provide Indian readers access to reputed known foreign 
publications through their facsimile editions. 
(ii)  As per the definition what would constitute ‘k nown foreign 
publication’ will be prescribed in the rules and will not be left for 
subjective interpretation.” 
4.5 One of the stakeholders who deposed before the Committee even 
expressed the apprehension that there are many newspapers abroad, which 
want an  entry into India to publish their newspapers, and they are 
pressurizing the Government to reserve these titles for a backdoor entry. 
India will become the only country in the world to legislate something like 
this, which is very unfair. He also expressed that the titles, which are already 
registered, will not affect in any manner. But once the Government decides 
to block certain titles and say that these titles are known and those titles may 
be given to, at whosoever behest to someone else and not allowed to 
Indians. This should not be done. 
  
4.6 On being enquired as to how the Ministry would decide/monitor 
whether a publication is known foreign publication, the Ministry informed 

25 
 
that as per the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting guideline dated 16 
June, 2004 ‘prominent foreign title’ would mean (i) the title should have been 
publishing continuously for at least 5 years in the country of its origin and (ii) 
the title should have circulation of at least 10,000 paid copies in the last 
financial year in the country of its origin. 
 
4.7 When the Committee desired to know as to how the concept of 
‘known foreign publication ’ is to be defined, the Ministry through their 
written reply has informed that the Rules regarding known foreign 
publications would be dr afted carefully after taking into account the interest 
of reading public and other stakeholders. 
4.8 When the Committee wanted the opinion of the Registrar of 
Newspapers for India (RNI) as to whether the introduction of the concept of 
“known foreign publication” in the proposed Act is inimical to the interests of 
the Indian newspapers and Publications, the RNI submitted as under:- 
 
‘Known foreign publication’ needs to be read in the right 
perspective. It is aimed to facilitate publication of facsimile or 
Indian editions of only prominent foreign publications by the 
Indian entities, which would have to strictly comply with 
provisions of Press and Registration of Books Act and all other 
Indian laws. 
 
4.9 Keeping in view the fact that most of the newspapers use  common 
titles such as Hindustan Times, NavBharat Times, Khaleej Times, etc. and 
‘Times’ being the common to all these newspapers, the Committee wanted 
to know whether the Hindustan Times name will be a ban to Khaleej Times 
going by the logic of same or si milar titles. To this, the representative of RNI 
further clarified as under:- 
 
“Times is a generic word. There is Nav Bharat Times  also and 
there is Times of India also.  There are certain words which are 
generic.  In fact, the most difficult and important  job in the 
office of the Registrar of Newspapers is clearance of the title.  
Certification follows certain well laid down legal procedures but 
title is the most important thing on which a paper is getting 
published and there are much litigation in this re gard also.  So, 
the new Bill very clearly says that there cannot be a same or 
similar title in the same language and in the same State.  But if 

26 
 
the application is from a group either a trust or an organisation 
or a joint stock company or a partnership firm or an individual or 
the same owner, then the title can be given to them.  They c an 
bring many editions. As the H on’ble Chairman and Hon’ble 
Members know, The Hindustan Times and Times of India have 
many editions across the country and so is Dainik Jagran or any 
other group.” 
 
4.10 To a related query as to whether it is possible to maintain a database 
the Ministry stated that creation of permanent database may not be possible 
as it is a dynamic process. Presently the facility of electronic search vehicle is  
relied on. 
  
4.11 The Ministry also informed that after the new Act is passed, under the 
rules to be made for the implementation of this Act, this provision called 
‘Known Foreign Publication ’ is yet to be defined. Rules regarding ‘Known 
Foreign Publications’ would be drafted carefully after taking into account the 
interest of reading public and other stakeholders. 
 
4.12 Asked as to whether there is any other country in the world where 
there is such a provision of “known foreign entity” in the newspaper industry, 
the representative of RNI submitted as under:- 
 
 “To the best of knowledge of the RNI, we are not aware.” 
 
4.13 The Committee note that one of the most debated provisions which 
has raised serious concern among the stakeholders is the provision of  
‘known foreign publications ’ as provided in Clause 2(i) of the Bill.  The 
Committee find merit in  the objections raised by the various stakeholde rs 
to this particular provision i.e. there are no reciprocal arrangements with 
other countries , the territorial nature of the newspapers and the very 
concept of ‘known foreign publication ’ being vague and subjective. 
Different sections of media have advocated for deletion of such a provision. 
While the Ministry has stated that the intention behind the provision is to 
facilitate publication of facsimile or Indian editions of only prominent 
publications and to give Indian readers an access to reputed known foreign 

27 
 
publications, the real intent behind such a provision is still beyond the 
comprehension of the Committee. The Committee share the concerns of 
the stakeholders that this concept is vague and difficult to be defined  and 
implemented. The Committee are of the view that when thousands of 
newspapers are in circulation throughout the world, having s ame or similar 
publication it will be very difficult on the part of RNI to monitor such a 
provision.  Moreover, the provision has no other precedent in the world as 
RNI themselves have accepted that to the best of their knowledge, they are 
not aware of suc h a provision. The Ministry has also informed that 
implementation aspects of the provision is yet to be defined under the rules 
to be made for the implementation of the Act.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to seriously examine the provisi ons taking into 
account the international practice in allowing access to facsimile editions in 
other countries and concerns expressed by the various stakeholders. If at all 
the present provision is utmost essential, the Ministry should clearly define 
the concept of ‘known foreign publications’ and its implementation aspects 
in the rules to be framed so as to avoid any ambiguity.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
V. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Syndicate Related Issues 
 Clause 9 
  
In regard to FDI in print media, as per the Print Media Policy of 1955  
and related guidelines revised from time to time, the existing provisions are, 
 
(a) The foreign direct investment up to a ceiling of twenty-six 
percent of paid up equity capital in Indi an entities 
publishing newspapers and periodicals dealing with news 
and current affairs and hundred per cent, in the scientific, 
technical and specialty category  subject to certain 
conditions; 
(b) The publication of facsimile editions, in whole or in part , 
of foreign newspapers by Indian entities, with or without 
foreign investment, and also by foreign companies 
owning the original newspaper; 
(c) The publication of Indian editions of foreign scientific, 
technical, specialty and news and current affairs 
magazines, periodicals and journals. 
 

28 
 
5.2 Clause 9 (1)(2)(3) of the proposed legislation deal with limits of foreign 
news contents and FDI which allows the Government to decide on the FDI 
quantum. The relevant provision is as under:- 
 
9. (1) Without prejudice  to the other provisions of this Act, no 
publication shall be printed and published in India except with 
the prior approval of the Central Government granted in this 
behalf, if — 
(a)  such publication is owned by any individual who is not an 
Indian citizen  or unincorporated body of individuals or 
body corporate incorporated under the law of any 
country other than India; or 
 
(b)  its title is same or similar to a known foreign publication; 
or 
(c)  its foreign news content in an issue of an Indian 
publication exceeds the limit prescribed for such 
publication; or 
(d)  such publication has investment from any individual who 
is not an Indian citizen or unincorporated body of 
individuals or body corporate incorporated under the law 
of any country other than India; or 
(e)  it is a facsimile edition of a known foreign publication. 
 
(2)  Any person who intends to print or bring out a 
publication referred to in sub - section (1) may make an 
application to the Central Government for its prior approval in 
such form and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. 
(3)  The Central Government may, subject to such terms and 
conditions as it may deem fit, grant approval for printing or 
publishing the publication referred to in sub -section (1) or 
refuse to grant such approval after recording the reasons 
thereof: 
 
Provided that no such refusal shall be made unless that person 
concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
  
5.3 During the course of examination, the Committee pointed out that the 
limits of Foreign Direct  Investment/ syndication limits have not been 
specifically mentioned in the Bill and the Government intends to regulate th e 
same through executive orders. Enquired as to whether the Government has 

29 
 
been given a blanket permission to increase FDI to 100 per cent, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  during 
evidence informed that the provisions would allow the Government to take 
any decision on the limit of FDI in Print Media on case to case basis.  
 
5.4 Asked about the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Law in 
the matter the representatives of the Ministry of Law  and Justice  clarified 
that proposed provisions indeed give a free hand to Government to increase 
the limits. 
 
5.5 On the issue of fixing the limits of FDI, the Committee desired to know 
whether it will not be better to specify the limit/cap on FDI in print media 
rather than giving a free hand to the Government. To this, the representative 
of the Ministry during the evidence submitted  as under:- 
  
“……. that it is never a good idea to write percentages in Acts. 
The reason being that the climate changes from time to time, 
and as you are also aware that whatever the Government does, 
it does administratively.  It is not that the Government is living in 
a vacuum. They cannot do just whatever they want ………. 
Government normally does take all shades of opinion and 
Cabinet approval. 
5.6 In the context of FDI in other sectors such as banking, insurance, 
telecom where limits are provided in the bye-laws enacted by Parliament, the 
Committee enquired whether the Ministry ha s examined this aspect with 
regard to other Acts dealing with other sectors in the country. 
 
5.7 The Ministry in a reply informed as under:- 
 
“The FDI limit in Banking and Insurance sector is 49% whereas FDI 
cap in News sector of Print Media is 26% only. Keeping in mind 
the sensitivities involved in the News sector, FDI limit has been 
kept at such level so that ownership and control remains in 
Indian hands.” 
 
5.8 As regard to adequate safeguards to preventing cultural infiltration 
and protecting the interests of the country, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting further clarified that the FDI and facsimile/ Indian edition of 
foreign publications are to be seen in the light of benefit to the readers and a 

30 
 
large chunk of publications in India which otherwise starve for technology, 
marketing and capital to expand. Besides, facsimile editions and Indian 
editions of foreign publications would be brought out mainl y by the Indian 
entities; hence national interests are not likely to be compromised. 
 
5.9 On being asked about Press Council of India’s views on FDI, the 
Chairman, PCI submitted before the Committee as under: 
 
The industry is opposed to FDI…….…. India is a  Sovereign nation. 
We do not want some foreign powers to grab hold of our Press, 
which is very powerful and very important in the democracy. If 
you start permitting foreign countries picking our Press, will that 
not undermine our independence, our freedom and our 
Sovereignty?  I am personally opposed to this. I think my 
country is a sovereign country. And foreign companies should 
not take over our Press. This is my personal view.  
 
5.10 One of the stakeholders in his memorandum submitted to the 
Committee ex pressed serious concern over giving statutory backing to the 
FDI norms and free hand to Government with reference to limits of FDI. He 
opined that by providing a statutory status to FDI in media and sanctifying 
syndication material of dubious intent in Ind ian publications through this 
proposed Bill, the media is being turned into a commercial activity like any 
other commodity for maximizing gain with fierce rivalries of the corporate 
world with no hands barred. Reacting to the above concern, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
  
“The Guidelines for FDI etc. are already in place. The liberalized    
policy environment has benefited the Print Media industry 
greatly. The Act only gives statutory backing to these Guidelines. 
Entry of foreign publications in India and  FDI in print media 
would improve the quality of publications, and thus widen the 
scope of readership. Further both FDI in media and syndication 
are to be permitted only by Central Government as per approved 
guidelines. Material of dubious intent will defi nitely not be 
permitted.”* 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the draft Report, the Ministry vide their OM dated 18.12.2012 ha s 
stated that it may not be proper to mention  the share of FDI in the Bill, as the same will depend on Government’s 
policy on FDI on case to case basis which will be regulated through executive orders. 
 

31 
 
5.11 The Committee note that Clause 9 of the Bill concerning the FDI and 
limits of foreign news content is one of the most important clauses in the 
Bill. The Committee find that the provisions in the Clause are couched in 
such wordings that it has been left to individual interpretations as to what 
are the limits of FDI and syndication in print media  as the limits of FDI and 
syndication limits have not been spe cifically mentioned in the Bill and  the 
Government intends to regulate the same through Executive Orders. The 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice have endorsed to the views that the maximum cap                                          
in    FDI    and   syndication   have   not   been   indicated   in  the Bill. This 
gives a blanket authority to the Government  to increase FDI in print media 
upto 100 per cent. While on the on e hand, it gives Government of the  day 
the freedom to fix the limits on print media sector as the situation 
demands, on the other hand, the provision is likely to be misused by raising 
the limits to undesirable levels putting the domestic media at the risk of 
takeover by foreign giants . The Ministry has emphasized that the existing 
arrangement of FDI and syndication continues and the proposed Bill aims at 
giving a legal backing to existing guidelines and allowing foreign 
publications for free flow of knowledge in respect of science and technology 
in the intere st of readers.  The Ministry has informed that the FDI limit in 
Banking and Insurance Sector is 49% the limit of FDI cap in news sector of 
print media is 26 per cent only and keeping in mind the sensitivities 
involved in the news sector , FDI limit has been kept at such a low level so 
that ownership and control remains in Indian hands. The Committee 
strongly feel that opening of the floodgates of foreign media with content 
not suitable to the interests of the country may have a detrimental  effect 
on our rich culture and unity.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
keeping the interests of Print Media in particular and the country at large, 
the Ministry should reconsider the feasibility of having the maximum 
permissible cap and provisions ensuring that control over print media 
remains broadly in Indian hands.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 

32 
 
VI. Operational/Procedural Aspects  
A. Owner of the Printing Press to make declaration 
Clause 4(1) 
 
As per Clause 4(1) , every person who owns and operates any Press for 
the printing of books or publications shall make and subscribe a declaration 
in such form as may be prescribed, before the specified authority within 
whose local jurisdiction such press is kept.  
6.2 Sub section 4(2), further provides as under:-  
As often as the place where a press is kept is changed, a fresh 
declaration shall be necessary: 
Provided that where the change is for a period not exceeding 
sixty days and the place where the press is kept after the change 
is within the local jurisdiction of the specified authority referred 
to in sub-section (1), no fresh declaration shall be necessary if — 
 
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the said 
specified authority within three days thereof; and 
(b) the owner of the press continues to be the same. 
 
6.3 Indian News Paper Society has suggested as under:-  
“Declaration by “printer” and printing press owner should be 
dispensed with as they have no control over the matter 
published in a newspaper. They are appointed by the owner and 
have nothing to do with content. A newspaper published from 
one place and printed from different places should not be asked 
to file declaration from every printing place. In case Government 
feels that they should have the information about these presses 
and the printer, he may rather be asked to give intimation to 
RNI instead of filing a declaration on this count.” 
6.4 To the above suggestion, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
responded as under: 
“Accountability of the Printer is a must as he is responsible for 
the final printing of the contents.  Hence, declaration from him 
is mandatory.  

33 
 
Declaration by ‘Printing Press Owner’ is required as DM is 
expected to have the record of printing presses, w hich are 
operating under his jurisdiction.  To control printing presses 
from indulging in anti -national or anti -social activities, 
particularly in disturbed or border areas, such a clause is 
necessary.  
 
In RNI records all major details of newspapers, including printing 
press(s), on the basis of the declaration as it has legal sanctity.  
But, intimation may be false and would be difficult to be 
challenged legally. 
 
Also, in the event of any content problem at a printing place, the 
DM concerned may refus e to intervene as he may say that the 
declaration not filed before him.” 
 
6.5 With regard to the provision for Owner of printing press to make 
declaration the Committee also feel that such a declaration is necessary to 
control printing press from indulging  in anti national and anti social 
activities. However, the Committee feel that the time limit of three days as 
prescribed in sub section (a) is not sufficient and the Ministry may 
reconsider for increase in the time limit.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
B. Timeline  for the Specified Authority to Verify the Antecedents 
 Clause 6(3) 
 
6.6 Clause 6(3) of the Bill provides that the specified authority may after 
verification of antecedents of the applicant and after satisfying himself about 
the eligibility of such applicant, within a period of three months, recommend 
or reject the application. 
 
6.7 Indian Newspaper Society has suggested that period of three months 
for clearing title application by the DM under Clause 6(3) should be one 
month. Similar views were ex pressed by another stakeholder who had 
suggested that in this electronic age three months is too long period hence it 
should be reduced to one month in the larger public interest. 
 

34 
 
6.8 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has reacted to the above 
suggestion as under: 
 
“Since the DM has to take care of a large number of aspects 
with limited resources, he should be given fairly sufficient time 
to verify the antecedents of the applicant and do other 
formalities. The antecedents of the applicant need to  be 
verified with proper care and for this purpose time limit of 
three months is reasonable.” 
 
6.9 Considering the usage of IT and related data at all levels, the 
Committee feel that three months time for the purpose is too long and it 
should be reduced to two months. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
C. Communication of the Reasons for Rejection of Title 
 Clause 6(4) 
 
6.10 Clause 6(4) of the Bill provides as under: 
“On receipt of the recommendation from the specified authority 
under sub-section (3), the Press Registrar General shall in writing 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, approve one of the 
title or reject all the proposed titles if such titles are— 
(a) the same or similar to that of any existing publication, except in 
the case of publications owned by the same person; or  
(b) obscene; or 
(c) similar to name of symbols of terrorists or terrorist 
organisations either in full or in abbreviated form; 
(d) same or similar to that of a known foreign publication.” 
6.11 Some of the stakeholders have suggested that the reason for rejection 
may be communicated to the applicant. One of them has suggested that the 
following should be inserted as 4(e): 
“4 (e): provided further that in case the Magistrate rejects all of 
the titles that have been applied for  above, he shall record in 
writing the reasons for such rejection and shall afford to the 
applicant an opportunity of being heard in person.” 

35 
 
6.12 On the i ssue of rejection of title the r epresentative of RNI submitted 
during evidence as under: 
“Rejection is not an offence. When we reject, then, you have to 
apply fresh through the DM. Again, rejection is only on four 
grounds: one, the same title should not be asked; two, it should 
not be a similar title from the same region; three, if it is a group 
or owner, then it is considered as another addition. So, we will 
give. Next, it should not be obscene; it should not be unlawful. 
It should not resemble the symbols or words of the 
organisations of any terrorists. It should not resemble a foreign 
title.  So, on these grounds, we reject. Under the proposed new 
Act, we give the grounds for rejection also. So, based on that, 
you can apply with another fresh set of five suggestions. Each 
applicant is required to give a list of five names.” 
 
6.13 The Committee desire th at as agreed to  by RNI the Bill may 
specifically provide that the rejection of titles will be communicated with 
recorded reasons. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
D. Decision of Press Registrar General Final 
 Clause 6(5) 
 
6.14 Clause 6 (5) which vests in the Press Registrar General the final 
authority to approve or reject the titles reads as follows: 
“The decision of Press Registrar General as to title under sub 
section (4) shall be final.” 
6.15 The stakeholders expressed their concern with regard to vesting 
absolute powers to Press Registrar General on the issue of titles. It has been 
suggested that sub section 5 may be amended as follows: 
“On receipt of a recommendation from the Magistrate, the 
Press Registrar General may after verifying with his records 
approve in writing one of the titles applied for and as has been 
recommended by the Magistrate  within a period of 30 days 
from the date of  receipt of the recommendation p rovided that 
in case the Press Registrar General declines to verify and 
approve a title t hat has been recommended by the Magistrate 
he shall accordingly inform the Magistrate  along with the 

36 
 
reasons therefore, and afford to the applicant an opportunity of 
being heard in person.” 
 
6.16 The Committee note that in the proposed Bill there is a pro vision for 
Appellate Authority in Clause 20. However, only two Sections have been 
covered under the jurisdiction of the appellate authority and there is no 
other mechanism in the Bill for redressal of grievance for a person 
aggrieved by the decision of the  PRG with regard to rejection of titles. The 
Committee strongly feel that in a democratic system like ours the aggrieved 
should be given a fair chance for appeal. The Committee recommend that 
requisite amendment in the Bill may be made to address the issue. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
E. Transfer of Titles 
 Clause 6(7) 
 
6.17 Clause 6(7) provides that any owner of a publication may, after 
registration, transfer the title of such publication to any person, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
6.18 When it was suggested that the procedure and process for the transfer 
of titles should be clearly elaborated and time limit set out for this, the 
Ministry of I&B has stated that since it is a procedural aspect, it can be taken 
care of in due course.   
6.19 The Times of India has suggested the following amendment to the 
provision: 
“Clause 6(7) may be amended as: subject to other provisions of 
this Act and the Rules made hereunder a title of a publication 
which has been registered in the name of an entity may  be 
transferred to another entity by the owner thereof after the 
same is registered with RNI either by way of sale, license, or 
franchising. However, a title, which has not been registered, 
cannot be so transferred.” 
6.20 The Committee desire that this aspect should be examined and 
necessary provisions be made in the Rules to be framed for implementation 
of the proposed legislation.   
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 

37 
 
F. Annual Statement of Publications 
 Clause 31 
 
6.21 Clause 31 deal with the provision of annual statement etc. to be 
furnished by publishers which states as under: 
31. (1) It shall be the duty of the publisher, and owner in the 
absence of the publisher, of every publication— 
(a)  to furnish to the Press Registrar General an annual 
statement in respect of the publication, at such time and 
containing such other particulars referred to in   25 sub-
section (2) of section 29, as may be prescribed; 
(b) to publish in the publication at such times and such of the 
particulars relating to the publication  referred to in sub -
section (2) of section 29 as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Press Registrar General. 
(2) If a publisher or owner required to submit annual statement 
under this Act fails to submit the annual statement for a 
consecutive period of three years, the title, declaration 
and the registration of the publication concerned shall 
stand cancelled. 
(3) The Press Registrar General shall cause publication of the 
cancellation of any publication in at least one daily 
newspaper circulating in the locality in which the 
publication concerned is brought out.  
 
6.22 As has already been dealt in earlier part of the Report, the Ministry at 
the consultation stage of the drafting of the legislation had discussed with 
various stakeholders about the issue of disclosure of income from 
advertisements in the Annual Statement o f newspaper. The Union Cabinet 
had initially approved the provision in Section 31(1)(a) of the Bill i.e. to 
furnish the Press Registrar General an annual statement in respect of the 
publication and amount of moneys received in respect of such advertisement 
and the person from whom such moneys has been received and such other 
particulars referred to in sub -section (2) of section 29 as may be prescribed.  
However, in view of the strong objections raised by Indian Newspapers 
Society (INS) and the Times of India (ToI), the Ministry dropped this point and 
modified Section 31 (1) (a) as follows:  

38 
 
“To furnish to the Press Registrar General an annual statement 
in respect of the publication at such time and such other 
particulars referred to in sub-section 29, as may be prescribed.” 
 
6.23 Explaining the above , the Secretary , Information and Broadcasting  
during the course of oral evidence submitted as under:- 
 
“The INS and the Times of India had raised points on our draft 
bill which we had prepared after the February C abinet Meeting. 
There we had said that every publication is supposed to submit 
their accounts to the Government.  Now, in those accounts, we 
had also made a mention at that time that they would submit a 
complete detail of all the advertising revenue, which  had been 
generated by them. I do not want to go into great deal here.   I 
am sure the Committee understands what we meant by asking 
them for explanation regarding advertising revenue. It was not 
that we were interested in the small classifieds; we were 
interested in the much larger revenue we are talking about 
here. But there was a strong objection from these quarters on 
advertising revenue.  The argument that they gave was:  “This is 
a very voluminous data and therefore, this should be done away 
with”.  It is also true because if all advertising revenue has to be 
reported, the data would be very voluminous.  This issue was 
examined; there were various discussions with various 
stakeholders and so on. Ultimately this point was dropped.  
Now, the Government is not insisting on them about submitting 
accounts of the advertising revenue generated by them in the 
final form of the Bill.”   
6.24 On being enquired as to whether the issue was discussed with other 
stakeholders and an effort was made to have wider consu ltations on the 
issue of filing of annual statements by publishers to made compulsory, the 
Ministry of I&B informed that that there was no need to consult other stake 
holders as INS is a representative body of newspapers and the Government 
was also convinc ed that the information being demanded may be 
voluminous.  Regarding consultations with stakeholders on compulsory filing 
of annual statements, such consultations were not found necessary, as filing 
of annual statements cannot be dispensed with.  Annual St atements are 
mandatory to be received by RNI for discharge of its statutory function of 
compiling ‘Press-in-India.  Apart from this on the basis of annual statements, 

39 
 
circulation of a publication is verified which helps in deciding the 
advertisement rates by DAVP.   
6.25 During the course  of briefing, when the Committee wanted to know 
whether the deletion of proposed provision from the bill was self thought out 
or there was pressure from some sections of the stakeholders , the 
representative of the Ministry of I nformation and Broadcasting  replied as 
under : 
“ I can ’t really say it was under pressure ……….. There were 
merits and there were demerits of this issue ……….There could 
be some procedural problems. This is something, which we need 
to perhaps address in view of the larger problems attached to 
money, which some media houses do collect.   That is a much 
larger issue, which I think, you are already aware.  ” 
 xxxx    xxxx  xxxx  xxxx xxxx  xxxx    xxxx  xxxx xxxx  
There was a certain amount of merit in the idea.  There is also a 
certain amount of logic on the other side, which says that this 
kind of sweeping collection of data from everybody would 
perhaps result in a lot of voluminous data being collected.  I 
think, what we perhaps need to do, if you ask me,  is like this.  
We have laboured over this quite a bit.  What we actually need 
to do is to find out a via media because we all need to address.  
What you just said, paid news is one of the major nuisances, 
which we all are facing at the moment.  That is so mething, 
which we need to address.  How we are going to address that.  
Perhaps this may not be the right way, Sir. There could be 
perhaps some other ways, which we would be coming out with. 
When we have a discussion on paid news, we would perhaps 
have to d eal with it at that time. But putting it here and asking 
every newspaper or every magazine or every publication to give 
us all the classifieds, matrimonial and all that kind of data, 
would perhaps be like stretching it.” 
6.26 On being pointed out that ever y professional management now has a 
mechanism and the software to collect all these details and collecting these 
details on the part of the Govt., should not be a hurdle, the representative 
further added as under:  
“………..Perhaps what we need to find out is  a via media here 
because while making such a blanket provision in the PRB Act, 

40 
 
we were perhaps going to end up creating a lot of 
inconvenience for everybody.  There are some well -known 
defaulters as the hon. Committee is aware.  This is well -
documented by now. We already know it. But to deal with half a 
dozen or dozen or may be 100 people out of thousands and tens 
of thousands of publications in the country; and put 60,000 
people in difficulty, would perhaps not be a  very logical step on 
our part……….  We  need to work out a system for that. Perhaps 
this would not have resulted in solving that problem. We can get 
that information using some other methodology.” 
 
6.27 On being pointed out by the Committee that the main objective of any 
legislation in a democratic system is to protect public interest and there is an 
urgent need for having a mechanism to distinguish news and paid news, 
furnishing of details of advertisement revenue by the publications can 
address the issue of paid news and deletion of the provisi on is a grey area, 
the representative of the Ministry stated that the Ministry is seized of the 
matter and issue of paid news is to be addressed separately and not likely 
through PRB Act.  
6.28 The witness further explained:- 
“We are not suggesting a new l egislation........... What we are 
suggesting is that we need to address it separately. I would 
invite your attention to clause 29 of the new legislation where 
we have kept an enabling provision. It is clause 29 (k). We have 
kept that provision. I was talki ng about a mechanism. The 
provision is there, if you kindly note. It says: “The Press Registrar 
General shall maintain in such manner as may be prescribed a 
Register of Publication, and the Registry shall contain the 
following particulars about every publi cation brought out in 
India, namely…………….Here, clause 29 (k) talks about ‘any other 
particulars as may be prescribed’. Theoretically, under this, if we 
choose, the Press Registrar General can ask a newspaper or they 
can ask a publication to give us the par ticulars relating to 
anything else which they may want, which may be relevant. 
What has happened is that we are not covering the entire 
publication industry and asking them to give the details of 
advertising revenue. I said that we have to develop a via media 
for this which is why I am not committing myself as of today 
because the modalities have to be worked out to ensure that we 
are not later on attacked on some other ground. You can call for 

41 
 
those details under clause 29 (k) from a particular publication  in 
case we come to know that there is some kind of a violation or a 
problem there.” 
 
6.29 Drawing attention of the Ministry to the fact that the remedy to paid 
news in the proviso 29(k) has been incorporated alongside easily 
ascertainable, easy to fulfill  portions in clause 29(a) to (j) when the 
Committee asked if it was sufficient to address the issue, the representative 
of the Ministry submitted that 29(k) allows the Government or the Press 
Registrar General to seek the information from the party and for the moment 
it is good enough. He further added: 
 
“.......Sir, the point basically here is we are trying to be careful 
because you have to have an enabling provision in the Act. After 
the enabling provision in the Act, you have to also frame Rules 
which are as per the Act. As I mentioned right in the beginning, 
we have had that problem where the original Act did not 
envisage all these things. As a matter of fact, what was 
happening was the guidelines we were operating under the 
original Act, which I have po inted out earlier, were not on the 
basis of what the original Act was which the Court rightly 
pointed out that we were going beyond our brief. So, here, we 
are trying to build enabling provisions under which various rules 
will be set up which I said the mo dalities will have to be worked 
out and there is something which we have to see in great detail” 
 
6.30 The Committee note that the Union Cabinet had initially approved 
the provision in Section 31(1)(a) to furnish annual Statement in respect of 
the publication and disclosure of annual income from the advertisement. 
However, the same was dropped from the proposed legislation in view of 
strong objections raised by Indian Newspaper Society (INS) and the Times of 
India on ground of voluminous data to be furnished by a large number of 
publishers. When  the  Committee  pointed  out that   in  this  age  of  
technology  when    all    the    publishing    houses    are    maintaining    their    
books   of  account digitally through computer software and it w ill not be 
that difficult to ascertain these data, the Ministry did not have any 
explanation. In the context of ‘paid news’, the Committee feel that having 
details of return or record of income from advertisements will put a check 

42 
 
in place. The Committee n eed hardly emphasize that having the provision 
of furnishing details of advertisement revenue by the publications would 
definitely address the menace of paid news to a great extent. The 
Committee express their serious anguish that the Ministry has missed o ut 
an opportunity to curb the menace of paid news. Looking into the 
seriousness of the menace of paid news which some of the media houses 
are resorting to the Government could have very well asked for the above 
information from only those whose circulation  exceeds a particular limit 
and Annual Revenue from advertisements exceed certain fixed amount. 
With this provision many small and medium publications would have been 
exempted automatically and the concern of furnishing details on income 
from advertisements by each and everyone could have been avoided. From 
the submissions of the representatives of the Ministry  it appeared that the 
Ministry is going to address the issue separately. However, the Committee 
are of the view that the present Bill being the most comprehensive one 
relating to press, the issue of disclosure of details of annual income from 
advertisements should be addressed in this Bill only. The Committee 
accordingly recommend the Ministry to re-examine the issue and a suitable 
provision may be incorporated to check the menace of paid news. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
G. Circulation Verification by Authorised Auditor 
Clause 34(1) 
 
6.31 As per the clause 34 (1) of the Bill, the Press Registrar General on his 
own or on any request made to him, may conduct, through an officer or 
auditor authorised in this behalf, a verification in such manner as may be 
prescribed, as regard to circulation of the publication mentioned in the 
annual statement. 
(2) The verification under sub -section (1) shall be made in respect of a 
publication brought out in a financial year and not a part thereof. 
(3) In cases where the circulation verification is conducted on the 
request made by the owner, publisher or any other person, the 
verification shall be made on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed. 

43 
 
 6.32 INS has suggested that circulation verification should be done by 
authorized officers only and not through any registered CA firms. Necessary 
changes may accordingly be made in the bill.  
6.33 To this, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has clarified that 
circulation verification requires professional qualification particularly with 
reference to examination of financial documents -  a criterion for assessing 
the circulation. In case it is restricted to be d one by authorised officers only  
this work would come to standstill in the absence of such officers. Hence the 
option of getting work done through CA firms has been kept in the Bill 
(Clause 34). 
6.34 During the course of evidence, the representative of RNI elaborated on 
the issue as under: 
“Earlier the RNI  was doing the circulation verification under 19 
(f) of the existing Act. There were circulation officers and senior 
circulation officers in the regional and branch offices and in the 
headquarters also.  They were drawn primarily from the Audit 
and Accounts Service on deputation basis. After the posts were 
abolished in 2006, the RNI empanelled Chartered Accountants 
through the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India in 
different parts of the country and they were authorised to 
conduct the circulation, v erification and provide us the figures 
which was accepted by the DAVP also.  But  the Indian Language 
Newspapers Association had contested the decision and they 
have gone to the court.  In the High Court of Delhi a decision 
was taken that the R NI will do t he circulation verification. But 
given the acute shortage of manpower and the shortage of staff 
and officers, this job needs to be outsourced under section 34.” 
6.35 When the Committee pointed out that there would be every chance of 
manipulation, the repre sentative submitted that the other alternative is to 
strengthen staff strength of the regional RNIs. If the existing vacancies are 
filled up and circulation officers are appointed, RNI can undertake that work. 
In absence of such a scenario , outsourcing ha s been suggested. Thus , this is 
an enabling provision so that in the absence of technically qualified 
officers/officials with RNI, the work could be entrusted to private CA Firms, 
duly empanelled with the Government to facilitate uninterrupted disposal of 
circulation requests. 

44 
 
6.36 The apprehension that Chartered Accountants being in private domain 
may disclose commercial secrets of newspaper secrets to third party is ill 
conceived as even now CA’s are verifying the circulation figures of 
newspapers which a re accepted by DAVP.  Further Audit Bureau of 
Circulation (ABC) a private body too verifies the circulation of a large number 
of newspapers.  Also the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India has 
framed a professional code according to which individual Chartered 
Accountants or CA firms work.  In case the code is not observed by a CA firm 
or an individual CA, his registration/membership certificate is liable to be 
cancelled by ICAI. 
6.37 The Committee observe that in reaction to the concern expressed by 
some stakeholders that the circulation verification should be done by 
authorized officers only and not by Registered CA firms, the Ministry has 
justified their stand by stating that circulation verification being a technical 
job requires professional qualif ication. At the same time RNI has also cited 
the judgment by the Delhi High Court that circulation verification should be 
done by the staff of RNI only. However, in view of acute shortage of staff 
the provision to get the work done through outsourcing has been proposed 
in the Bill.  Even if the Ministry has maintained that there is less chance of 
manipulation in getting the verification done by private Firms the 
Committee feel that it is always preferable to get the verification done by 
RNI. To facilitate this, the Committee recommend the RNI to take necessary 
steps to increase qualified professional s. The existing staff strength of RNI 
should be strengthened so as to enable it to fulfill all  its mandate under the 
Bill. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
H. Penalty 
 Clauses 38-49 
 
6.38 Chapter VI of the Bill (Clauses 38 -49) deals with penalties, which 
provides for various kinds of penalties for violation of different clauses of the 
Bill. During the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee came across 
divergent views on the proposed penalties. Most of the stakeholders 
vociferously expressed their disagreement with regard to clauses concerning 

45 
 
suspension of the Publication and suspension of the Press for thirty days. The 
issue has been dealt in the succeeding para. 
 
6.39 Clauses 38 & 39 of the Bill provide as under:- 
 
Clause 38:- Whoever prints or publishes any book or publication otherwise 
than in conformity with section 3 shall be liable to a fine not 
exceeding five thousand rupees in addition to suspension of the 
publication for a period of thirty days. 
 
Clause 39:- Whoever owns any press in contravention of the provisions of 
section 4 shall be liable to a fine n ot exceeding five thousand 
rupees in addition to sealing of the printing press for a period of 
thirty days. 
 
6.40 The Indian Newspaper Society in their memorandu m submitted to the 
Committee have  raised serious objections on the Chapter on penalties as 
under:- 
 
 “There is absolutely no reason for the draft Bill to prescribe the 
punishment of suspension of a publication for contravention of 
Sections 3 and 4. Declarations under these sections are routine 
in nature, and it is unnecessary for Government to claim  the 
power to order suspension to deal with infractions. The 
monetary penalty imposed could, if Government so desires, 
follow a mathematical progression, or indeed any other formula 
that acts as a disincentive. But no Government should give itself 
the powe r to suspend a publication in the manner 
contemplated, and especially at the levels at which the power is 
proposed to be delegated. 
  
The provision under Section 44(1) for imprisonment for 
publication not confirming to the provisions of the Act to 
whoever edits, prints or brings and any publication is against the 
very purpose of the Act, which is primarily to administer and 
regulate the publication of newspapers, and should be deleted. 
Even the Press Council of India has opposed this Section. 
Similarly, the  provisions to cancel the declaration should be 
dropped.  
 
 The entire Chapter for ‘Penalty’ is a draconian provision and i s 
violation of Chapter III  of the Constitution while the original 
provision prescribed punishment and or fine upon conviction by 
a magistrate, the new section does not make conviction 

46 
 
mandatory. The punishments are prescribed for several 
technical violations. 
 
 In our opinion, susp ension of the publication is too wide a 
power to grant to a Magistrate or even Press Registrar. A 
provision that causes cessation of a publication has no place in 
democracy and is violation of right to freedom and speech 
under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.  
 
 This provision thus needs to be removed. The original provisions 
were sufficient deterrent and should not have been tinkered 
with. 
 
 Section 50 permits the Press Registrar to delegate all or any of 
his powers to any officer subordinate to him. When read with 
this, section 38 contemplates leaving the publications at the 
mercy of junior functionaries. State Governments are permitted 
to make rules for carrying out the objectives of the Act. With 
sweeping power to suspend publication or cancel regis tration 
there is every likely hood of the print media being an easy target 
for witch hunting.  
  
We strongly oppose this and demand that this should be 
dropped/removed.” 
 
6.41 The Haryana Editors Guild and Haryana Union of journalists expressed 
similar concerns on the Clauses on penalty:- 
 
“The whole Chapter VI regarding penalties is obnoxious in 
nature. The bureaucracy should have no such power of coercion 
on the functioning of media in general and publications at 
district and sub -divisional levels in part icular, since it will place 
media at the sweet mercy of babudom and will impair its 
independence to a dangerous extent and make it subservient to 
vested interests.  In the name of verification of antecedents 
police control coupled with such penal powers spelled out under 
this chapter will go to make a vibrant media docile and tailing 
the bureaucracy. “ 
 

47 
 
6.42 Asked as to why the extreme punishment of suspension of 
publication/sealing of printing press for contravention of Clauses 3 and 4 of 
the Bill have been prescribed, the Ministry has informed as under:- 
 
“Section 3 of the proposed Act provides for printing of the name 
of Printer/Publisher and Place of Printing/Publishing in each 
issue of a book or publication. The provision has been retained 
from the exis ting Act, and in the existing Act penalty for not 
printing the imprint line is imprisonment of 6 months or with 
fine of Rs. 2000/ - or both (Section 12). In the amended Act, the 
penalty of ‘imprisonment’ has been removed. There has been an 
additional penalt y of ‘suspension of publication for 30 days’ 
instead. Further, the penalty amount has been raised from Rs. 
2000/- to Rs. 5,000/-. The requirements under Section 3 are very 
important and therefore deterrent is a must for violators. 
Further imposition of any  penalty is through court of law and 
not by Press Registrar General (PRG) or District magistrate (DM). 
Replacement of imprisonment by suspension of publication for 
30 days cannot be termed as draconian, rather it is dilution of 
penalty. 
 
As for violation of Section 4, penalty for contravention is closure 
of the printing press for 30 days along with fine of Rs. 5,000/ -. 
Here too, in the existing Act the penalty is fine of Rs. 2,000/ - or 
imprisonment of 6 months or both. The amended Act has 
diluted the penal ty by replacing imprisonment with closure of 
printing press. If printing presses are allowed to work without 
the knowledge of district authorities, it is possible that some 
may prove to be detrimental to national interest, particularly in 
border and distur bed States. Hence the penal provision should 
be stringent enough to curb such tendencies.” 
 
6.43 When the Committee asked if the penalties have been enhanced or 
brought down, the representative added that in absolute terms they could be 
called an enhanceme nt. Clarifying on the issue of its imposition the 
representative stated during the evidence: 
 
 “I do not think it would really make much of a substantial 
difference in that sense because neither suspension nor 
imprisonment was being done by the executive.  Both of them 
had to be implemented by the judiciary.  It is a matter of what 

48 
 
the concerned judge feels, what he needs to do.  His objection 
would have made a lot of sense in case we had introduced a 
penalty, which said that the Press Registrar General can suspend 
you, or we had said that the District Magistrate can suspend 
you, which is not the case.  So, in any case, I do not think that is 
much of a point.” 
 
6.44 The Committee note that various stakeholders have expressed 
serious concern on the issue of penalty i.e. suspension of publication and 
sealing of print ing press for thirty days  for contravention of clause 3 and 4 
respectively. They have argued that this is violative of the Freedom of Press 
as guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution . They have expressed 
that this is an extreme form of penalty for mere technical violations. 
Sharing the concerns of the stakeholders, the Committee recommend that 
penalty may be imposed in stages and penalty of suspension of the 
publication and sealing of the pr ess may be resorted to only on successive 
violations. The defaulter may be given a chance to explain and complete 
the formalities as prescribed in Clause 3 and Clause 4 of the proposed Bill. 
The Committee also feel that the sealing of printing press may ha ve other 
legal implications as one of the stakeholders who deposed before the 
Committee had stated that sealing is a bigger thing than publication being 
suspended. Sealing is putting an end to somebody’s business and the only 
criteria provided in proposed Bill is when somebody does not make a 
declaration. There has to be some more strict provisions leading to a 
situation where a sealing of press may be resorted to because it may not 
stand judicial scrutiny if it was to be challenged in the Court. As such, t he 
Committee recommend the Ministry to look into the possible ramifications 
and legal side of the issue before deciding on the penalty in the form of 
sealing of the press.  Necessary amendments may be carried out in the Bill, 
accordingly. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 

49 
 
I. Delegation of Power s by Press Registrar General (PRG) to any 
Subordinate Officer 
 Clause 50 
 
6.45 As per Clause 50 of the proposed Bill subject to the provisions of the 
Act and rules made there under, the Press Registrar General may delegate all 
or any of his powers under the Act to any officer subordinate to him. 
 
6.46 The INS expressed serious concerns on the above provision as it 
apprehended that delegation of powers when read with section 38 would 
leave the publications at the mercy of junior functionaries. State 
Governments are permitted to make rules for carrying out the objectives of 
the Act. With sweeping power to suspend publication or cancel registration 
there is every likely hood of the print media being an easy target for witch 
hunting. Hence the provision needs to be dropped. 
 
6.47 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their comments to 
the above apprehension stated that it is not correct to read delegation of 
powers (clause 50) with the penalty clause (Section 38). Del egation of 
powers is for administrative convenience. Section 38 is about a specified 
penalty, which is to be imposed by the Court of Law. Delegation of powers is 
provided in every sphere of Government functioning in order to ensure 
speedy disposal.  
 
6.48 With regard to delegation of power by PRG to any subordinate 
Officers, serious concerns have been expressed that the provision may lead 
to wielding and exercising of more powers by the junior functionaries, 
leaving the administrative process relating to press and publications at their 
mercy. The Committee also feel that in the absence of clear cut guideline s 
regarding the circumstances when and how these powers can be delegated 
to subordinates leaves ample scope for misuse of the provision. The recent 
misuse of section 66(A) of the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 
2008 is a very good example of how the provisions on delegation of power  
in any Act can be misused in the absence of clear cut guideline s. The 
Committee recommend that necessary safeguards may be built in the Act 

50 
 
itself or the same may be outlined in Rules/Guidelines so as to avoid any 
possible misuse of this provision. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
VII. Chapters III and IV relating to Books  
(Clauses 21-27) 
Role of Ministry of Human Resource Development      
 
The Committee heard the views of the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development on the proposed legislation in general and more particularly on 
Chapters III and IV i.e. sections concerning books. The Secretary, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development while deposing before the Committee reacted 
to the proposed legislation as under: 
As regards our reaction to the proposed amendments, the Bill and 
the earlier Act, by and large, this Ministry agr ees to the views 
proposed in the Bill. We feel that all the important aspects have 
been covered. Since the nodal agency for this Act is the Ministry 
of I&B, so, though, we did not hold any formal consultation with 
them or they did not invite us for any for mal consultation, yet we 
did send our comments way back on 22 June 2010. So, in a way, 
the comments, which you have received are slightly out -dated, 
which is of 2010. 
 To our mind, whatever changes are brought into place will 
facilitate book promotion. It will help in the preparation of list of 
catalogue and bibliography, and it will also give data of the 
number of books published and the number of publishers in India. 
So, this kind of data will now be available nationally. But since this 
Act is actually being implemented at the ground level by the State 
Governments, we feel that the State Governments need to be 
kept on board. Frankly, I would admit that we have not done this, 
and we need to work on it and sensitise them and promote the 
issues raised in this particular Act. 
7.2 Besides, the Secretary during the course of evidence highlighted on 
certain key issues and put forth the following views/suggestions: 
 With regard to suggestion to have a separate Act for book away from 
publication, etc. there is no nee d for having a separate Act. The 
proposed legislation , which deals both with the print media , 
publications and books, is sufficient. 

51 
 
 Rapid technological changes need to be taken into account, and the 
definition of book should also include e-books. 
 Applications should be made online, and instead of giving hard copies 
and submission of hardcopy applications if it is done online, then it 
would be a good facility for the authors. This would reduce their 
hardship and take them out of the bureaucracy, which we so metimes 
tend to engage in.  
 Under the Press and Registration of Books and Publications Act one 
has to submit certain documents, and one has to submit hard copy. 
Similarly, in the Ministry of Culture, there is the Delivery of Books and 
Newspapers Act, 1954 under which they have to supply books to four 
National libraries, and while doing ISBN again one submits a copy. In 
order to avoid the duplicity, and through use of technology the 
possibility of having a common platform or a common repository for 
such book s should be explored. In any case, in the Book Promotion 
Council which deals with ISBN, there is no space to keep the books. In 
the time of technology this submission should be done electronically 
so that much of space for storing books in an expensive cit y like Delhi 
can be liberated. 
 There should be no barriers to kno wledge. As much as possible, 
through use of technology, these barriers should be removed and 
knowledge should flow freely not only within the country but also 
abroad, and wherever some admini strative steps have to be taken 
through the Act in the interests of the country, it should be done as 
smoothly as possible by using ICT and technology. 
A. Administrative Ministry for implementation of the Act – Inter 
Ministerial Co-ordination 
7.3 On the mandate of the Ministry of Human Resource Development with 
regard to the Press and Registration of Books and Publications 1867 the 
Secretary, MHRD submitted that the Ministry of HRD has a limited role as far 
as this particular Act is concerned. As per Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, 
their role is limited to book and book promotion. In books also, there are 
certain aspects, which relate to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
(I&B), and it also excludes stationery paper, news print, etc., wh ich relates to 
the Department of Industry and Industrial Promotions. Secondly, this Act is 
actually being implemented at the State level. The Government has notified 
the authorised offices, and they are responsible for doing the registration in 
this respect. 

52 
 
7.4 The Committee pointed out that  as per the demarcation of 
responsibilities in the Government of India’s various Ministries the precise 
responsibility of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is restricted to 
publication on matters of national importance for internal and external 
publicity with a view to imparting to the general public at home and abroad 
up to date and correct information about India. For instance, in the Annual 
Report of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 2011 -12 it h as been 
mentioned that the administration of the Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications (section 25 of 1867) concerning newspapers is the responsibility 
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
7.5 When the Committee drew the attention o f the Secretary, HRD to this 
aspect, he submitted as under: 
“As far as this Ministry is concerned, the Allocation of Business 
Rules 1961 gives book and book promotion to us. We have to 
restrict ourselves to that. The ownership of this Act, the 
authorship is with the Ministry of I&B. They have not disputed it 
or contested it. They have been doing it till now. We come in 
only when the issue of books is concerned. As far as the journal 
is concerned and as far as information dissemination is 
concerned, it is the Ministry of I&B which is responsible……….we 
have no complaints with the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting; in fact the system is doing well.” 
7.6 With regard to complaints like objectionable and controversial 
material in books suggesting banning of such books the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development informed that the same are received by the Ministry 
of HRD. However, as the subject matter regardin g banning of books comes 
under the domain of Ministry of Home Affairs, the complaints are forwarded 
to them for necessary action.  
7.7 Asked as to how the Ministry of Human Resource Development would 
explain the fragmented approach with regard to the imple mentation of 
provisions concerning books whereby several Ministries are involved and the 
implementation is with the State Governments, the Ministry in a post 
evidence reply stated as under: 
“This Ministry will request the implementing Ministry i.e the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to constitute an inter 

53 
 
ministerial Committee to monitor the implementation of the 
Act.” 
 
B. Implementation of the Act by State Governments  
7.8 When the Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development has ever reviewed the implementation of the 
provisions pertaining to Books by the State Government, the Ministry of HRD 
through their written replies informed that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has not taken any review of the implementation of the Act as 
the implementation authorities are the respective State Government. 
However, it is proposed to review implementation of the relevant provisions 
of the Act pert aining to books at Central level. This will have to be done 
jointly by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. 
7.9 Asked as to whether the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
has reviewed rules framed by the State Governments concerning books in the 
context of ‘The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, the Ministry 
further informed that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has not 
taken / undertaken any review of the rules framed by the State 
Governments. However, a joint review mechanism will be worked out in this 
regard in consultation with the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
7.10 On being enquired as to what initiatives have been taken by the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development fo r sensitising the State 
Governments, the Secretary deposed before the Committee as follows: 
“We are looking into this. We ha ve not done this. I assure the 
Hon’ble Members that we will hold joint workshops and 
meetings with the nodal agencies.” 
7.11 When asked about the difficulties the State Governments are facing in 
implementing the existing Act, the Secretary further added: 
“The truth is that nobody is contacting us in connection with the 
Act neither the State Governments nor the publishers. Actually 
to be very frank, as far as we are concerned, we are out of the 
loop. But since the Act is there and the issue of book is 

54 
 
mentioned, we need to involve ourselves with the State 
Governments and see what the problem is.” 
7.12 On being further asked as to who w ill take initiative in this regard, the 
Secretary informed that the Ministry will take initiatives and it will talk to 
Officers in the State Government. When the Committee enquired about 
concrete suggestions for sensitising the S tate Governments, the Minis try of 
Human Resource Development informed that they will take up the 
importance of implementation of the provisions of the Bill with all the State 
Governments in consultation with the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. The Ministry will also ask the National Book Trust (NBT) to 
conduct awareness workshops during the book fairs to sensitise the 
publishers about the importance of the implementation of the Act.   
7.13 When the Committee wanted to know whether there should have 
been more involvement and i ntervention of the Ministry of HRD in the 
drafting of the Bill, the Secretary viewed that there should be no hindrance in 
the free flow of knowledge unless it goes against the national interests of the 
country. In reply to a question about  bringing the pro posed legislation , he 
added: 
“The Act has been brought in as there are issues of national 
security in it. However, in my opinion, the less we regulate the 
better it is. Till now there has been no representation, no 
complaint to us. So there is less interfa ce with us as far as this 
Act is concerned.” 
 
7.14 The Committee note during his deposition Secretary, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development was candid in his admission before the 
Committee that even though Chapter III & IV of the present Act relates to 
the Ministry of HRD, they have hardly done anything so far in implementing 
the provisions relating to registration of books across the country. Similarly, 
the Act is being implemented by the State Governments. However, the 
Ministry of HRD has not done any interaction with the State Government s 
so far in the matter. The Secretary has now assured the Committee that 
now onwards they will be actively involved with the provisions of the Act 

55 
 
concerning the books and book promotion. He also proposed to have 
interaction with the State Governments and emphasized the need for Co -
ordination Committee wherein the representative of the Ministry of I&B, 
HRD, Culture and others could be included for proper implementation of 
the provisions of the Bill. The Committee recomme nd that the Ministry of 
I&B, which is the nodal Ministry, for the proposed legislation should 
examine these aspects in detail for incorporation of necessary provisions in 
the proposed legislation or under the Rules to be framed for 
implementation of the proposed legislation.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
7.15 The Secretary, HRD was also candid in his admission that the Ministry 
of HRD has so far not coordinated with the State Governments in regard to 
implementation of the existing Act. It appears that all S tates are taking 
action as per their own systems. The Committee strongly feel that there is a 
need to have coordinated approach to ensure that there are uniform 
procedures across all the State Governments with designated 
authorities/offices which would be responsible for the Act. The Central 
Ministries, viz., the Ministry of Human Resource Development and I&B 
should also have a mechanism to get a regular feedback from the State 
Governments. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that necessary 
provisions shou ld be incorporated in the proposed legislation for the 
purpose. Similarly, adequate steps should be taken to sensitize the State 
Governments for implementation of the legislation in letter and spirit. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
7.16 The Committee note the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
has made certain useful suggestions with regard to provision for online 
application and online submission, inclusion of e -Books in the definition of 
books, exploring the feasibility of a common repository for book s to avoid 
duplicity in storage of books and greater use of ICT and technology 

56 
 
wherever possible for smooth and efficient functioning of the 
administrative process. The Committee while appreciating the views of the 
Secretary, recommend the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to look 
into the above suggestions and take necessary steps in coordination with 
concerned Ministries/Departments including HRD, NIC etc. so as to 
concretize these proposals  for incorporation in the Bill and Rules to be 
framed for implementation of the proposed legislation.  
  (Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
VIII. Powers of the Central Government/State Governments to make 
Rules 
 Clause 53(1) 
 
 Clause 53(1) of the proposed legislation vests in the Central 
Government the power to make rules which inter-alia provides that the 
Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
under the provisions of this Act as may be necess ary or desirable for carrying 
out the objects of this Act. Eighteen such issues have been listed where the 
Government will make rules on issues concerning registration, publication 
printing etc. Clause 54(1) provides that the State Governments could make 
rules not inconsistent with rules made by the Central Government. 
 
8.2 Some of the stakeholders suggested that the Central Government 
alone should frame the rules as allowing the State Governments to frame 
separate rules may lead to some States making rules  inconsistent with 
Central Government rules thereby leading to confusion.  On being asked the 
views of the Ministry of I &B, the Ministry responded: 
 
 “The rules to be framed by the State Governments would only 
be on Chapter III and IV. Chapter III talks about delivery of books 
and publications to State Governments, while Chapter IV talks 
about the catalogue of books to be maintained by the State 
Governments in a prescribed manner. The apprehension that 
two sets of rules would create problems is ill founded as the Act 
deals with publications only with regard to title verification, 
registration or circulation etc. State Government has nothing to 
do with the title verification and registration of publications.”  

57 
 
 
8.3 On being enquired as to whether the Government should formulate 
some model Rules for guiding the States with regard to section on books so 
that there is uniformity in implementation of the Act, the Ministry of I & B 
stated that model Rules may be made in consultation with the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. 
 
8.4 The Committee note that provisions in clause 53(1) and Clause 54(1) 
in the proposed Bill are a continuity from the P ress and Registration of 
Books Act 1867. Even th en some of the stakeholders have expressed 
apprehensions that vesting the pow er to make Rules in the State 
Governments may lead to some State Governments making Rule s 
inconsistent with the Central Government Rules thereby leading to 
confusion. However, the Ministry has clarified that Rules to be framed by 
State Governments will only be on Chapters III and IV. Since this a 
continuing provision, the Committee wanted to know the 
position/experience in this regard  from the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development. However, to the utter surprise of the Committee, it has been 
informed that the Ministry of HRD has not done any review in the matter 
and as such not aware of any Rules framed by the State Governments in 
accordance with provisions in the Act. The Central Government is not aware 
as to how the States are implementing the provisions of the Act. For 
effective implementation of the proposed legislation, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Informa tion and Broadcasting in 
co-ordination with the Ministry of Human Resource Development should 
formulate certain model rules/guidelines for States to follow so as to 
ensure uniformity across the country with regard to implementation of the 
Act. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
IX. Power of State Governments to exclude any class of Books and 
Publications from the purview of the Act 
 Clause 55 
 
 As per Clause 55 of the proposed legislation, the State Government 
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in 
the official Gazette, exclude any class of books or publications from the 

58 
 
operation of the whole or any part or  parts of the Act. Such a provision 
existed in Chapter VI, Clause 21 of the Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications Act, 1867 also.  
 
9.2 The representative of Times of India during the course of evidence 
expressed the view that when the law says that all the books and publications 
will follow the law, then the Government cannot exempt any State from the 
purview of the law by having such a Clause. On being asked as to what is 
wrong in the provisions when it is only the State Government, which is be ing 
empowered after being scrutinized by the Central Government, the 
representative stated that it could be discriminating. The Government wants 
to reserve the power by excluding any particular publication from the law 
and the purpose of this is not clear.  
 
9.3 The Committee enquired about the views of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting behind such a provision and whether the 
Ministry foresees any situation where such a provision would be required, 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their written replies stated as 
under: 
 
“There are large numbers of Publications like Law Journal, 
Government Publications, which are being published since long 
back but are not registered with RNI for whatever reason. The 
State Government may seek exception under this clause for 
availing facilities like postal concession, DAVP Advertisements 
which are otherwise extended to Registered Publications only.” 
 
9.4 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development about the inst ances of State Governments issuing notices in 
this regard to which it was informed that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has no information about State Governments issuing notices 
about exclusion of any class of books or publications from the ope ration of 
the whole or any part or parts of this Act as this is implemented by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
9.5 The Committee note that under Clause 55 of the proposed legislation 
the State Government may exclude, with prior approval of t he Central 

59 
 
Government any class of Books or publications from the operation of the 
Act. Similar provision also existed in the PRB Act 1867. Some of the 
stakeholders have expressed that the provision could be discriminatory as 
the Government may reserve the  power to exclude any particular 
Publication from the purview of the law and the purpose is not very clear. 
The Committee feel that there should be provisions in the Rules wherein 
the concerned authorities should record such instances and 
permissions/exemption should be based on recorded reasons so as to avoid 
any discrepancies. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
X. Miscellaneous 
 
A. e-Books, e-Publications and Online Edition of Newspapers 
  
 As per the salient features outlined in the detailed background note 
furnished by the Ministry, internet edition of Newspapers have been covered 
under the proposed legislation. 
 
10.2 The Committee desired to know about the registration procedure for 
online news portals such as rediffnews.com, sify.com, e -khabar.in etc. and 
how the online editions of portals newspapers are being regulated and 
monitored, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has informed that 
online news portals such as rediffnews.com, sify.com, e-khabar.in etc. will not 
be under the purview of the proposed PRBP Bill. The subject matter pertains 
to the Ministry of Communications & Information Technology. 
 
10.3 Recently Social Networking Websites such as Face book, Twitter are 
growing in popularity and increasingly influencing and shaping up the public 
opinion. In this context, when the Committee wanted to know what 
safeguards have been ensured in the proposed legislation so that these are 
not left out unregulated leading to glaring loopholes in the Act, the Ministry 
of I& B stated that this does not come under the purview of the proposed Bill 
as the subject matter comes under the purview of the Ministry of Information 
Technology. 
 

60 
 
10.4 More and more Books and Publications are using alternate media and 
online editions and as such greater inv olvement of the Ministry of 
Communications & Information Technology would be required with regard to 
technical interpretations and bring this Bill in consonance with the 
Information Technology Amendment Act, 2005. When the Committee asked 
about the efforts  being made to ensure greater co -ordination with the 
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology so that issues of e -
Book, e-publications are also addressed suitably in the pr oposed legislation, 
the Ministry replied that this would  be done in due c ourse with the 
concerned Ministries. 
 
10.5 The Committee note from the s alient features of the proposed 
legislation th at internet edition of the news papers ha ve been covered 
under the Act. However, on  a detailed examination of the B ill, the 
Committee find that nowhere in the Bill the issues relating to monitoring 
and regulation of e-books, e-publications, and online edition of newspapers 
have been mentioned in the Bill.  In the present age when more and more 
Newspapers and publications are digitally published the Committee wonder 
as to how these have been left un addressed in the Bill. Further, on the 
issues of online edition of news portals the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting informed that these are not under the purview of the Bill. The 
Committee u nderstand that the Ministry intends to take up these in co -
ordination with the Ministry of Communications & I nformation Technology 
later. In the opinion of the Committee the Bill should address these at this 
stage only and for this there will be a need for  greater involvement of the 
Ministry of Communications & I nformation Technology  with regard to 
technical interpretations and  to bring the  Act in consonance with the 
Information Technology (Amendment)  Act of 200 8. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take up the issues with the Ministry 
of Communications & Information Technology and address these suitably in 
the proposed legislation. 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
 

61 
 
B. Overlapping with Trade Marks Act 
 
10.6 The Indian Newspaper  Society (INS) through their Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee had stated that newspaper titles registered 
under the Press and Registration of Books and Publications Act are unique 
and are protected against infringement by others . Clause 16 of the Four th 
Schedule of the Trade Mark Rules contain a word “printed matter” for 
registration of Trade marks. Set in the context in which it is printed, it cannot 
include newspapers. However, the Trademark Registry also continues to issue 
Registration Certificates for newspaper titles under the Trade Marks Act and 
leading to overlapping . On this basis, some newspapers, which have no 
registration under the PRB Act, have contested in courts of law that 
registration of newspaper titles under the PRB Act is of no conseq uence and 
registration under the Trade Marks Act is supreme and overrides the PRB Act. 
The Karnataka High Court has not accepted this plea and has held that Trade 
Marks Act can best provide only an additional registration but not the 
primary registration f or newspapers, which is under the PRB Act. It is, 
therefore, necessary to remove these doubts, and make the matter 
abundantly clear. 
  
10.7 In another memorandum  received from the Financial Times (FT)  the 
Committee were informed that there is great anomaly  between the 
provisions of the PRB Act and the provisions of the Trade Marks Act 1999 (TM 
Act) and both need to be brought in consonance with each other. Titles of 
Publications that have been registered under the TM Act and even if not 
registered, known an d accepted to be in use should be respected and 
registration of such titles in the name of any other persons should not be 
granted by the Press Registrar. Further, if such titles have already been 
granted, the PRB Bill must provide for a procedure for havi ng such titles 
taken off the Register after granting a time period for obtaining written 
consent of the owner of the foreign Publications. This will enhance the 
import of liberalization of GOI and create a level playing field. 
  
10.8 In this background, wh en the Committee desired to know the efforts 
made to ensure that the present Act does not conflict with the Trade Mark 

62 
 
Act the Ministry through their written reply informed that the Press and 
Registration of Books Act and Trade Mark Act are entirely differ ent in nature 
and scope and independent of each other. They have different areas to deal 
with. The Press and Registration of Books Act deals with the semantic 
representation of a newspaper’s identity, while the Trade Marks Act deals 
with the visual and pho netic representation of identities and also recognizes 
associations built over years of usage. PRB Act protects the newspaper titles 
throughout India against duplication or adoption of even a “similar” title.  A 
newspaper title for a newspaper is what a Tr ade Mark is for other goods.  A 
Trade Mark is goods oriented while a Newspaper title is ‘title oriented’.  Both 
have different fields to deal with and hence there is no necessity to further 
remove any doubts. 
 
10.9 The Ministry has further informed that if  at all any conflict arises; it is 
for the appropriate Courts to decide in each case from time to time.  
 
10.10 The Committee note that ‘The Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications Bill, 2011’ is a comprehensive legislation concerning the press 
in India. During the course of examination of the Bill, however, some of the 
stakeholders have referred to situations wherein the Trade Marks Act (TM 
Act) may come in direct conflict with the PRB Act as the Trade Marks Rules 
contain the word ‘printed matter’  for registration of trademarks, which 
include newspapers. Trade Mark Registry continues issuing Registration 
Certificates for newspaper titles under the Trade Mark Act leading to 
conflict with PRB Act. Though the Ministry has maintained that the two Acts 
are entirely dif ferent areas to deal with trade marks being good oriented 
while newspapers title is title oriented, the case in Karnataka High Court is a 
case in point which proves that indeed there may be conflict between the 
two Acts. The case has also brought into surface anomalous situations for 
facsimile edition of some ongoing publications whose titles have been 
registered under Trade Marks Act but would be denied title registration as 
per the proposed legislation . The Committee find that the Bill does not 
prescribe any bail out for such publications. In this regard the Committee 
are not happy with the stand of the Ministry th at if at all conflict arises 
between the two Acts it is for the Courts to decide each case from time to 

63 
 
time. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry need to examine all 
such situations where possible conflicts may arise with regard to all 
provisions of PRB Act, and address them suitably in the Act itself rather 
than leaving it to the Courts. That will not only clear ambiguities in the Bill 
but also reduce unnecessary legal hassle and litigations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that apart from such an exercise the Ministry should 
take up the issue with the concerned Department for removing 
‘newspapers’ title registration from the ambit of Trade Marks Act and make 
the provisions amply clear. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 26) 
C.  Errors and Mistakes 
 
10.11 Errors and shortcomings to the Bill were brought forward by one of the 
stakeholders, which pointed to mistakes/errors at several places in the 
proposed Bill. The details of errors noticed and the comments/the status as 
given by the Ministry is as under:- 
 
Page:16: under clause [c], first line, 
the word “Specialty” may be as 
“Speciality”. 
 
Page:17: Para 2, under (e), 3rd line, 
the word “or” to be placed *“and it” to be 
replaced] 
 
 -do- Para.3.under (f), 1st line, the word 
“an” may be inserted in between the 
words “by agent” (by an agent).  Similarly, 
in Page.19, under clause 7,3rd line also. 
 
 -do- Para 8: under (iii), 1st line, it may be 
“in an issue of an Indian Publication.  *Th e 
word is to be inserted] 
 
  Similarly in Page 20, clause 9, 7th line ”is” 
to be inserted. 
 
Page.18 clause.5  3rd Para, first line, the 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Not clear. 
 
 
 
 
Not clear. 
 

64 
 
word “It” must be placed instead of I”.  
(the letter “t” omitted) 
 
Page:18.clause.6: 2nd line, the word “The” 
may be  
inserted, if needed, in between the words 
“in Prescribed” (in the Prescribed) 
 
Page:19  -do-  9th line may be as “if he/she 
is” (if needed) 
 
 -do- clause 7: A word “The” may be 
inserted, if needed, as last line “in the 
prescribed form”  similarly in Page 20,  
below clause 9 [sub -clause (i) first Para, 
3rd line, may be “approval in the  
prescribed form. 
 
Also in P.21, clause 14, last line in and in 
sub-clause 1, last line; clause 18, 6th line. 
 
Page 20.clause 10 (sub -clause-1) Para.2.  
1st line, the word “that”  is put in two 
places. 
 
Page.21. clause 17. 3rd line & 5th line, the 
word “latter” is placed.  May be confirmed 
and suitably corrected, if needed. 
 
Page. 21. clause.18. The word “inquiry” in 
two places may be corrected as “enquiry”.  
Similarly in P.22, bel ow clause 20 [1st Para 
22nd line] may be corrected, if needed. 
 
 -do-   clause.19.  1st line, the word 
cancellation, the letter “C” in capital may 
be, in small letter. 
 
Page.22.clause.23. 2nd line, the word 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
Not accepted. 
 
 
 
 
Not accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 

65 
 
“disposed of” or “disposal off” may be 
checked and confirmed 
Similarly in Page. 27, under clause 57, sub -
clause (f) in 2nd and 3rd line. 
 
Page.25. clause. 41. 7th line, the word 
“fine” must be replaced instead of “line”.  
Similarly in 5 other places mentioned 
below (in Page 25 and Page. 26). 
 
Page.28. Pa ra.3. 1st line must be “It is 
proposed” (The word “is” to be inserted. 
 
Not  accepted. 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted. 
 
10.12 The Committee have come across several typographical or other 
mistakes in the Bill. The Ministry has accepted many of these errors and 
agreed to correct them. Considering the large number of mistakes in the Bill, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to be extra careful in drafting of 
important Bills such as the present one so a s to avoid any kind of 
misunderstanding, misinterpretation and ambiguity.   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 27)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RAO INDERJIT SINGH  
New Delhi  Chairman,  
17 December, 2012  Standing Committee on  
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)  Information Technology  

66 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
Bill No. 124 of  2011 
 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS 
BILL, 2011 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1.  Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.  Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
PRINTING PRESSES AND  PUBLICATIONS 
3.  Particulars to be printed on books and publications. 
4.  Owner of printing press to make declaration. 
5.  Who may bring out a publication. 
6.  Verification and registration of title. 
7.  Printer and publisher of a publication to make declaration. 
8.  Prohibition as to making declaration under section 7, or editing of a publication, in 
certain cases. 
9.  Limits of foreign news content, foreign investment, etc. 
10.  Authentication of declaration. 
11.  Deposit of declaration. 
12.  Inspection and supply of copies of declaration. 
13.  Office copy of declaration to be prima facie evidence. 
14.  New declaration by persons who have signed a declaration and subsequently ceased 
to be printer or publisher or owner. 
15.  Authentication and filing of declaration made under section 14. 
16.  Inspection and supply of copies of declaration made under section 14. 
17.  Putting up copy of declaration in evidence. 
18.  Person whose name has been incorrectly published as editor may make a declaration 
before a specified authority. 
19.  Cancellation of declaration. 
20.  Appeal. 
CHAPTER III 
DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND  PUBLICATIONS 
21.  Copies of books printed to be delivered gratis to Government. 
22.  Receipt for copies delivered under section 21. 
23.  Disposal of copies delivered under section 21. 
24.  Copies of publication printed in India to be delivered gratis to Government. 
25.  Copies of publication delivered to Press Registrar General. 

67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLAUSES 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF BOOKS 
26.  Registration of memorandum of books. 
27.  Publication of memorandum registered. 
CHAPTER V REGISTRATION  OF 
PUBLICATIONS 
28.  Appointment of Press Registrar General and other officers. 
29.  Register of publications. 
30.  Certificate of registration. 
31.  Annual statement, etc. to be furnished by publisher. 
32.  Returns and reports to be furnished by publisher. 
33.  Right to access to records and documents. 
34.  Circulation verification. 
35.  Annual report. 
36.  Furnishing of copies of extract from Register. 
37.  Production of documents before Press Registrar General. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES 
38.  Penalty for printing contrary to section 3. 
39.  Penalty for owning press without making declaration required by section 4. 
40.  Penalty for failure to make a declaration under section 14. 
41.  Penalty for not delivering books or not supplying printer with maps. 
42.  Penalty for failure to supply copies of publications gratis to Government. 
43.  Punishment for making false statement. 
44.  Penalt y for printin g or bringin g out publicatio n withou t conformin g to the 
provisions of this Act. 
45.  Penalty for failure to supply copies of publications to Press Registrar General. 
46.  Penalty for failure to produce documents before Press Registrar General. 
47.  Penalty for contravention of section 31 or section 32. 
48.  Recovery of forefeitures and disposal thereof and of fines. 
49.  Cognizance of offence. 
 
 
 
 
50.  Delegation of powers. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
51.  Press Registrar General and other officers to be public servants. 
52.  Protection of action taken in good faith. 
53.  Power of Central Government to make rules. 
54.  Power of State Government to make rules. 
55.  Power to exclude any class of books and publications from operation of Act. 
56.  Power to remove difficulties. 
57.  Repeal and saving. 

68 
 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 124 of  2011 
 
 
 
 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS 
BILL, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5   2011. 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to amend and consolidate the laws relating to press and registration of 
books and publications. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Press and Registration of Books and Publications Act, 
 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
 
Provided that any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in the State of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, 
exten t and 
commencement. 
Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the 
corresponding law in force in that State. 
 
10  (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

69 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(a) ―Appellat e Board‖ means the Press and Registratio n Appellate Board 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 20; 
 
(b) ―book‖ includes every volume, part or division of a volume and pamphlet in 
any language and every sheet of music, map, chart or plan separately printed, other   5 
than newspaper, magazine, journal and newsletter, and has no definite periodicity; 
 
(c) ―editor‖ means a person, whether called editor, chief-editor, sub-editor or by 
whatever name called, who is a citizen of India and ordinarily resides in India, who 
controls the selection of the matter that is brought out in a publication; 
 
(d) ―electronic form‖ in reference to information means any information generated,   10 
sent, received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, 
computer generated micro fiche or similar device; 
 
(e) ―facsimile edition‖ of a publication means an exact replica in full or in part of 
the original edition of a foreign publication; subject to the condition that any page is 
not published in part; 15 
 
(f) ―financial year‖ means the year beginning on the 1st April and ending on the 
31st March next following; 
 
(g) ―foreign publication‖ means any publication published in a country outside 
India;  
 
(h) ―journal‖ means a periodical publication other than a newspaper, magazine or   20 
newsletter containing comments or write-ups on specific subjects; 
 
(i) ―known foreign publication‖ means such foreign publication as may be 
prescribed; 
 
(j) ―magazine‖ means a periodical publication containing comments or write-ups 
on general subjects including public news or comments on public news; 25 
 
(k) ―newsletter‖ means a periodical publication brought out by a group or 
organisation or institution to present information to its members or stakeholders, on 
subjects of common interests; 
 
(l) ―newspaper‖ means a publication of loose folded sheets usually printed on 
newsprint brought out daily or often or atleast once in a week, containing public news   30 
or comments on public news; 
 
(m) ―owner‖ means a person who owns the publication; 
 
(n) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
 
(o) ―Press Registrar General‖ means the Press Registrar General of India, appointed 
by the Central Government under section 28; 35 
 
(p) ―printer‖ means a person nominated by the owner to be responsible for 
printing; 
 
(q) ―printing‖ means reproduction through any technology involving mass 
production of copies excluding photocopying; 
 
(r) ―publication‖ means newspapers, magazines, journals or newsletters printed   40 
periodically and published in India including its reproduction in electronic form, or any 
syndication, facsimile edition, and Indian edition of periodical published outside India; 
 
(s) ―publisher‖ means a person who prepares and causes the publication to be 
brought out; 
 
(t) ―Register‖ means the register of publications maintained under section 29; 45 

70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
37 of  1967.  
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
(u) ―specified authority‖ means a District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner 
or Commissioner of Police, as the case may be, or any other executive magistrate or an 
officer authorised in writing by the District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner or 
Commissioner of Police, as the case may be; 
 
(v) ―syndication‖ means sourcing content from other publications which has 
been or is being published and the credit is given for the source in the byline of 
publications;  
 
(w) ―title‖ in relation to a publication means a word or combination of words and 
does not include abbreviations. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
PRINTING PRESSES AND  PUBLICATIONS 
 
3. (1) Every book or publication printed within India shall have legibly printed on it the 
date of its publication, name of the owner, printer, publisher, editor and complete address of 
place of printing and of the publication. 
 
(2) In case an edition of a publication is being printed from more than one location, the 
name of the printer and each printing press with their complete address shall be disclosed in 
the imprint line of each print. 
 
4. (1) Every person who owns and operates any press for the printing of books or 
publications shall make and subscribe a declaration in such form as may be prescribed, 
before the specified authority within whose local jurisdiction such press is kept. 
 
(2) As often as the place where a press is kept is changed, a fresh declaration shall be 
necessary: 
 
Provided that where the change is for a period not exceeding sixty days and the place 
where the press is kept after the change is within the local jurisdiction of the specified 
authority referred to in sub-section (1), no fresh declaration shall be necessary if — 
 
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the said specified authority 
within three days thereof; and 
 
(b) the owner of the press continues to be the same. 
 
5. A person, being an entity incorporated and registered in India under any law for the 
time being in force, or a citizen of India, may bring out a publication: 
 
Provided that no person who has been convicted by any court for an offence — 
(i) involving terrorist act or unlawful activity; or 
(ii) for having done anything against the security of the State, 
shall bring out a publication. 
Explanatio n.—For the purpose of this section, the expressio n ―terroris t act‖ or 
―unlawful activity‖ shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (k) and 
(o) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 
 
6. (1) The owner of any proposed publication may make an application proposing one 
or more titles, not exceeding five, in order of preference to the specified authority for 
verification of one of titles of the publication: 
 
Provided that if the owner of the proposed publication is an entity incorporated and 
registered in India, the authorised signatory shall make an application on behalf of that entity 
under this section. 
 
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in such form and accompanied 
by such fees as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Particular s  to 
be  printed on 
books and 
publications.  
 
 
 
 
 
Owner of 
printin g  press 
to  make  
declaration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Who may 
bring out  a 
publication.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Verificatio n  and 
registratio n  of 
title.  

71 
 
 
(3) The specified authority may after verification of antecedents of the applicant and 
after satisfying himself about the eligibility of such applicant, within a period of three months, 
recommend or reject the application: 
 
Provided that no such application shall be rejected unless the person concerned had 
been given an opportunity of being heard. 5 
 
(4) On receipt of the recommendation from the specified authority under sub-section 
(3), the Press Registrar General shall in writing and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
approve one of the title or reject all the proposed titles if such titles are— 
 
(a) the same or similar to that of any existing publication, except in the case of 
publications owned by the same person; or 10 
 
(b) obscene; or 
 
(c) similar to name of symbols of terrorists or terrorist organisations either in full 
or in abbreviated form; 
 
(d) same or similar to that of a known foreign publication. 
 
(5) The decision of the Press Registrar General as to title under sub-section (4) shall be   15 
final.  
 
(6) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, every title of a publication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printe r and 
publisher of   a 
publicatio n  to 
make  
declaration.  
approved under this section shall, if the authenticated declaration made under section 10 is not 
filed with the Press Registrar General within a period of six months from the date of such 
approval, be deemed to have been cancelled and become available to new applicants: 20 
 
Provided that the Press Registrar General may, if he is satisfied that the delay in filing 
the authenticated declaration by the  applicant was beyond the  control of the  applicant, 
extend the time for such period, not exceeding four months, after recording the reasons in 
writing. 
 
(7) Any owner of a publication may, after registration, transfer the title of such   25 
publication to any person, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
(8) A title verified under this section, if not registered under section 30 within one year 
of its verification, shall stand cancelled: 
 
Provided that the Press Registrar General may, in exceptional cases, grant further 
period of four months to those publications where the delay is due to reasons beyond the   30 
control of the title holder. 
 
7. (1) The printer and the publisher of every publication shall appear in person or by 
agent authorised in this behalf, before a specified authority within whose local jurisdiction 
such publication shall be printed or published, and make and subscribe a declaration in 
duplicate, in such form as may be prescribed. 35 
 
(2) Every declaration made under sub-section (1) shall specify the title of the publication, 
the language in which it is to be published and the periodicity of its publication. 
 
(3) Where the printer or publisher of a publication making a declaration under sub- 
section (1) is not the owner thereof, the declaration shall specify the name of the owner and 
shall also be accompanied by an authority in writing from the owner authorising such person   40 
to make and subscribe such declaration. 
 
(4) A declaratio n made in respec t of a publicatio n under sub-sectio n (1) and 
authenticated under section 10 shall be necessary before the publication can be published. 
 
(5) Where the periodicity of a publication is changed, the declaration shall cease to 
have effect and a fresh declaration shall be necessary before the publication can be continued.   45 
 
(6) As often as the ownership of a publication is changed, a fresh declaration shall be 
necessar y. 

72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
9  of 1875.  
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
(7) As often as the place of printing or publication is changed, a fresh declaration shall 
be necessary: 
 
Provided that where the change is for a period not exceeding thirty days and the place 
of printing or publication after the change is within the local jurisdiction of the specified 
authority referred to in sub-section (1), no fresh declaration shall be necessary if — 
 
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the said specified authority 
within three days thereof; and 
 
(b) the printer or publisher or the printer and publisher of the publication continue 
to be the same. 
 
(8) As often as the printer or the publisher who shall have made such declaration as is 
aforesaid shall leave  India for a period exceeding  ninety days or where such printer or 
publisher is by infirmity or otherwise rendered incapable of carrying out his duties for a 
period exceeding ninety days in circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, 
a fresh declaration shall be necessary. 
 
(9) Every declaration made in respect of a publication shall be void, where the publication 
does not commence— 
 
(a) within six weeks of the authentication of the declaration under section 10 in 
the case of a publication to be published once a week or oftener; and 
 
(b) within three months of the authentication of the declaration under section 10, 
in the case of any other publication, 
 
and in every such case, a fresh declaration shall be necessary before the publication can be 
brought out. 
 
(10) Every existing declaration in respect of a publication shall be cancelled by the specified 
authority before whom a fresh declaration is made and subscribed in respect of the same. 
 
(11) The declaration shall cease to have effect if the publication has not been brought 
out as per the declared periodicity, for a period exceeding one year, and in all such cases the 
registration number and the title shall be deemed to have been cancelled. 
 
8. No person, who does not ordinarily reside in India, or who has not attained majority 
in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 or of any law for the time 
being in force to which he is subject in respect of the attainment of majority, shall be permitted 
to make a declaration under section 7, or edit a publication. 
 
 
9. (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, no publication shall be 
printed and published in India except with the prior approval of the Central Government 
granted in this behalf, if —- 
 
(a) such publication is owned by any individual who is not an Indian citizen or 
unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate incorporated under the law of 
any country other than India; or 
 
(b) its title is same or similar to a known foreign publication; or 
 
(c) its foreign news content in an issue of an Indian publication exceeds the limit 
prescribed for such publication; or 
 
(d) such publication has investment from any individual who is not an Indian 
citizen or unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate incorporated under 
the law of any country other than India; or 
 
(e) it is a facsimile edition of a known foreign publication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibitio n  as 
to  making  
declaration 
under section 7, 
or  editing of a 
publication ,  in 
certain  cases. 
Limits of 
foreign  news 
content ,  
foreign  
investment, 
etc.  

73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authentication 
of  declaration.  
 
 
(2) Any person who intends to print or bring out a publication referred to in sub- 
section (1) may make an application to the Central Government for its prior approval in such 
form and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem 
fit, grant approval for printing or publishing the publication referred to in sub-section (1) or 
refuse to grant such approval after recording the reasons thereof: 
Provided that no such refusal shall be made unless that person concerned has been 
given an opportunity of being heard. 
10. (1) The specified authority, before whom declaration has been made under this Act 
shall within a period of two months, authenticate each of the two originals of the declaration, 
with his signature and official seal with date or through his electronic signature with date: 
 
Provided that the specified authority shall not authenticate the declaration made under 
section 7 unless it is accompanied by a title approved under sub-section (4) of section 6: 
 
Provided further that any declaration so made and authenticated under the provisions 
of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 before the commencement of this Act shall 
be deemed to have been made and authenticated under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 25 of  1867.  
 
 
 
 
 
Deposi t of 
declaration.  
 
Inspectio n  and 
supply  of 
copies of 
declaration.  
 
 
Office copy  of 
declaratio n  to 
be prima  facie 
evidence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New  declaration 
by  persons  who 
have  signed a 
declaratio n  and 
subsequently 
ceased to be 
printe r or 
publisher  or 
owner. 
 
 
 
Authentication 
and filing  of 
declaration 
made  under 
sectio n  14. 
 
(2) A copy of the declaration authenticated by the specified authority, or a copy of the 
order refusing to authenticate the declaration, shall be forwarded as soon as possible to the 
person making and subscribing the declaration and also to the Press Registrar General. 20 
 
11. One of the originals of the declaration referred to in section 10 shall be deposited 
among the records of the office of the specified authority. 
 
12. The officer-in-charge of each original shall allow any person to inspect that original 
on payment of a fee of one hundred rupees, and shall give to any person applying a copy of 
the said declaration, attested by the seal of the Court which has the custody of the original,   25 
on payment of a fee of two hundred rupees. 
 
13. In any legal proceeding, whether civil or criminal, the production of a copy of 
declaration so authenticated under section 10 or section 15, attested by the seal of the 
specified authority or in case of the editor, a copy of the publication containing his name 
printed on it as that of the editor or in case of more than one editor, the editor finally   30 
responsible for the selection of the matter shall be held (unless the contrary be proved ) to be 
sufficient evidence, as against the person whose name shall be subscribed to such declaration, 
or printed on such publication, as the case may be, that the said person was printer or 
publisher, or printer and publisher (according as the words of the said declaration may be) of 
every portion of every publication whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the   35 
publication mentioned in the declaration, or the editor of every portion of that issue of the 
publication, of which a copy is produced. 
 
14. (1) If any person has subscribed to any declaration in respect of a publication 
under section 7 and the declaration has been authenticated by a specified authority under 
section 10 and subsequently that person ceases to be the printer or publisher or owner of   40 
publication mentioned in such declaration, he shall appear in person or through his authorised 
representative before the specified authority and make and subscribe a declaration in duplicate, 
in such form as may be prescribed. 
 
(2) The owner shall also file declaration for change of printer or publisher by appearing 
before the specified authority concerned and make and subscribe a declaration in duplicate,   45 
in such form as may be prescribed. 
 
15. (1) Each original of the declaration made under section 14 shall be authenticated by the 
signature with date and seal of the specified authority before whom the said declaration shall 
have been made, and one original of the said declaration shall be filed along with original 
of the declaration authenticated under section 10. 50 

74 
 
 
(2) A copy of the declaration attested by the official seal of the specified authority 
under sub-section (1) shall be forwarded to the Press Registrar General. 
 
16. The officer-in-charge of each original of the declaration made under section 14 
shall allow any person applying to inspect that original, on payment of a fee of one hundred 
5   rupees, and shall give to any person applying a copy of the said declaration, attested by the 
seal of the specified authority having custody of the original, on payment of a fee of two 
hundred rupees. 
 
17. In all trials in which a copy attested, of the former declaration have been put in 
evidence, it shall be lawful to put in evidence a copy, attested, of the latter declaration, and 
10   the former declaration shall not be taken to be evidence that the declarant was, at any period 
subsequent to the date of the latter declaration, printer or publisher of the publication therein 
mentioned. 
 
18. (1) If any person, whose name has appeared as editor on a copy of a publication, 
claims that he was not the editor of the issue on which his name has so appeared, he may, 
15   within two weeks of his becoming aware that his name has been so published, appear before 
a specified authority and make a declaration in such form as may be prescribed, that his name 
was incorrectly published in that issue as that of the editor thereof, and if the said specified 
authority, after making such inquiry or causing such inquiry to be made as he may consider 
necessary, is satisfied that such declaration is true, he shall certify accordingly, and on that 
20   certificate being given, the provisions of section 13 shall not apply to that person in respect 
of that issue of the publication. 
 
(2) The specified authority may extend the period under sub-section (1) in case he is 
satisfied that such person was prevented by sufficient cause from appearing and making the 
declaration within that period. 
 
25  19. (1) If, on an application made to him by the Press Registrar General or any other 
person or otherwise, the specified authority empowered to authenticate a declaration under 
this Act, is of opinion that any declaration made in respect of a publication should be 
cancelled, he ma y, after giving the person concerned an opportunity of showing cause 
against the action proposed to be taken, hold an inquiry into the matter and if, after considering 
30   the cause, if any, shown by such person and after giving him an opportunity of being heard, 
he is satisfied that — 
 
(a) the publication, in respect of which the declaration has been made is being 
published in contravention of the provision of this Act or rules made there under; or 
 
(b) the publication mentioned in the declaration bears a title which is the same 
35 as, or similar to, that of any other publication; or 
 
(c) the owner has ceased to be the owner of the publication mentioned in such 
declaration; or 
 
(d) the declaration was made on false representation or on the concealment of 
any material fact or in respect of a periodical work which is not a publication, 
 
40   the specified authority may, by order, cancel the declaration and shall forward a copy of the 
order to the person making or subscribing the declaration and also to the Press Registrar 
General. 
 
(2) On the cancellation of declaration under sub-section (1), the title and the registration 
certificate issued by  the Press Registrar General shall also be deemed to be cancelled with 
45   effect from the date of such cancellation of declaration. 
 
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of a specified authority refusing to 
authenticate a declaration under section 10 or cancelling a declaration under section 19 may, 
within sixty days from the date on which such order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal 
to the Press and Registration Appellate Board, to be constituted by the Central Government, 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspectio n  and 
supply  of 
copies of 
declaration 
made  under 
sectio n  14. 
 
Puttin g up 
copy of 
declaratio n  in 
evidence.  
 
 
 
Person  whose 
name  has been 
incorrectly 
published as 
edito r may 
make a 
declaration 
before a 
specified  
authorit y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cancellation 
of  
declaration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal.  

75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copies of 
books  printed  
to  be  delivered 
gratis to 
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Receip t for 
copies  delivered 
under section 21. 
Disposal  of 
copies  
delivered 
under  section 
21 .  
 
Copies of 
publication 
printed in  India 
to be  delivered 
gratis to 
Government.  
 
Copies of 
publication 
delivere d to 
Press  Registrar 
General.  
 
 
by notification in the Official Gazette, consisting of a Chairperson and another member, to 
be nominated by the Press Council of India, established under section 4 of the Press 
Council Act, 1978, from among its members: 
Provided that the Appellate Board may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal in time. 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under this section, the Appellate Board may, after calling for 
the records from the specified authority and after making such further inquiries as it thinks 
fit, confirm, modify or set aside the order appealed against. 
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the Appellate Board may, by 
order, regulate its practice and procedure. 
(4) The decision of the Appellate Board shall be final. 
CHAPTER III 
DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND  PUBLICATIONS 
21. (1) Printed copies of the whole of every book which shall be printed in India 
together with all maps, prints or other engravings belonging thereto, finished and coloured 
in the same manner as the best copies of the same shall, notwithstanding any agreement 
between the printer and publisher thereof, if the book is published, be delivered by the 
printer at such place and to such officer as the State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, from time to time, direct, and free of expense to the Government— 
(a) in any case, within one calendar month after the day on which any such book 
shall first be delivered out of the press, one such copy; and 
(b) if within one calendar year from such day the State Government shall require 
the printer to deliver other such copies not exceeding two in number, then within one 
calendar month after the day on which any such requisitio n made by the State 
Government on the printer, another such copy, or two other such copies, as the State 
Government may direct, 
the copies so delivered being bound, sewed or stitched together and upon the best paper on 
which any copies  of the book printed and the publisher or other person employing the 
printer shall, before the expiration of the said month, supply the printer with all maps, prints 
and engravings finished and coloured as aforesaid, which may be necessary to enable him to 
comply with the requirements aforesaid. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any second or subsequent edition of a 
book in which edition no additions or alterations either in the letter-press or in the maps, 
prints or other engravings belonging to the book have been made, and a copy of the first or 
some preceding edition of which book has been delivered under this Act. 
22. The officer to whom a copy of book is delivered under section 21 shall give to the 
printer a receipt in writing therefor. 
23. (1) The copy delivered under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 21 shall be 
disposed of as the State Government shall from time to time determine. 
(2) Any copy delivered under clause (b) of the said sub-section shall be transmitted to 
the Central Government. 
24. The publisher of every publication in India shall deliver at such place and to such 
officer as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct, and free of 
expense to the Government, two copies of each issue of such publication as soon as it is 
published. 
 
 
25. (1) The publisher of every publication in India shall deliver free of expense one 
copy of each issue of such publication as and when demanded by the Press Registrar 
General. 
 
 
 
 
 
37 of  1978.  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

76 
 
 
(2) Every publisher shall preserve one copy of every issue of the publication, either in 
hard copy or in electronic form and shall provide the same as and when demanded by the 
Press Registrar General. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
5 REGISTRATION OF BOOKS 
 
26. (1) There shall be kept at such office, and by such officer as the State Government 
shall appoint in this behalf, a book to be called a Catalogue of Books printed in India, wherein 
shall be registered a memorandum of every book which shall have been delivered under 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 21, containing the following particulars, namely :— 
 
10 (a) the title of the book and the contents of the title-page, with translation into 
English of such title and contents, when the same are not in the English language; 
(b) the language in which the book is written; 
(c) the name of the author, translator or editor of the book or any part thereof; 
(d) the subject; 
15 (e) the place of printing and the place of publication; 
 
(f) the name or firm of the printer and the name or firm of the publisher; 
(g) the date of issue from the press or of the publication; 
(h) the number of sheets, leaves or pages; 
(i) the size; 
20 (j) the first, second or other number of the edition; 
 
(k) the number of copies which the edition consists; 
 
(l) whether the book is printed, cyclostyled or lithographed; 
(m) the price at which the book is sold to the public; and 
(n) the name and residence of the proprietor of the copyright or of any portion of 
25 such copyright. 
 
(2) The memorandum shall be made and registered in the case of each book as soon as 
practicable after the delivery of the copy thereof pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section 21. 
 
27. The memorandum registered during each quarter in the catalogue referred to in 
30   section 26 shall be published in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be after the end of such 
quarter, and a copy of the memorandum so published shall be sent to the Central Government. 
 
CHAPTER V REGISTRATION 
OF PUBLICATIONS 
28. The Central Government may appoint Press Registrar General of India and such 
35   other officers under the general superintendence and control of the Press Registrar General 
as may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions assigned to them by or 
under this Act, and may, by general or special order, provide for the distribution or allocation 
of functions to be performed by them under this Act. 
 
29. (1) The Press Registrar General shall maintain in such manner as may be prescribed, 
40   a Register of publications. 
 
(2) The Register shall contain the following particulars about every publication brought 
out in India, namely:— 
 
(a) the title of the publication; 
 
 
 
 
Registration 
of  
memorandum 
of books. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publicatio n  of 
memorandum 
registered.  
 
 
 
 
 
Appointmen t 
of Press 
Registrar 
General  and 
other  officers.  
 
 
Register of 
publications.  

77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificat e  of 
registration.  
 
 
 
 
 
Annual  
statement, 
etc., to  be 
furnished  by 
publisher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Returns and 
report s to  be 
furnished  by 
publisher. 
 
Right to 
access to 
records  and 
documents.  
 
 
(b) whether under foreign direct investment, facsimile edition, Indian edition of 
foreign publication, if so, the details like name of the organisation or country, etc.; 
 
(c) the language in which the publication is published; 
(d) periodicity of the publication; 
(e) the name of the editor, printer and publisher of the publication; 5 
(f) the places of printing and publishing; 
(g) the average number of pages per week; 
 
(h) the number of days of publication in the year; 
(i) retail selling price per copy; 
(j) the names and addresses of the owners of the publication and such other   10 
particulars relating to ownership as may be prescribed; 
(k) any other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(3) On receiving information from time to time about the aforesaid particulars, the Press 
Registrar General shall cause relevant entries to be made in the Register and may make such 
necessary alterations or corrections therein as may be required for keeping the Register   15 
up-to-date. 
 
30. On receiving from the specified authority under sub-section (2) of section 10 or 
sub-section (2) of section 15 a copy of the declaration in respect of a publication, and on 
bringing out of such publication, the Press Registrar General shall, as soon as practicable 
thereafter, issue a certificate of registration in respect of that publication to the publisher   20 
thereof. 
 
31. (1) It shall be the duty of the publisher, and owner in the absence of the publisher, 
of every publication— 
 
(a)  to furnish to the Press Registrar General an annual statement in respect of 
the publication, at such time and containing such other particulars referred to in   25 
sub-section (2) of section 29, as may be prescribed; 
 
(b) to publish in the publication at such times and such of the particulars relating 
to the publication referred to in sub-section (2) of section 29 as may be specified in this 
behalf by the Press Registrar General. 
 
(2) If a publisher or owner required to submit annual statement under this Act fails to   30 
submit the annual statement for a consecutive period of three years, the title, declaration and 
the registration of the publication concerned shall stand cancelled. 
 
(3) The Press Registrar General shall cause publication of the cancellation of any 
publication in at least one daily newspaper circulating in the locality in which the publication 
concerned is brought out. 35 
 
32. The publisher of every publication shall furnish to the Press Registrar General 
such returns, statistics and other information with respect to any of the particulars referred 
to in sub-section (2) of section 29 as the Press Registrar General may from time to time 
require. 
 
33. The Press Registrar General or any Gazetted Officer authorised by him in writing in   40 
this behalf shall, for the purpose of the collection of any information relating to a publication 
under this Act, have access to any relevant record or document relating to the publication in 
the possession of the publisher thereof, and may enter at any reasonable time any premises 
where he believes such record or document to be and may inspect or take copies of the 
relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining any information   45 
required to be furnished under this Act. 

78 
 
 
34. (1) The Press Registrar General on his own or on any request made to him, may 
conduct, through an officer or auditor authorised in this behalf, a verification in such manner 
as may be prescribed, as regard to circulation of the publication mentioned in the annual 
statement. 
5  (2) The verification under sub-section (1) shall be made in respect of a publication 
brought out in a financial year and not a part thereof. 
 
(3) In cases where the circulation verification is conducted on the request made by the 
owner, publisher or any other person, the verification shall be made on payment of such fee 
as may be prescribed. 
10  35. The Press Registrar General shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year 
as may be prescribed, an annual report containing a summary of the information obtained by 
him during the previous year in respect of the publications in India and giving an account of 
the working of such publications, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government. 
15  36. On the application of any person for the supply of copy of any extract from the 
Register and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, the Press Registrar General shall 
furnish such copy to the applicant in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 
37. The publisher, printer or owner shall, on a demand made in writing, specifying the 
reasons for such demand by the Press Registrar General, produce before the Press Registrar 
20   General any document referred to in any report or return submitted by such publisher, printer 
or owner, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the demand so made. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES 
38 . Whoever prints or publishes any book or publication otherwise than in conformity 
25   with section 3 shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees in addition to 
suspension of the publication for a period of thirty days. 
 
39. Whoever owns any press in contravention of the provisions of section 4 shall be 
liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees in addition to sealing of the printing press 
for a period of thirty days. 
 
 
 
30  40. If any person who has ceased to be a printer or publisher or owner of any publication 
fails or neglects to make a declaration under section 14, he shall be liable to a fine not 
exceeding five thousand rupees. 
 
41. (1) If any printer of any such book as is referred to in section 21 neglects to deliver 
copies of the same pursuant to that section, he shall for every such default forfeit to the 
35   Government such sum not exceeding two thousand rupees as a Magistrate having jurisdiction 
in the place where the book was printed may, on the application of the officer to whom the 
copies should have been delivered or of any person authorised by that officer in this behalf, 
determine to be in the circumstances a reasonable fine for the default, and, in addition to 
such sum, such further sum as the Magistrate may determine to be the value of the copies 
40   which the printer ought to have delivered. 
 
(2) If any publisher or other person employing any such printer neglects to supply 
him, in the matter provided in sub-section (2) of section 21 with the maps, prints or engravings 
which may be necessary to enable him to comply with the provisions of that section, such 
publisher or other person shall for every such default forfeit to the Government such sum not 
45   exceeding two thousand rupees as such a Magistrate may, on such an application, determine 
to be in the circumstances a reasonable fine for the default, and, in addition to such sum, 
such further sum as the Magistrate may determine to be the value of the maps, prints or 
engravings which such publisher or other person ought to have supplied. 
 
 
Circulation  
verification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
report.  
 
 
 
 
 
Furnishin g  of 
copies  of 
extrac t from  
Register. 
Productio n  of 
documents 
before  Press 
Registrar 
General.  
 
 
 
 
Penalt y  for 
printing 
contrar y  to 
sectio n  3. 
Penalt y for 
owning   press 
withou t  making 
declaration 
required by 
sectio n 4. 
Penalt y for 
failure to  make 
a  declaration  
under section 14. 
Penalt y for 
not  delivering 
books or  not 
supplying 
printe r  with 
maps.  

79 
 
 
 
Penalt y for 
failure to 
supply  copies 
of  publications 
gratis to 
Government. 
Punishment 
for  making 
false 
statement.  
 
 
Penalt y  for 
printin g  or 
bringing  out 
publication 
without  
conforming 
to the 
provision s  of 
this Act. 
 
 
 
Penalt y for 
failure to 
supply  copies 
of  publications 
to   Press 
Registrar 
General.  
 
Penalt y  for 
failure  to 
produce  
documents 
before  Press 
Registrar 
General.  
 
Penalt y for  
contravention 
of sectio n  31 
or  sectio n  32. 
 
Recover y of 
forfeiture s  and 
disposal 
thereo f and  of 
 
 
42. If any publisher of any publication brought out in India neglects to deliver copies 
of the same in compliance with section 24, he shall, on the complaint of the officer to whom 
copies should have been delivered or of any person authorised by that officer in this behalf, 
be liable to a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every default. 
 
43. Any person who, in making any declaration or other statement under the authority   5 
of this Act, makes a statement which is false, and which he either knows or believe to be false 
or does not believe to be true, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
six months and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 
 
44 (1) Whoever edits, prints or brings out any publication without conforming to the 
provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, or whoever edits, prints or publishes, or   10 
causes to be edited, printed or published any publication, knowing that the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder have not been complied with, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
(2) Where an offence is committed in relation to publication under sub-section (1), the   15 
court may, in addition to the punishment imposed under the said sub-section, also cancel the 
declaration in respect of the publication. 
 
45. If any publisher of a publication brought out in India neglects to deliver the copies 
of the publication as required under section 25, he shall be liable to a fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees. 20 
 
 
 
 
46. If the publisher, printer or owner neglects to produce any document before the 
Press Registrar General in compliance with the provisions of section 37, he shall be liable to 
a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
 
 
 
 
47. If the publisher of any publication refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions 
of section 31 or section 32, he shall be liable to a fine which may extend to five thousand   25 
rupees in addition to a further penalty of a sum of ten rupees for each day default. 
 
48. Any sum forfeited to the Government under this Act and rules made thereunder 
may be recovered, under the warrant of a Magistrate determining the sum, or of his successor 
in office, in the manner authorised by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for the time being 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  of  1974.  
fines.  
 
Cognizanc e  of 
offence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delegatio n  of 
powers. 
 
Press  Registrar 
General and 
other  officers  
to  be public 
servants.  
in force, and within the period prescribed by the Indian Penal Code for the levy of a fine. 
49. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, except upon a 
complaint in writing made by the Press Registrar General or the specified authority or by any 
officer authorised by the Press Registrar General or the specified authority, as the case may 
be, for this purpose. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence under this Act. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
50. Subject to the provisions of this Act and rules made there under, the Press Registrar 
General may delegate all or any of his powers under this Act to any officer subordinate to him. 
51. The Press Registrar General and all officers appointed under this Act shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
30 45 of  1860.  
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
45 of  1860.  

80 
 
 
52. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or a 
State Government or the Press Registrar General or any officer or employee authorised by the 
Press Registrar General, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
 
5  53. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
under the provisions of this Act as may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the objects 
of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
 
10  (a) the form in which a declaration shall be made by the owner of a publication 
under sub-section (1) of section 4; 
 
(b) the form, fees and manner of making an application under sub-section (2) of 
section 6; 
 
(c) the manner in which the Press Registrar General may approve or reject the 
15 title under sub-section (4) of section 6; 
 
(d) the manner in which owner of a publication may transfer the title under sub- 
section (7) of section 6; 
 
(e) the form in which a declaration shall be made by the printer and publisher 
under sub-section (1) of section 7; 
 
20  (f) limit in a publication, of foreign news content under clause (c), and of foreign 
investment under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
 
(g) the form and fee for an application under sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(h) the form in which fresh declaration shall be made under section 14; 
(i) the form in which a declaration may be made by a person whose name has 
25 been incorrectly published as editor under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
 
(j) the manner in which a Register shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of 
section 29; 
 
(k) other particulars relating to ownership under clause (j), and any other 
particulars under clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 29; 
 
30  (l) the time within which and the particulars in respect of which, an annual 
statement shall be furnished by the publisher or the owner of a publication, to the 
Press Registrar General under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 31; 
 
(m) the manner in which verification may be conducted by an officer or auditor 
under sub-section (1) of section 34; 
 
35  (n) the fee for verification conducted on the request made by the owner, publisher 
or any other person under sub-section (3) of section 34; 
 
(o) the form in which, and the time within which, annual report may be prepared 
by the Press Registrar General under section 35; 
 
(p) fee for furnishing copies of extracts from the Register and the form and 
40 manner in which such copies may be furnished under section 36; 
 
(q) any matter relating to books referred to in Chapters III and IV; 
(r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
45   may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
 
 
Protectio n  of 
actio n  taken  
in  good faith. 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central  
Government 
to make  rules. 

81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of  State 
Government 
to make  rules. 
 
 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 5 
 
54. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in 
respect of books referred to in Chapters III and IV, not inconsistent with the rules made by 
the Central Government, as may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the objects of this 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
exclude  any 
class of  books 
and 
publications 
from  operation  
of Act. 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeal  and 
saving.  
 
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
 
55. The State Government may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude any class of books or publications from the 
operation of the whole or any part or parts of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Press Registrar General, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
 
57. (1) The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken 
(including any rule, notification, inspection, order or declaration made or any document 
or instrument executed or any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty 
or fine imposed) under this Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act; 
 
(b) any declaration, including title thereof, so made and authenticated under the 
provisions of this Act hereby repealed, shall be deemed to have been made and 
authenticated under the corresponding provisions of this Act; 
 
(c) any proceeding pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may 
be continued in that court as if this Act has not been passed; 
 
(d) the Press Registrar and other officers appointed under section 19A of this 
Act hereby repealed and holding office as such immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, shall, on the commencement of this Act, continue to hold their respective 
offices under the corresponding provisions of this Act, unless and until they are 
removed or superannuated; 
 
(e) the Press and Registration Appellate Board established under this Act hereby 
repealed shall, continue to function under the corresponding provisions of this Act, 
unless and until the Appellate Board is constituted under this Act; 
 
(f) any appeal preferred to the Press and Registration Appellate Board under 
section 8C of the Act hereby repealed but not disposed of before the commencement 
of this Act may be disposed of by the Appellate Board constituted under this Act; 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 of  1867.  
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 of 1897.  
 
 
(g) any penalty payable under this Act hereby repealed may be recovered in the 
manner provided by or under this Act, but without prejudice to any action already 
taken for the recovery of such penalty under this Act so repealed; 
 
(h) any certificate of registration issued or granted under this Act hereby repealed 
shall continue to have effect after the commencement of this Act under the same 
conditions as if this Act had not been passed. 
 
(3) The mention of the particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice 
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to 
the effect of repeal. 

83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 was enacted for the regulation of 
Printing  presses and Newspapers for the preservation of copies of books and newspapers 
printed in India, and for the registration of such books and newspapers. Though the aforesaid 
Act has been amended several times between 1870 and 1983, the existing provisions of the 
Act are not adequate to cater to the phenomenal growth of the print media sector in view of 
the liberalised policy of the Government. 
 
2. The Print Media Policy of 1955, inter alia, provides that—(i) no foreign owned 
newspapers and periodicals should be published in India; (ii) the foreign newspapers and 
periodicals dealing mainly with news and current affairs should not be allowed to bring out 
Indian editions. The aforesaid Policy of 1955 was reviewed, from time to time, and as on date 
it, inter alia, allows— 
 
(a) the foreign direct investment up to a ceiling of twenty-six per cent. of paid up 
equity capital in Indian entities publishing newspapers and periodicals dealing with 
news and current affairs and hundred per cent., in the scientific, technical and specialty 
category  subject to certain conditions; 
 
(b) the publication of facsimile editions, in whole or in part, of foreign newspapers 
by Indian entities, with or without foreign investment, and also by foreign companies 
owning the original newspaper; 
 
(c) the publication of Indian editions of foreign scientific, technical, specialty 
and news and current affairs magazines, periodicals and journals. 
 
3. In view of the liberalised policy of the Government, the Print Media has not only 
attracted the foreign direct investment but also led to a phenomenal increase in the availability 
of the foreign scientific and technical magazines in India. The Print Media Policy of 1955, 
which so far prohibited bringing out of foreign publications in India, has since been reviewed 
from time to time and the issues of foreign direct investment, facsimile editions, Indian 
edition of foreign newspapers, syndication, etc., are now being regulated through executive 
orders which needs to be supported with the statutory provisions to elicit optimum results 
and hassle free entry of foreign publications. Thus, in order to give statutory backing to the 
Print Media Policy and various guidelines, it is proposed to enact a new legislation to amend 
and consolidate the laws relating to press and registration of books and publications. 
 
4. The proposed Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011, inter 
alia, makes the following, namely:— 
 
(a) every book or publication printed within India shall have legibly printed on it 
the date of its publication, name of the owner, printer, publisher, editor and complete 
address of  place of printing and the publication; 
 
(b) every person who owns and operates any press for the printing of books or 
publications shall make and subscribe a declaration in such form as may be prescribed 
before the specified authority within whose local jurisdiction such press is kept; 
 
(c) a person, being an entity incorporated and registered in India under any law 
for the time being in force, or a citizen of India, may bring out a publication, but a 
person who has been convicted by any court for an offence involving terrorist act or 
unlawful activity or for having done anything against the security of the State shall 
not bring out a publication; 
 
(d) the owner of any proposed publication may make an application proposing 
one or more titles, not exceeding five, in order of preference to the specified authority 
 

84 
 
 
for verification of one of titles of the publication and the specified authority may after 
verification of antecedents of the applicant and after satisfying himself about the 
eligibility of such applicant, within a period of three months, recommend or reject the 
application; 
 
(e) the Press Registrar General, on receipt of the recommendation from the specified 
authority shall, in writing and in such manner as may be prescribed, approve one of the title 
and it may reject all the proposed titles if such titles are– (i) the same or similar to that of any 
existing publication, except in the case of publications owned by the same person;  or (ii) 
obscene; or (iii) similar to name of symbols of terrorists or terrorist organisations either in 
full or in abbreviated form; or (iv) same or similar to that of a known foreign publication; 
 
(f) the printer and the publisher of every publication shall appear in person or by agent 
authorised in this behalf before a specified authority within whose local jurisdiction such 
publication shall be printed or published, and make and subscribe a declaration in duplicate 
in the prescribed form; 
 
(g) no person, who does not ordinarily reside in India, or who has not attained the 
majority in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 or of any law for 
the time being in force to which he is subject in respect of the attainment of majority, shall be 
permitted to make a declaration or edit a publication; 
 
(h) no publication shall be printed and published in India except with the prior approval 
of the Central Government, if— 
 
(i) such publication is owned by any individual who is not an Indian citizen or 
unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate incorporated under the law of 
any country other than India; or 
 
(ii) its title is same or similar to a known foreign publication; or 
 
(iii) its foreign news content in an issue of an Indian publication exceeds the 
limit prescribed for such publication; or 
 
(iv) such publication has investment from any individual who is not an Indian 
citizen or unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate incorporated under 
the law of any country other than India; or 
 
(v) it is a facsimile edition of a known foreign publication; 
 
(i) any person aggrieved by an order of a specified authority refusing to authenticate 
a declaration or cancelling a declaration may prefer an appeal to the Press and Registration 
Appellate Board, to be constituted by the Central Government, consisting of a Chairperson 
and a member, to be nominated by the Press Council of India from among its members; 
 
(j) the publisher of every publication shall furnish to the Press Registrar General the 
returns, statistics and other information with respect to any specified particulars; 
 
(k) it also provides for offences, punishment and penalties for contravention of the 
provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions of the Bill. 
 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd December, 2011. AMBIKA SONI. 

85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes on Clauses 
 
Clause 1.— This clause provides for short title, extent and commencement. 
 
Clause 2.—This clause provides for definitions. It defines the certain expression used 
in the proposed legislation which, inter alia, includes: the expressions ―book‖, ―editor‖, 
―electronic form‖, ―facsimile edition‖, ―foreign publication‖,  ―journal‖, ―known foreign 
publication‖, ―magazine‖, ―newsletter‖, ―owner‖, ―Press Registrar General‖, ―printer‖, 
―printing‖, ―publication‖, ―publisher‖, ―syndication‖ and ―title‖, etc. 
 
Clause 3.— This clause provides for particulars to be printed on books and publications. 
It provides that every book or publication printed within India shall have legibly printed on 
it the date of its publication, name of the owner, printer, publisher, editor and complete 
address of place of printing and of the publication. 
 
It further provides that in case an edition of a publication is being printed from more 
than one location, the name of the printer and each printing press with their complete address 
shall be disclosed in the imprint line of each print. 
 
Clause 4.— This clause provides that owner of printing press to make declaration. It 
provides that every person who owns and operates any press for the printing of books or 
publications shall make and subscribe a declaration in prescribed form before the specified 
authority within whose local jurisdiction such press is kept. 
 
It further provides that whenever the place where a press is kept is changed, a fresh 
declaration shall be necessary but where the change is for a period not exceeding sixty days 
and the place where the press is kept after the change is within the local jurisdiction of the 
aforesaid specified authority, fresh declaration shall not be necessary if a statement relating 
to the change is furnished to the said specified authority within three days thereof; and the 
owner of the press continues to be the same. 
 
Clause 5.—  This clause provides that who may bring out a publication. It provides 
that a person, being an entity incorporated and registered in India under any law for the time 
being in force, or a citizen of India, may bring out a publication. 
 
It further provides that any person, who has been convicted by any court for an 
offence involving terrorist act or unlawful activity; or for having done anything against the 
security of the State, shall not bring out a publication. 
 
I also provides an explanation for the purpose of this clause   that the expression 
―terrorist act‖ or ―unlawful activity‖ shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in clauses (k) and (o) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967 (37 of 1967). 
 
Clause 6.— This clause provides for verification and registration of title. It provides 
that the owner of any proposed publication may  make an application in prescribed form 
proposing  one or more titles, not exceeding five,  in order of preference to the specified 
authority for verification of one of titles of the publication and if the owner of the proposed 
publication is an entity incorporated and registered in India, the authorised signatory shall 
make an application on behalf of that entity: 
 
It further provides that the specified authority may after verification of antecedents of 
the applicant  and after satisfying himself about the eligibility of such applicant,  within a 
period of three months, recommend or reject the application and if application is rejected the 
person concerned shall be given an opportunity of hearing. 
 
It also provides that on receipt of the recommendation from the specified authority, the 
Press Registrar General shall   approve one of the title or reject all the proposed titles if such 
 

86 
 
 
titles are – (a) the same or similar to that of any existing publication, except in the case of 
publications owned by the same person; or (b) obscene; or (c) similar to name of symbols of 
terrorists or terrorist organisations either in full or in abbreviated form; or (d) same or similar 
to that of a known foreign publication. The decision of the Press Registrar General as to title 
shall be final. 
 
It also provides that every title of a publication approved under this clause shall be 
deemed to have been cancelled and become available to new applicants if the authenticated 
declaration made under clause 10 is not filed with the Press Registrar General within a period 
of six months from the date of such approval. The Press Registrar General may, if he is 
satisfied that the delay in filing the authenticated declaration by the applicant was beyond 
the control of the applicant, extend the time for such  period, not exceeding  four months, 
after recording the reasons in writing. 
 
It also provides that any owner of a publication may, after registration, transfer the title 
of such publication to any person, in the prescribed manner. 
 
It also provides that a title verified under this clause, if not registered under clause 30 
within one year of its verification, shall stand cancelled. The Press Registrar General may, in 
exceptional cases, grant further period of four months to those publications where the delay 
is due to reasons beyond the control of the title holder. 
 
Clause 7.— This clause provides that printer and publisher of a publication to make 
declaration. It provides that the printer and the publisher of every  publication shall appear 
in person or by agent authorised in this behalf, before a specified authority within whose 
local jurisdiction such publication shall be printed or published,  and make and subscribe a 
declaration in duplicate, in prescribed form. 
 
It further provides that every declaration shall specify the title of the publication, the 
language in which it is to be published and the periodicity of its publication. 
 
It also provides that where the printer or publisher of a publication making a declaration 
is not the owner thereof, the declaration shall specify the name of the owner and shall also be 
accompanied by an authority in writing from the owner authorising such person to make and 
subscribe such declaration. 
 
It also provides that a declaration made in respect of a publication under this clause 
and authenticated under clause 10 shall be necessary before the publication can be published 
and where the periodicity of a publication is changed, the declaration shall cease to have 
effect and a fresh  declaration shall be necessary before the publication can be continued 
and whenever the ownership of a publication is changed or the place of printing or publication 
is changed, a fresh  declaration shall be necessary. 
 
It also provides whenever the printer or the publisher who made such declaration 
leaves India for a period exceeding ninety days or where such printer or publisher is by 
infirmity or otherwise rendered incapable of carrying out his duties for a period exceeding 
ninety days in circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, a fresh declaration 
shall be necessary. 
 
It also provides that every declaration made in respect of a publication shall be void, 
where the publication does not commence, in the case of a publication to be published once 
a week or often, within six weeks of the authentication of the declaration under clause 10; and 
in the case of any other publication, within three months of the authentication of the declaration 
under clause 10, and in every such case, a fresh declaration shall be necessary before the 
publication can be brought out. 
 
It also provides that every existing declaration in respect of a publication shall be 
cancelled by the specified authority before whom a fresh declaration is made and subscribed 
in respect of the same and the declaration shall cease to have effect if the publication has not 
been brought out as per the declared periodicity, for a period exceeding one year, and in all 
such cases the registration number and the title shall be deemed to have been cancelled. 

87 
 
 
Clause 8.—  This clause provides for prohibition as to making declaration under 
clause 7, or editing of a publication, in certain cases. It provides that no person shall be 
permitted to make a declaration under clause 7, or edit a publication if he does not ordinarily 
reside in India, or has not attained majority in accordance with the provisions of the Indian 
Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) or of any law for the time being in force to which he is subject 
in respect of the attainment of majority. 
 
Clause 9.— This clause provides for limits of foreign news content, foreign investment, 
etc. It provides that without prejudice to the other provisions of proposed legislation, no 
publication shall be printed and published in  India except with the prior approval of the 
Central Government granted in this behalf, if —(a) such publication is owned by any individual 
who is not an Indian citizen or unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate 
incorporated under the law of any country other than India; or (b) its title is same or similar 
to a known foreign publication; or (c) its foreign news content in an issue of an Indian 
publication exceeds the limit prescribed for such publication; or (d) such publication has 
investment from any individual who is not an Indian citizen or unincorporated body of 
individuals or body corporate incorporated under the law of any country other than India; 
or (e) it is a facsimile edition of a known foreign publication. 
 
It further provides that any person who intends to print or bring out a publication 
referred to in sub-clause (1) may make an application to the Central Government for its prior 
approval in prescribed form and accompanied with prescribed fee. 
 
It also provides that the Central Government may, subject to such terms and conditions 
as it may deem fit, grant approval for printing or publishing the publication referred to in sub- 
clause (1) or refuse to grant such approval  after recording the reasons thereof and giving 
him an opportunity of hearing. 
 
Clause 10.— This clause provides for Authentication of declaration. It provides that 
the specified authority, before whom declaration has been made under the proposed legislation 
shall within a period of two months, authenticate each of the two originals of the declaration, 
with his signature and official seal with date or through his electronic signature with date but 
the specified authority shall not authenticate the declaration made under clause 7 unless it 
is accompanied by a title approved under clause 6: 
 
It also provide s that that any declaratio n so made and authenticate d under the 
provisions of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 before the commencement of the 
proposed legislation shall be deemed to have been made and authenticate d under the 
corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
It also provides that a copy of the declaration authenticated by the specified authority, 
or a copy of the order refusing to authenticate the declaration, shall be forwarded as soon as 
possible to the person making and subscribing the declaration and also to the Press Registrar 
General. 
 
Clause 11.— This clause provides for deposit of declaration. It provides that one of 
the originals of the declaration referred to in clause 10 shall be deposited among the records 
of the office of the specified authority. 
 
Clause 12.— This clause provides for Inspection and supply of copies of declaration. 
It provides that the Officer-in-charge of each original shall allow any person to inspect that 
original on payment of a fee of one hundred rupees, and shall give to any person applying a 
copy of the said declaration, attested by the seal of the Court which has the custody of the 
original, on payment of a fee of two hundred rupees. 
 
Clause 13.—  This clause provides for office copy of declaration to be prima facie 
evidence. It provides that in any legal proceeding, whether civil or criminal, the production of 
a copy of declaration so authenticated under clause 10 or clause 15, attested by the seal of 
the specified authority or in case of the editor, a copy of the publication containing his name 
printed on it as that of the editor or in case of more than one editor, the editor finally 

88 
 
 
responsible for the selection of the matter shall be held (unless the contrary be proved ) to be 
sufficient evidence, as against the person whose name shall be subscribed to such declaration, 
or printed on such publication, as the case may be, that the said person was printer or 
publisher, or printer and publisher (according as the words of the said declaration may be) of 
every portion of every publication whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the 
publication mentioned in the declaration, or the editor of every portion of that issue of the 
publication, of which a copy is produced. 
 
Clause 14.— This clause provides for new declaration by persons who have signed a 
declaration and subsequently ceased to be printer or publisher or owner. It provides that if 
any person has subscribed to any declaration in respect of a publication under clause 7 and 
the declaratio n has been authenticate d by a specified authorit y under clause 10 and 
subsequently that person ceases to be the printer or publisher or owner of   publication 
mentione d in such declaration , he shall appear in person or through his authorised 
representative before the specified authority and make   and subscribe a declaration in 
duplicate, in prescribed form. 
 
It further provides that the owner shall also file declaration for change of printer or 
publisher by appearing before the specified authority concerned and make and subscribe a 
declaration in duplicate, in prescribed form. 
 
Clause 15.— This clause provides for authentication and filing of declaration made 
under clause 14. It provides that each original of the declaration made under clause 14 shall 
be authenticated by the signature with date and seal of the specified authority before whom 
the said declaration shall have been made, and one original of the said declaration shall be 
filed along with original of the declaration authenticated under clause 10 and a copy of the 
declaration attested by the official seal of the specified authority shall be forwarded to the 
Press Registrar General. 
 
Clause 16.— This clause provides for inspection and supply of copies of declaration 
made under clause 14. It provides that the Officer-in-charge of each original of the declaration 
made under clause 14 shall allow any person applying to inspect that original, on payment of 
a fee of one hundred rupees, and shall give to any  person applying a copy of the said 
declaration, attested by the seal of the specified authority having custody of the original, on 
payment of a fee of two hundred rupees. 
Clause 17.— This clause provides for putting up copy of declaration in evidence. It 
provides that in all trials in which a copy attested, of the former declaration have been put in 
evidence, it shall be lawful to put in evidence a copy, attested, of the latter declaration, and 
the former declaration shall not be taken to be evidence that the declarant was, at any period 
subsequent to the date of the latter declaration, printer or publisher of the publication therein 
mentioned. 
 
Clause 18.—  This clause provides that person whose name has been incorrectly 
published as editor may make a declaration before a specified authority. It provides that  if 
any person, whose name has appeared as editor on a copy of a publication, claims that he 
was not the editor of the issue on which his name has so appeared, he may, within two weeks 
of his becoming aware that his name has been so published, appear before a specified 
authority and make a declaration in prescribed form that his name was incorrectly published 
in that issue as that of the editor thereof, and if the said specified authority, after making such 
inquiry or causing such inquiry to be made as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that 
such declaration is true, he shall certify accordingly, and on that certificate being given, the 
provisions of clause 13 shall not apply to that person in respect of that issue of the publication. 
 
It further provides that the specified authority may extend the period under sub-clause 
(1) in case he is satisfied that such person was prevented by sufficient cause from appearing 
and making the declaration within that period. 
 
Clause 19.— This clause provides for Cancellation of declaration. It provides that the 
specified authority empowered to authenticate a declaration under the proposed legislation 

89 
 
 
may, after giving the concerned person an opportunity of hearing, cancel the declaration 
made in respect of a publication, if- (a) the publication, in respect of which the declaration 
has been made is being published in contravention of the provision of this Act or rules made 
there under; or (b) the publication mentioned in the declaration bears a title which is the same 
as, or similar to, that of any other publication; or (c) the owner has ceased to be the owner of 
the publication mentioned in such declaration; or (d) the declaration was made on false 
representation or on the concealment of any material fact or in respect of a periodical work 
which is not a publication, and forward a copy of the order to the person making or subscribing 
the declaration and also to the Press Registrar General. 
 
It further provides that on the cancellation of declaration under sub-clause (1), the title 
and the registration certificate issued by Press Registrar General shall also be deemed to be 
cancelled with effect from the date of such cancellation of declaration. 
 
Clause 20.—  This clause provides for appeal. It provides that any person aggrieved 
by an order of a specified authority refusing to authenticate a declaration under clause 10 or 
cancelling a declaration under clause 19 may, within sixty days from the date on which such 
order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Press and Registration Appellate 
Board, to be constituted by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette 
consisting of a Chairperson and another member, to be nominated by the Press Council of 
India, established under section 4 of the Press Council Act, 1978(37 of 1978), from among its 
members. The Appellate Board may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if 
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal 
in time. 
 
It also provides that on receipt of an appeal, the Appellate Board may, after calling for 
the records from the specified authority and after making such further inquiries as it thinks 
fit, confirm, modify or set aside the order appealed against and the decision of the Appellate 
Board shall be final. 
 
Clause 21.— This clause provides that copies of books printed to be delivered gratis 
to Government. It provides that the printed copies of the whole of every book which shall be 
printed in India together with all maps, prints or other engravings belonging thereto, finished 
and coloured in the same manner as the best copies of the same shall, notwithstanding any 
agreement  between the printer and publisher thereof, if the book is published, be delivered 
by the printer at such place and to such officer as the State Government shall, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, from time to time direct, and free of expense to the Government. 
 
It further provides that nothing in sub-clause (1) shall apply to any second or 
subsequent edition of a book in which edition no additions or alterations either in the letter- 
press or in the maps, prints or other engravings belonging to the book have been made, and 
a copy of the first or some preceding edition of which book has been delivered under the 
proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 22.— This clause provides for receipt for copies delivered under clause 21. It 
provides that the officer to whom a copy of book is delivered under clause 21 shall give to the 
printer a receipt in writing therefor. 
 
Clause 23.— This clause provides for disposal of copies delivered under clause 21. It 
provides that the copy delivered under clause 21 shall be disposed of as the State Government 
shall from time to time determine or be transmitted to the Central Government, as the case 
may be. 
 
Clause 24.—  This clause provides that copies of publication printed in India to be 
delivered gratis to Government. It provides that the publisher of every publication in India 
shall deliver at such place and to such officer as the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct, and free of expense to the Government, two copies of each 
issue of such publication as soon as it is published. 

90 
 
 
Clause 25.— This clause provides that copies of publication delivered to Press Registrar 
General. It provides that the publisher of every publication in India shall deliver free of 
expense one copy of each issue of such publication as and when demanded by the Press 
Registrar General. 
 
It further provides that every publisher shall preserve one copy of every issue of the 
publication, either in hard copy or in electronic form and shall provide the same as and when 
demanded by the Press Registrar General. 
 
Clause 26.— This clause provides for Registration of memorandum of books. It provides 
that there shall be kept at such office, and by such officer as the State Government shall 
appoint in this behalf, a book to be called a Catalogue of Books printed in India, wherein shall 
be registered a memorandum of every book which shall have been delivered under item (a) of 
sub-clause (1) of clause 21, containing the particulars specified in this clause. 
 
It further provides that the memorandum shall be made and registered in the case of 
each book as soon as practicable after the delivery of the copy thereof pursuant to item (a) 
of sub-clause (1) of clause 21. 
 
Clause 27.— This clause provides for publication of memorandum registered.   It 
provides that the memorandum registered during each quarter in the catalogue referred to in 
clause 26 shall be published in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be after the end of such 
quarter, and a copy of the memorandum so published shall be sent to the Central Government. 
 
Clause 28.— This clause provides for appointment of Press Registrar General and 
other officers. It provides that the Central Government may appoint Press Registrar General 
of India and such other officers under the general superintendence and control of the Press 
Registrar General as may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions assigned 
to them by or under the proposed legislation, and may, by general or special order, provide 
for the distribution or allocation of functions to be performed by them under the proposed 
legislation. 
 
Clause 29.—  This clause provides for register of publications.   It provides that the 
Press Registrar General shall maintain a Register of publications in prescribed manner. 
 
It further provides that the Register shall contain the particulars about every publication 
brought out in India as are specified in this clause. 
 
It also provides that the Press Registrar General shall cause relevant entries to be made 
in the Register and may make such necessary alterations or corrections therein as may be 
required for keeping the Register up-do-date on receiving information from time to time 
about the aforesaid particulars. 
 
Clause 30.— This clause provides for certificate of registration. It provides that the 
Press Registrar General shall, as soon as practicable, issue a certificate of registration in 
respect of the publication to the publisher thereof on receiving copy of the declaration in 
respect of that publication, and on bringing out of such publication, from the specified 
authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 10 or sub-clause (2) of clause 15. 
 
Clause 31.— This clause provides for annual statement, etc., to be furnished by 
publisher. It provides that it shall be the duty of the publisher, and owner in the absence of 
the publisher, of every publication – (a) to furnish to the Press Registrar General an annual 
statement in respect of the publication, at such time and containing such other particulars 
referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause  29, as may be prescribed; and (b) to publish in the 
publication at such times and such of the particulars relating to the publication referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 29 as may be specified in this behalf by the Press Registrar General. 
 
It further provides that if a publisher  or  owner required to submit annual statement 
under the proposed legislation fails to submit the annual statement for a consecutive period 
of three years, the title, declaration and the registration of the publication concerned shall 
stand cancelled. 

91 
 
 
It also provide s that the Press Registrar General shall cause publicatio n of the 
cancellation of any publication in at least one daily newspaper circulating in the locality in 
which the publication concerned is brought out. 
 
Clause 32.— This clause provides for returns and reports to be furnished by publisher. 
It provides that the publisher of every publication shall furnish to the Press Registrar General 
such returns, statistics and other information with respect to any of the particulars referred 
to in sub-clause (2) of clause 29 as the Press Registrar General may from time to time require. 
 
Clause 33.— This clause provides for   right to access to records and documents. It 
provides that the Press Registrar General or any gazetted officer authorised by him in writing 
in this behalf shall, for the purpose of the collection of any information relating to a publication 
under the proposed legislation, have access to any relevant record or document relating to 
the publication in the possession of the publisher thereof, and may enter at any reasonable 
time any premises where he believes such record or document to be and may inspect or take 
copies of the relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 34.— This clause provides for  circulation verification. It provides that the 
Press Registrar General on his own or on any request made to him, may conduct, through an 
officer or auditor authorised in this behalf, a verification in the prescribed manner, as regard 
to circulation of the publication mentioned in the annual statement. The verification shall be 
made in respect of a publication brought out in a financial year and not a part thereof. 
 
It further provides that in cases where the circulation verification is conducted on the 
request made by the owner, publisher or any other person, the verification shall be made on 
payment of prescribed fee. 
 
Clause 35.— This clause provides for annual report. It provides that the Press Registrar 
General shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, an 
annual report containing a summary of the information obtained by him during the previous 
year in respect of the publications in India and giving an account of the working of such 
publications, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
 
Clause 36.— This clause provides for furnishing of copies of extract from Register. It 
provides that on the application of any person for the supply of copy of any extract from the 
Register and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, the Press Registrar General shall 
furnish such copy to the applicant in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 
Clause 37.— This clause provides for production of documents before Press Registrar 
General.  It provides that the publisher, printer or owner shall, on a demand made in writing, 
specifying the reasons for such demand by the Press Registrar General,  produce before the 
Press Registrar General any document referred to in any report or return submitted by such 
publisher, printer or owner, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the 
demand so made. 
 
Clause 38.— This clause provides for penalty for printing contrary to clause 3. It 
provides that whoever prints or publishes any book or publicatio n otherwise than in 
conformity with clause 3 shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees in 
addition to suspension of the publication for a period of thirty days. 
 
Clause 39.— This clause provides for penalty for owning   press without making 
declaration required by clause 4. It provides that whoever owns any press in contravention 
of the provisions of clause 4 shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees in 
addition to sealing of the printing press for a period of thirty days. 
 
Clause 40.— This clause provides for penalty for failure to make a declaration under 
clause 14. It provides that if any person who has ceased to be a printer or publisher or owner 
of any publication fails or neglects to make a declaration under clause 14, he shall be liable to 
a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees. 

92 
 
 
Clause 41.— This clause provides for penalty for not delivering books or not supplying 
printer with maps. It provides that if any printer of any such book as is referred to in clause 
21  neglects to deliver copies of the same pursuant to that section, he shall for every such 
default forfeit to the Governmen t such sum not exceedin g two thousand rupees as a 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where the book was printed may, on the application 
of the officer to whom the copies should have been delivered or of any person authorised by 
that officer in this behalf, determine to be in the circumstances a reasonable line for the 
default, and, in addition to such sum, such further sum as the Magistrate may determine to be 
the value of the copies which the printer ought to have delivered. 
 
It further provides that if any publisher or other person employing any such printer 
neglects to supply him, in the matter provided in sub-clause (2) of clause 21 with the maps, 
prints or engravings which may be necessary to enable him to comply with the provisions of 
that section, such publisher or other person shall for every such default forfeit to the 
Government such sum not exceeding two thousand rupees as such a Magistrate may, on 
such an application, determine to be in the circumstances a reasonable line for the default, 
and, in addition to such sum, such further sum as the Magistrate may determine to be the 
value of the maps, prints or engravings which such publisher or other person ought to have 
supplied. 
 
Clause 42.— This clause provides for penalty for failure to supply copies of publications 
gratis to Government. It provides that if any publisher of any publication brought out in 
India neglects to deliver copies of the same in compliance with clause 24, he shall, on the 
complaint of the officer to whom copies should have been delivered or of any person 
authorised by that officer in this behalf, be liable to a line which may extend to five thousand 
rupees for every default. 
 
Clause 43.— This clause provides for punishment  for making false statement. It 
provides that any person who, in making any declaration or other statement under the 
authority of the proposed legislation, makes a statement which is false, and which he either 
knows or believe to be false or does not believe to be true, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months and with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees. 
 
Clause 44.— This clause provides for penalty for printing or bringing out publication 
without conforming to the provisions of the proposed legislation. It provides that whoever 
edits, prints or brings out any publication  without conforming to the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and rules made thereunder, or whoever  edits, prints or publishes, or 
causes to be edited, printed or published any publication, knowing that the provisions of the 
proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder have not been complied with, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
It further provides that where an offence is committed in relation to publication under 
sub-clause (1), the court may, in addition to the punishment imposed under the said sub- 
section, also cancel the declaration in respect of the publication. 
 
Clause 45.— This clause provides for penalty for failure to supply copies of publications 
to Press Registrar General. It provides that if any publisher of a publication brought out in 
India neglects to deliver the copies of the publication as required under clause 25, he shall be 
liable to a line which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
 
Clause 46.— This clause provides for penalty for failure to produce documents before 
Press Registrar General. It provides that if the publisher, printer or owner neglects to produce 
any document before the Press Registrar General in compliance with the provisions of clause 
37, he shall be liable to a line which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
 
Clause 47.— This clause provides for penalty for contravention of clause 31 or clause 
32. It provides that if the publisher of any publication refuses or neglects to comply with the 

93 
 
 
provisions of clause 31 or clause 32, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees in addition to a further line of a sum of ten rupees for each day default. 
 
Clause 48.— This clause provides for recovery of forfeitures and disposal thereof and 
of fines. It provides that any sum forfeited to the Government under the proposed legislation 
and rules made thereunder may be recovered, under the warrant of a Magistrate determining 
the sum, or of his successor in office, in the manner authorised by the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for the time being in force, and within the period prescribed by 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) for the levy of a fine. 
 
Clause 49.— This clause provides for cognizance of offence. It provides that no court 
shall take cognizance of any offence under the proposed legislation, except upon a complaint 
in writing made by the Press Registrar General or the specified authority or by any officer 
authorised by the Press Registrar General or the specified authority, as the case may be, for 
this purpose. 
 
It further provides that no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 50.— This clause provides for delegation of powers. It provides that the Press 
Registrar General may delegate all or any of his powers under the proposed legislation to any 
officer subordinate to him subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation and rules 
made thereunder. 
 
Clause 51.—  This clause provides that Press Registrar General and other officers to 
be public servants. It provides that the Press Registrar General and all officers appointed 
under the proposed legislation shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
 
Clause 52.—  This clause provides for protection of action taken in good faith. It 
provides that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or 
a State Government or the Press Registrar General or any officer or employee authorised by 
the Press Registrar General, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of the proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder. 
 
Clause 53.— This clause provides for power of Central Government to make rules. It 
provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the objects of the proposed legislation. 
 
It further specifies the matter in respect of which such rules may be made. 
 
It also provides that every rule made under the proposed legislation shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 54.— This clause provides for power of State Government to make rules. It 
provides that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in 
respect of books referred to in Chapters III and IV, not inconsistent with the rules made by 
the Central Government, as may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the objects of the 
proposed legislation. 
 
It further provides that every rule made by the State Government under this clause 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
 
Clause 55.— This clause provides for power to exclude any class of books and 
publications from operation of the proposed legislation. It provides that the State Government 
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exclude any class of books or publications from the operation of the whole or any 
part or parts of the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 56.— This clause provides for power to remove difficulties. It provides that if 
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Press Registrar General, by order published in the 

94 
 
 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed 
legislation, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
 
It further provides that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of three years from the commencement of the legislation. 
 
It also provides that every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 57.— This clause provides for repeal and saving.  It provides that the Press 
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 is hereby repealed. 
 
It further provides that notwithstanding such repeal, — 
 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken 
(including any rule, notification, inspection, order or declaration made or any document 
or instrument executed or any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty 
or fine imposed) under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation; 
 
(b) any declaration, including title thereof, so made and authenticated under the 
provisions of the Act hereby repealed, shall be deemed to have been made and 
authenticated under the corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation; 
 
(c) any proceeding pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may 
be continued in that court as if the proposed legislation has not been enacted; 
 
(d) the Press Registrar and other officers appointed under section 19A of the Act 
hereby repealed and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of 
the proposed legislation, shall,  on the commencement of this Act, continue to hold 
their respective offices under the corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation, 
unless and until they are  removed or superannuated; 
 
(e) the Press and Registration Appellate Board established under the Act hereby 
repealed shall, continue to function under the corresponding provisions of the proposed 
legislation, unless and until the Appellate Board is constituted under the proposed 
legislation; 
 
(f) any appeal preferred to the Press and Registration Appellate Board under 
section 8C of the Act hereby repealed but not disposed of before the commencement 
of the proposed legislation may be disposed of by the Appellate Board constituted 
under  the proposed legislation; 
 
(g) any penalty payable under the Act hereby repealed may be recovered in the 
manner provided by or under the proposed legislation but without prejudice to any 
action already taken for the recovery of such penalty under the Act so repealed; 
 
(h) any certificate of registration issued or granted under the Act hereby repealed 
shall continue to have  effect after the commencement of the proposed legislation 
under the same conditions as if the proposed legislation had not been enacted. 
 
It also provides that the mention of the particular matters in sub-clause (2) shall not be 
held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal. 

95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 provides that any person aggrieved by an order of a 
specified authority refusing to authenticate a declaration under clause 10 or cancelling a 
declaration under clause 19 may, within sixty days from the date on which such order is 
communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Press and Registration Appellate Board, to be 
constituted by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette consisting of a 
Chairperson and another member, to be nominated by the Press Council of India, established 
under section 4 of the Press Council Act, 1978, from among its member. 
 
2. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may appoint Press Registrar 
General of India and such other officers under the general superintendence and control of 
the Press Registrar General as may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions 
assigned to them by or under the proposed legislation, and may, by general or special order, 
provide for the distribution or allocation of functions to be performed by them under the 
proposed legislation. 
 
3. It proposed that the Press Registrar and other officers appointed under section 19A 
of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 to be repealed under proposed legislation 
and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of the proposed legislation, 
shall, on the commencement of the proposed legislation, continue to hold their respective 
offices under the corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation, unless and until 
they are removed or superannuated and the Press and Registration Appellate Board established 
under the said repealed shall, continue to function under the corresponding provisions of 
the proposed legislation, unless and until the Appellate Board is constituted under the 
proposed legislation. 
 
4. As the Press Registrar and other officers appointed under section 19A of the Press 
and Registratio n of Books Act, 1867 and the Press and Registratio n Appellate Board 
established under the said Act are proposed to continue to function as such under the 
proposed legislation, there is no financial implication involved in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub- 
clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, 
inter alia, include matters: (a) the form in which a declaration shall be made by the owner of 
a publication under sub-clause (1) of clause 4; (b) the form, fees and manner of making an 
application under sub-clause (2) of clause 6; (c) the manner in which the Press Registrar 
General may approve or reject the title under sub-clause (4) of clause 6; (d) the manner in 
which owner of publication may transfer the title under sub-clause (7) of clause 6; (e) the 
form in which a declaration shall be made by the printer and publisher under sub-clause (1) 
of clause 7; (f) limit in a publication, of foreign news content under clause (c), and of foreign 
investment under item (d) sub-clause (1) of clause 9; (g) the form and fee for an application 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 9; (h) the form in which fresh declaration shall be made under 
clause 14; (i) the form in which a declaration may be made by a person whose name has been 
incorrectly published as editor under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (j) the manner in which a 
Register shall be maintained under sub-clause (1) of clause 29; (k) other particulars relating 
to ownership under clause (j), and any other particulars under item (k) of sub-clause (2) of 
clause 29; (l) the time within which and the particulars in respect of which, an annual statement 
shall be furnished by the publisher or the owner of a publication, to the Press Registrar 
General under item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 31; (m) the manner in which verification may 
be conducted by an officer or auditor under sub-clause (1) of clause 34; (n) the fee for 
verification conducted on the request made by the owner, publisher or any other person 
under sub-clause (3) of clause 34; (o) the form in which, and the time within which, annual 
report may be prepared by the Press Registrar General under clause 35; (p) fee for furnishing 
copies of extracts from the Register and the form and manner in which such copies may be 
furnished under clause 36; (q) any matter relating to books referred to in Chapters III and IV; 
(r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be laid, as soon as they 
are made, before both Houses of Parliament. 
 
3. Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, rules in respect of books referred to in Chapters III and IV, not inconsistent 
with the rules made by the Central Government, as may be necessary or desirable for 
carrying out the objects of the proposed legislation. 
 
4. The rules made by the State Government are required to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
 
5. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure 
and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK  SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to amend and consolidate the laws relating to press and registration of  
books and publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Smt. Ambika Soni, Minister of Information and 
Broadcasting) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GMGIPMRND —3053LS—08-12-2011. 
 
 
 

98 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 24 th February, 2012 from 1100 hours 
to 1245 hours in Committee Room  No. ‘G -074’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shri Tapas Paul 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
11. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
15. Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 

99 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for briefing meeting with the representatives of 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in connection with examination of 
‘The  Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ and 
……xxxxx……..  
 
3. The Chairman, then, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality  of the 
deliberations till the Reports on the Bills are presented to the House. The 
Chairman also took note of the absence of Secretary, Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting from the meeting and desired that prior approval for such 
absence from the mee ting in future should be sought by the Secretary 
himself in conformity with rules.      
 
4. The representative of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
then, briefed the Committee on ‘The Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications Bill, 2011’  giving an outline of the genesis of the Press and 
Registration of Books and Publication Act, 1867, the Print and Media Policy 
1955, subsequent amendments  brought in the Act and guidelines  allowing 
FDI, provisions of the amending legislation inter-alia including definition, title 
of publication, cancellation of publication, furnishing of Annual Statement of 
revenue, provision for penalty for printing or publishing book or publications 
not in conformity with the provisions of the Act, the office of the P ress 
Registrar General, syndication and Foreign Direct Investment norms relating 
to books and publication etc.  
 
 
Sl. No Name Designation 
 
1.  Shri Rajiv Takru  Additional Secretary  
2. Ms. Supriya Sahu Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vijay Sharma Director 
4. Shri T. Jairaj Press Registrar 

100 
 
5. xxxxx………………….xxxxx…………….xxxxx………………..xxxxx…………….xxxxx.  
 
6.  The Members of the Committee during the course of deliberations 
raised pertine nt issues related to the aforesaid Bills and the representative 
responded to the same.  
 
7. xxxxx………………….xxxxx…………….xxxxx……………….xxxxx…………….xxxxx.  
 
  A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to Report. 
 
 
 
 

101 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 25 th June, 2012 from 1500 hours to 
1850 hours in Committee Room ‘G -074’, Parliament Library Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthy 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
14. Shri Salim Ansari 
15. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
16. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
17. Shri Bhushan Lal Jangde 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary  

102 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the 
experts/organizations/stakeholders, in connection with examinations  of 
……xxxxxx…… and ‘The Press and Registration of Books and Publicati ons Bill, 
2011’.  
 
3. xxxxx…………..….xxxxx…..…….…………xxxxx…….………….xxxxx……………xxxxx. 
  
4. After welcoming the Witnesses, the Chairman drew their attention to 
the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
regarding confidentiality  of the deliberations till the report on the subject is 
presented to the House. 
 
5. xxxxx………….….xxxxx……..…….…xxxxx…….….……….xxxxx………………xxxxx. 
 
   
6. The following experts/organisations/stakeholders thereafter deposed 
before the Committee in connection with examination of ‘The Press and 
Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’:- 
 
1. The Times of India Group                           
Mr. Gopal Mohan                                        1520 hrs. to 1540 hrs. 
General Manager, Corporate,  
The Times of India Group 
and colleagues 
 
2. Indian Newspaper Society 
Mr. Naresh Mohan                                       1540 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
Chairman, IRLAC 
and colleagues 
 
3. Mr. Gagan Chhabra                                      1600 hrs. to 1620 hrs. 
Advocate, Supreme Court of India 
 
4. Haryana Editors Guild  
Mr. Satbir Sarwari                                        1620 hrs. to 1640 hrs. 
President, Haryana Union of Journalists 
and colleagues                     
  
7. The aforesaid witnesses deposed on ‘The Press and Registration of 
Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ one by one. The representatives of each of 
the organization/individual during the first instance were welcomed by the 
Committee and their attention drawn to provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
deliberations till the report on the subject is presented to the House. 

103 
 
8. The witnesses put forth their views on the various provisions made in 
the aforesaid legislation. The wit nesses also responded to pertinent queries 
raised by the Members during the course of deliberations. The Chairman 
thanked representatives of each of the organization/individual for appearing 
before the Committee and furnishing valuable information in conne ction with 
the examination of the aforesaid Bill. 
 
[The above witnesses then withdrew] 
 
9. xxxxx………….….xxxxx……..…………xxxxx…….….……….xxxxx……………xxxxx. 
      
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to Report. 

104 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  ----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 st July, 2012 from 1430 
hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Tapas Paul 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Joy Abraham 
13. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
14. Shri Salim Ansari 
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
16. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  Director 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 

105 
 
    
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to hear the views/suggestions of the 
representatives of Press Council of India (PCI) and Registrar of 
Newspapers for India (RNI) on ‘The Press and Registration of Boo ks and 
Publications Bill, 2011’.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of 
Press Council of India on the aforesaid Bill.  The Chairman welcomed 
the representatives of PCI and drew their attention to the provisions of 
Direction 51 of t he Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is 
presented to the House. 
4. The Chairman, PCI at the outset requested the Committee to give 
six months time to enable them to furnish their  views on the 
comprehensive Bill.  The Hon’ble Chairman observed that the 
Committee was in the process of consultations with various 
stakeholders including newspapers organisations on the aforesaid Bill.  
Moreover, the Ministry of Information and Broadcast ing had 
consultations with PCI before bringing legislation to Parliament.  
Besides, PCI is the Appellate Authority and the Committee would like to 
hear their experiences being an Appellate Authority as well as their 
views/suggestions on the various provisions made in the Bill.  As per the 
orders of Hon’ble Speaker, the report on the Bill has to be presented 
during the coming Monsoon Session of Parliament commencing from 
8th August, 2012. As such, the Committee requested Chairman, PCI to 
indicate minimum required time to furnish their views on the Bill to the 
Committee.   
5. Responding to the aforesaid observation of the Committee, the 
representative of  PCI stated that the PCI has expressed its opinion on 
the draft Bill before the current Chairman took over the charge.   
Moreover, most of the members of PCI have also joined after the 
consultation process.  PCI needed adequate time to go through the 
provisions made in the Bill and present their views on the legislation.  
The Chairman, PCI then indicated that m inimum three months’ time 
should be given to the Organisation to furnish their views on the Bill 
which the Committee decided to consider. 
6. In the context of examination of the subject ‘Issues related to 
Paid News’, the Committee took note of the importan t role played by 
the Press Council of India and decided that the PCI should be requested 
to furnish written memorandum. PCI might also be requested to 

106 
 
appear, as a witness before the Committee, in case the Committee 
desire to hear their views. 
 
The representatives of PCI then withdrew. 
The representatives of RNI were then called in. 
7. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of 
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI).  The Chairman welcomed the 
witnesses of RNI and drew their attentio n to the provisions of Direction 
51 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality 
of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House. 
The representatives responded to the various queries raised by 
the Members  during the course of deliberations.  The Chairman then 
thanked the witnesses for expressing their views on the Bill.   
The representatives of RNI then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
8. The Committee then delibe rated on the request of PCI to give 
minimum three months’ time to enable them to furnish their 
considered views on ‘The Press and Registration of Books and 
Publications Bill, 2011’.  The Committee observed that PCI has been 
assigned since its inception the  responsibility of functioning as an 
Appellate Authority for the purposes of the aforesaid legislation.  
Besides, PCI is a statutory body established for the purpose of 
preserving the freedom of press and maintaining and improving the 
standards of newspape rs and news agencies in India.  The Committee 
observed that the views of PCI may be an important input and would 
help the Committee in arriving at meaningful conclusions and making 
suggestions/ recommendations to the Government.  The Committee 
then reviewe d the status of examination of the aforesaid Bill.  The 
Committee noted that the Ministry of Human Resource and 
Development is the administrative Ministry for the purposes of Chapter 
3 and 4 of the legislation relating to Books. As such, consultations with  
the Ministry of Human Resource Development is also required.  The 
Committee may thereafter be getting the written input based on the 
deliberations held so far from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and taking their evidence followed by 
clause-by-clause consideration and finalization of the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee. 

107 
 
9. The Committee noted that as per the first extension accorded by 
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha the report on ‘The Press and Registration of 
Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ has to be presented to the House by 
the last week of the coming Monsoon Session of Parliament 
commencing from 8 th August, 2012.  Keeping in view the aforesaid 
circumstances, the Committee observed that the examination cannot 
be completed by the extended given time.  As such, the Committee 
decided that Hon’ble Speaker might be requested to give further 
extension of ti me for presentation of the report on ‘The Press and 
Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ till the last week of 
winter session of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 
 ANNEXURE-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 th November, 2012 from 
1100 hours to 1215 hours in Committee Room G -074, Ground Floor, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh– Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
9. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
11. Shri Salim Ansari 
12. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
13. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

109 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development  
 
1. Shri Ashok  Thakur Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Ish Joint Secretary (BP&CR) 
3. Shri M.A. Sikander Director, National Book Trust 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
1. Dr. G. Narayan  Raju Joint Secretary and Legislative 
Counsel 
(Legislative Department) 
2. Dr. Suresh Chander Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
(Department of Legal Affairs) 
2. xxxxx…………….xxxxx……………….xxxxx………..xxxxx………….xxxxx.  
 
3. xxxxx………….xxxxx…………….xxxxx……………..xxxxx………….xxxxx.  
 
4. The Committee also decided to give top most priority to the 
examination of ‘The Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 
2011’. 
 
[The representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Dev elopment 
were then called in for oral evidence on ‘The Press and Registration of 
Books and Publications  Bill, 2011’] 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs) to the sitting of 
the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55(1) by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings till the 
Report on the Bill is presented to Parliament. Aft er introduction by 
witnesses, the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development 
briefed the Committee about the mandate of the Ministry with regard to 
the Section on ‘books’ particularly in the context of Chapters III and IV of 
the Bill.  He also elabo rated on issues concerning the HRD Ministry which 
inter-alia included sensitizing State Governments on the implications of 
the proposed amendments, coordination with State Governments for 
registration of books, provisions relating to banning of books on th e 

110 
 
grounds of national security, inclusion of word ‘electronic -form’ in the 
definition of books in the proposed legislation, etc.  During the course of 
deliberations, Members raised various pertinent issues relating to the Bill 
and the representatives of th e Ministry responded to the same.  At the 
end, the Chairman directed the Ministry to furnish any additional 
information germane to the subject.   
 
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to Report. 

111 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 7 th December, 2012 from 1500 
hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
16. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
17. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
18. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
19. Shri Salim Ansari 
20. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
21. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
22. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
4. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
5. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

112 
 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
 
1. Shri Jitendra Shankar 
Mathur 
Additional Secretary 
2. Shri K. Ganesan Press Registrar, Registrar of 
Newspapers for India 
3. Shri Anurag Srivastava Joint Secretary (P&A) 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) 
1. Dr. S.S. Chahar Additional Secretary 
(Legislative Department) 
2. Dr. G. Narayan Raju Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
3. Shri Diwakar Singh Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri 
Rajendra Agrawal, a Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman 
for the sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. xxxxx…………….xxxxx……………xxxxxx………….xxxxx…………..xxxxxx. 
 
(The witnesses were then called in) 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of 
Information and Broadcasting and Law and Justice and drew their 
attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok S abha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations till the 
Report on the Bill is presented to the House.  
 
5. After their introduction to the Committee, the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting elaborated on the various 

113 
 
provisions made under the Bill. The Committee sought clarifications 
about important issues like limits of FDI in print media, implications of 
the provisions of ‘known foreign publications’ and facsimile editions, 
provisions relating to penalties and the need for ensuring greater 
coordination with the Ministries of Communications and Information 
Technology and Human Resource Development etc.  These were replied 
to by the witnesses. The representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 
also clarified on the related legal aspects. 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to Report. 

114 
 
ANNEXURE VI 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18th December, 2012 from 
1500 hours to 15 30 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
23. Shri Abdul Rahman 
24. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
25. Shri Raj Babbar 
26. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
27. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
28. Shri Sadashivrrao D. Mandlik 
29. Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
30. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
31. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
 
32. Shri Salim Ansari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
6. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
8. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 

115 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda for the 
sitting. 
  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report 
on ‘The Press and Registration of Books and Publication Bill, 2011’  of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting . The Committee adopted 
the same without any modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Report in the light of the factual verification by 
the concerned Ministry and present the same to the House.  
 
4. xxxxx…………………….xxxxxx……………………..xxxxxx……………….xxxxx. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to Report. 