 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
39 


 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
CONTENTS 

 
 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-13 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
14-26 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
27 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
28-34 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
35-42 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held on 7th December, 2012………. 
 
43-44 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Thirty -fourth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
45 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
 3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
10. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
11. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
12. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13. Shri Tapas Paul 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
  29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Additional Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Sandip Prasad - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (201 2-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this T hirty-ninth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for 
Grants (2012 -13)’ of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Thirty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 2 May , 201 2. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology furnished their 
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty -fourth 
Report on 8 August, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
7th December, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
17 December, 2012                                                                               Standing Committee on 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty -fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2012 -13)‟ relating to the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Thirty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 2nd May, 2012. It contained 25 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations  
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24 and 
25 
 
 Total 15 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 13  
 Total 01 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4, 5, 8, 9 and 15   
 Total 05 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl y of 
the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  10, 17, 20 and 23  
 Total 04 
 Chapter V 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations  accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken 
replies to the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-V of this Report 
should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
 
A. Position of Outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee have been repetitively raising concern over the huge 
pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs), especially regarding those 
implementing agencies who have been issued only one installment and 
never demanded the subse quent installments and also did not bother 
to furnish the Utilization Certificates. The Department has submitted 
that as on 31st December, 2011, there are 490 UCs pending 
amounting to ` 925.08 crore and 17 UCs (single installment) 
amounting to ` 18.72 cror e which are pending with the implementing 
agencies.   
 
The Committee find from the written note furnished by the Department 
that a lot of efforts are being made on the part of the Department for 
liquidating pending Utilisation Certificates/Unspent Balances  with the 
implementing agencies.   As a result of the initiatives taken by the 
Department 17 UCs (single installment) amounting to ` 18.72 crore are 
pending as compared to ` 72 UCs amounting to ` 46.95 crore which 
were pending on 31.12.2009.  With regard t o overall position of 
pendency of Utilisation Certificates, the pendency has declined to 490 
amounting to ` 925.08 crore as on 31.3.2012 as compared to 625 UCs 
amounting to `1107.77 crore as on 01.04.2011.  The Committee 
understand that on 1.4.2012 more UC s would become due thereby 
negating the impact of clearing pendency by the Department. The 
Committee feel that the scenario of pendency of UCs on the part of the 
implementing agencies indicates the problems in implementation of 
various projects by the impl ementing agencies.  Thus, there is an 
urgent need to review the implementation of the programmes 
particularly the   National e -Governance Plan for which major part of 
the allocation is being earmarked.  Not only that there is a need to put 
in place a system whereby the penalty clause is included in the various 
agreements. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
implementation of the programmes should be evaluated by some 
independent agency so as to find out the real issues involved in 
implementation of th e programmes which would help the Department 
in identifying the grey areas.  The evaluation followed by the desired 

 
 
corrective initiatives would certainly pace up the implementation of the 
various programmes.  The Committee hope that the Department would 
act on the suggested lines.   
 
The Department in their written reply have informed that for ongoing 
projects, interest after accrued by the implementing agency is also 
taken into account as part of the total outlay of the project.  In this 
connection, the Committee would like to be apprised about the system 
of keeping unspent balances as well as the amount of interest accrued 
year-wise.  The information may be furnished to the Committee 
State/UT wise.  The Committee in this connection may also like to 
emphasise that the real purpose of allocating outlay is not to earn 
interest on the outlay, instead the real purpose is effective 
implementation of the programme.  The earnest initiatives need to be 
taken to ensure effective implementation of the programmes 
particularly when IT programmes are the priority programmes of the 
Government.” 
 
7. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note have stated as under:- 
“The following actions have been taken by DeitY in view of the 
recommendation of the Committee relating to outstanding UCs: 
 
(i)   As per the prescribed guidelines governing Grant -in-Aid, the 
grantee institutions are required to maintain separate audited 
accounts for the project. If it is found expedient to keep a part or 
whole of the grant in a bank account earning interest, the 
interest thus earned should be reported to this Department. The 
interest so earned would be treated as a credit to the grantee to 
be adjusted towards future installments. Accordingly, on release 
of grants -in-aid, the details are entered in the “UC Monitoring 
System” immediately to take care of monitoring of unspent 
balances with grantee institutions from the date of issue of 
sanction/release of funds. Monitoring of unspent balances and 
UCs due is made through in -built statements generated though 
the UC Monitori ng System. The statements generated include 
agency-wise, GC-wise, State/UT-wise reports containing amount 
released, UC received, UC due and unspent balance with the 
implementing agencies. A State/UT -wise statement w.r.t. 
unspent balances as on 03.08.2012 is placed at Annexure-I.  
(ii)  Unspent balance and interest, if any, available/accrued with the 
implementing agency is accounted for, while releasing every 
subsequent installment. 
(iii)  Apart from the recommendation of Project Review and Steering 
Group (P RSG) for release of next installment of grants -in-aid 
(GIA), which is linked to the physical progress of the project, 
before releasing the subsequent installments of GIA, the 
submission of utilization of previous grants in the project is 
invariably insisted upon and monitored by the PRSG as well as 
by the Department. 
(iv)  The terms and conditions governing Grant in aid also binds the 
grantee institutions for spending the grant amount of the project 
within the specified time and also surrendering any portio n of 
the grant which is not ultimately required for expenditure for the 
approved purposes.  

 
 
(v)   All possible measures are being taken to accelerate the pace of 
implementation of various projects under NeGP. State Action 
Plans have been formulated by all State / UTs under the 
directions of DeitY which are reviewed at the Secretary level and 
impediments in the implementation process are being reviewed 
and resolved. Also an expert Group constituted by the PMs 
Committee on NeGP under the Chairmanship of Shri Sam 
Pitroda, is reviewing NeGP to devise an action plan for speedy 
implementation of the programme.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
(vi)  The schemes under e -Governance are being implemented by 
the State Government. Before releasing the  subsequent 
installments of GIA, the utilization of previous grants in the 
project are also insisted upon. The pendency of UCs has been 
taken up on individual basis with all agencies and the respective 
state governments which has yielded good results. 
(vii)  Coordinated efforts have resulted in liquidation of large number 
of UCs. The total amount of liquidation of UCs during the period 
1.4.2012 to 30.06.2012 in respect of sanctions issued (I) up to 
31.03.2011 for which UCs due and (II) for the period 01.04. 2011 
to 30.06.2012 for which UCs not due is  given below: 
 
  
S. 
No. 
Particulars Amount 
(` in crore) 
(I) Amount liquidated for which UCs are due 
(Sanctions issued up to 31.03.2011) 
 
145.03 
(II) Amount liquidated for which UCs are not due 
(a) Sanctions issued from 1.4.2011 to 
31.03.2012 
(b) Sanctions issued from 1.4.2012 to 
30.06.2012 
 
183.89 
12.12 
 Total liquidated amount 341.04 
 
8. Having observed huge amount of money lying as unspent balances 
and large number of Utilisation Certificates(UCs) pending  on the part of 
implementing agencies, the Committee had stressed on the urgent need 
for review of the implementation of programmes more particularly that of 
the National e -governance plan for which major part of the allocation is 
being earmarked.  In this  regard, the Committee had desired to know the 
system of keeping unspent balances as well as the amount of interest 
accrued year -wise in respect of States and Union Territories.  The 
Department in their action taken reply, instead of furnishing State -wise 
details of interest accrued has  simply furnished information on State-wise 
position of UCs which  does not give any deta il on the interest accrued 

 
 
year-wise in respect of States/ Union Territories. Even a l ook at the               
State-wise position of UCs also reveals that  the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Dara Nagar Haveli and Daman Diu have not utilized the amounts 
sanctioned to them. While taking serious note of the above, the Committee 
would like to once again exhort the Department to furnish complete 
information in this regard.  
Further, the Department has not responded to the part of the 
recommendation of the Committee whereby it had been recommended that 
the Ministry should incorporate the penalty clause in the various 
agreements.   In view of the huge pendency over the years, the Committee 
feel that the inclusion of penalty clause would definitely help in monitoring 
of implementation of projects and quick liquidation of pending UCs.  
Therefore, the Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendati on, 
once again exhort the Department to put in place a system  whereby the 
penalty clause is included in various agreements whil e implementing the 
programmes. The Committee also expect that replies of the Government 
are complete and comprehensive to their recommendations. 
 
 
B. National e- Governance Plan (NeGP) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that National e -Governance Plan is one of the 
flagship programme of the Department for which substantial part of 
the allocation under Plan schemes is being provided.  So far as the 
financial achievement during the Eleventh Plan is conce rned, the 
Committee observe that there are huge variations between the 
proposed allocations, allocations provided at Budget Estimates stage, 
Revised Estimates stage and the expenditure met. ` 6106.43 crore 
were proposed during the Eleventh Plan and the all ocations provided 
at Budget Estimates stage were ` 4617.13 crore.  The allocations at 
Budget Estimates stage were then reduced to ` 2533.49 crore at 
Revised Estimates stage.  Even the reduced allocations could not be 
utilised which is apparent from the dat a furnished by the Department.  
`1856.64 crore could be utilised which is 40.21 percent of the BE 

 
 
allocations and 73.28 percent of the RE allocations.  The aforesaid 
analysis of the financial performance under NeGP clearly indicates that 
there are serious problems in implementation of the programme.  The 
component wise analysis is done in the subsequent paras of the 
Report. 
 
The Committee have consistently been raising concern over shifting of 
deadlines of implementation of various components of e -Governance 
programmes viz. Common Service Centres (CSCs), State Wide Area 
Network (SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs) and Mission Mode Project 
(MMPs).  Under CSCs, the target was for setting up of one lakh CSCs in 
various States.  In spite of shifting the deadline for several times, out of 
the target of one lakh CSCs, 97871 CSCs could be established till 
31.12.2011.  Not only that out of 97871 CSCs that could be established 
around 88,000 CSCs could be made operational in the three States.  
Besides, only 68,754 CSCs co uld be connected by the internet.   Now, 
the deadline for completing the task of one lakh CSCs has been shifted 
to March, 2013.  State Wide Area Network (SWAN) could be made 
operational in 30 States/UTs and now the deadline has been shifted to 
March, 2013.   In respect of the State Data Centres (SDCs), 16 SDCs 
have been declared operational and now the extended deadline is by 
March, 2013.  With regard to MMP, NSDG target completion date is 
January, 2014, NLRMP is expected to be completed in August, 2016 
and for Treasuries, Municipalities, Commercial Taxes, the completion 
date is 2013-14.  The target date for one of the ambitious programme 
Gram Panchayat is still to be firmed up.  With regard to other 
important MMPs like, employment exchange, public distributi on 
system, health and education, the target dates have not been 
indicated.  The MMPs are still at the conceptual/design and 
development stages. The shifting of deadlines of various components 
of this programme has been the major area of concern highlighted  by 
the Committee in the respective reports.  The Department has 
repeatedly been furnishing the same reasons which include constraints 
related to power connectivity and difficult location.  
 
The Committee have consistently been recommending use of alternate 
sources of energy particularly solar energy to address to the issue of 
power constraint. Even when the onus for power and power back up in 
case of CSCs was placed on the service providers, the Department has 
now stated that the level of power shortages i n some States is much 
more than it was envisaged.  The Committee strongly feel that more 
initiatives need to be taken on the R&D front to make the alternate 
energy systems viable as well as cost effective.  With regard to 
broadband connectivity scenario, t he Committee find that overall 
position with regard to broadband connectivity in the country is not so 
satisfactory.  The Committee in the context of examination of 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Telecommunications have 
been informed that there ar e 13.54 million broadband connections as 
on February, 2012 against the target of 20 million broadband 
subscribers by 2010.  With regard to telecom connectivity, the 
challenges are to improve teledensity in rural areas as well as to cover 
the difficult terr ains.  The Committee strongly feel that the issue of 
connectivity need to be taken in a holistic way.  Since various 
Departments of the Union Government particularly the Department of 
Telecommunications and its PSUs, BSNL and MTNL, and private sector 
service providers are involved in the task, the coordinated approach 

 
 
need to be taken to address the issue.  The Committee would like the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology to take up the 
issue of connectivity with the respective Ministries/St ate 
Governments/Telecom Service Providers as an integrated approach 
need to be taken to address the issue.  The concerted action on the 
suggested line should be taken by the Department which would 
certainly help to pace up the implementation of various components of 
NeGP.  Besides, the penalty clause for delay in implementation of 
various projects should be included in the agreements which would 
ensure timely implementation of the various projects being 
implemented by the public/private sector agencies.” 
 
10. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“All possible measures are being taken to accelerate the pace of 
implementation of various projects under NeGP. State Action Plans 
have been formulated by all States / UTs under the directions of DeitY 
which are reviewed at the Secretary level every quarter and 
impediments in the implementation process are being reviewed and 
resolved. Also, an Expert Group constituted by the PM‟s Committee on 
NeGP under the Chairmanship of Shri Sam Pitroda is reviewing NeGP to 
devise an action plan for speedy implementation of the program.  
 
DeitY is preparing a special plan for addressing the issues of 
connectivity and power availability which impact the rollout of t he 
scheme in remote and rural areas. NOFN and solar power are being 
explored as viable options for addressing these issues.  
 
Regular meetings with BSNL are being held to address the connectivity 
issue. Also, e -District Programme which is envisaged to give  further 
impetus to the CSC programme is being implemented on a priority 
basis.” 
 
11. The Committee have consistently been raising concern over the poor 
utilization of allocations and continuous shifting of deadlines of various 
components under the flagship programme of National e-Governance Plan. 
Since various Departments of the Union Government such as Department 
of Telecommunications and PSUs under its administrative control such as 
BSNL, MTNL and other private service providers are involved in issues 
relating to power and connectivity  the Committee had recommended the 
Department to take up the se issues with these organizations/ agencies. 
The Department, however, in their action taken reply, has routinely 
mentioned that they are holding regular meetings  with BSNL to address 
the connectivity issue. The Committee feel that taking up the matter only 

 
 
with BSNL and not with other agencies which have an equally important 
role to play in ensuring power and connectivity will not improve the 
situation. Therefore,  while reiterating their earlier recommendation , the 
Committee would like the Department to follow an integrated approach to 
address the issue and take up the matter of connectivity and power with 
all concerned Ministries/State Governments/Telecom service providers. In 
this connection, the Committee, as emphasized in the  recommendation 
relating to UCs vide para 8  above, would also like the Department to 
consider inclusion of penalty clause in the implementation of the 
programme to ensure better implementation. 
 
C. Bharat Nirman Common Service Centre 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been apprised that the Government of India has 
proposed to upscale the existing scheme of 1 lakh CSCs to 2.50 lakh 
CSCs so as to set up one Bharat Nirman Common Service Centre at 
each Panchayat.  The Department had submitted a note for the 
Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure which considered the proposal 
and referred it to a Group of Ministers (GoM).  The GoM had its f irst 
meeting in January, 2012.  The next meeting of the GoM is expected 
soon.  The Committee appreciate the aforesaid proposal of the 
Government and would like the Department to pursue further so that 
the project is finally approved and execution starts du ring the year 
2012.  However, the Department need to address basic issues 
confronting implementation of CSCs which include power and 
connectivity constraints.  Since the CSCs are proposed to be set up at 
each Panchayat, the Committee may like to recommend that some sort 
of coordinating mechanism with Panchayats should be formulated in 
the guidelines which would help in speedy execution of the 
Programme.” 
 
13. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“The issues relating to power and connectivity constraints with regard 
to existing CSCs are being addressed on a priority basis. A Working 
Group under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary eGov is 
regularly reviewing the provision of connectivity to CSCs through BSNL. 
2,500 VSATs have also been sanctioned for CSCs in the North East and 
other remote areas for connectivity. DeitY has also initiated 
discussions with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for 

 
 
exploring provision of alternate power s ources to CSCs in the form of 
solar power and other renewable energy schemes.” 
 
14. In the context of Government of India’s proposal to upscale the 
existing scheme of 1 lakh CSCs to 2.50 lakh CSCs so as to set up one 
Bharat Nirman Common Service Centre at each Panchayat the Committee 
had recommended that some sort of co -coordinating mechanism with the 
panchayats should be formulated in the guidelines for speedy execution of 
the programmes.  The Department instead of furnishing any information 
with regard to  above recommendation of the Committee has cho sen to be 
silent on the issue. Therefore, the Committee once again reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and exhort the Department to take necessary 
steps for formulation of some sort of coordinating mechanism  with 
Panchayats in the guidelines so that one Bharat Nirman Common Service 
Centres at each Panchayat becomes a reality.   
 
D. Adequate manpower in National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have consistently been raising the issue of bridging 
the gap between the required and the existing manpower at various 
levels in their various Reports.  In spite of that, the Committee 
understand that the Demand of the requirement for addit ional 
manpower has still to be worked out by NIC.  Now, the Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani to examine the 
demand/requirement for additional requirements has been set up 
which is going to submit its Report within three months.  The  
Committee strongly emphasise that the manpower in NIC is the 
immediate concern which need to be addressed on an urgent basis by 
the Government particularly keeping in view the NIC mandate of 
providing wide range of e -governance, infrastructure and service s in 
the country at various levels right from Centre to the District level.  
Now, when the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan 
Nilekani is looking into the matter of demand/requirement of additional 
manpower and the Committee is likely to submi t its report in three 
months, the concrete initiatives to meet the gap between the required 
and the existing manpower need to be taken urgently by the 
Government.  The roadmap to fill up the vacancies within the 
stipulated timeframe should be formulated by NIC and the Department 

 
 
of Electronics and Information Technology and the Committee apprised 
accordingly.” 
 
16. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“Some of NIC‟s existing technical staf f requirements for application 
development and handholding are met through outsourced manpower. 
Few initiatives taken by the Department to resolve the problem of 
manpower are as follows: 
 
(i) Proposal for continuation of 265 posts for Data Centres is under  
process. 
  
(ii)  Regarding manpower for enhancing security of NICNET, a 
document has been prepared for approval. 
  
(iii)  For extension of manpower at the Block level, a EFC proposal is 
being prepared.” 
 
17. Stressing on the need for taking concrete initiatives to bridge the gap 
between the required and existing manpower of NIC at various levels, the  
Committee had asked the NIC and the Department to formulate the 
roadmap for filling  up the vacancies within a  stipulated timeframe.  
However, the action taken reply of the Department shows that  NIC is yet 
to sort out the issue of manpower shortage as  some of NIC’s existing 
technical staff requirements for application development and handholding 
are being met th rough outsourced manpower and the proposal for 
continuation of 265 posts for Data Centers is still under process.  What is 
more disheartening to note is that for manpower at block level, the matter 
is still at proposal stage. The Department should have by far finalized the 
manpower requirement in NIC particularly when a Committee i.e the 
Nandan Nilkeni Committee had been constituted to look into the matter of 
demand/requirement of additional manpower in NIC. While expressing 
their displeasure over the lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Department in dealing with the issue, the Committee once again reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and ex pect the Department to fill up all the 

 
 
vacancies in NIC within a stipulated timeframe so that the work of NIC 
does not suffer due to shortage of manpower. The Committee also desire 
the Department to furnish the details of the Nilekani Report in the matter 
and follow-up action thereon. 
 
E. e-Industry (IT-ITeS) 
 
Software Technology Park of India (STPI) and Electronics Hardware 
Technology Parks (EHTP) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note with concern that though the exports from 
STP/EHTP units have been increasing over the years, yet the number of 
new STP/EHTP units being registered are found to be decreasing every 
year.  When asked about any study being conducted to e valuate the 
feasibility of the registered STP/EHTP and about the details of the 
STP/EHTP that are functioning properly, the Department has simply 
stated that as per STPI, it was evident that SME‟s STP units would be 
hit by withdrawal of Income Tax benefits  under Section 10A w.e.f 1st 
April 2011, therefore no study was conducted. However, a Non Profit 
Linked incentive scheme has been proposed for MSMEs STP units.  The 
reply of the Department reflects a non serious attitude especially when 
exports from these units have generated a revenue of ` 3,27,764 crore 
in just one year.  The Committee feel that the Department should have 
conducted a study on STP/EHTP specially after being hit by the 
withdrawal of Tax benefits units so that important issues with regard to 
effects of withdrawal of tax regime would have emerged in turn 
helping the Department to work out a proper strategy to deal with 
reducing number of STP/EHPT units.  
 
Further, with regard to the strategy of the Department to tackle the 
situation emerging out of withdrawal of tax holiday from STPI from 1 
April, 2011 and increase in Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT), the 
Committee had  earlier been informed about three proposals (i) 
Preparation of non-profit link incentive scheme for STPI registered units 
(ii) Strengthening of the present induction programme of STPI units for 
business incubation and entrepreneurial development for startup units, 
and (iii) Establishment of a National Productivity Network by STPI in 
association with DeitY. On seeing that the Departme nt has not worked 
on these three proposals, the Committee in their Twenty -seventh 
Report had recommended the Department to ensure that the aforesaid 
three proposed initiatives are given utmost importance.  The 
Committee  note that while the draft Detailed Project Report (DPR) for 
the Non -Profit Linked Incentive Scheme for SME STP units has been 
prepared and is being processed for approval of the Competent 
Authority;  with regard to „Strengthening of the present incubation 
Programme of STPI units for busines s incubation and entrepreneurial 
development for start up units, the programme is still to be designed; 
and for establishment of a National Productivity Network(NPN), STPI is 
perusing the matter with E -Infrastructure Division, DeitY.  The 
Committee find th e progress to be extremely slow and rather non -

 
 
satisfactory.  Keeping in view the fact that the revenue generated by 
these units through exports is increasing every year, there is an urgent 
need to pay attention to the aforesaid proposed initiatives and ot her 
innovative measures so as to improve the competitive edge of these 
units.  The Committee, therefore, strongly exhort the Department to 
act swiftly on the above three proposed initiatives during 2012 -13 so 
that the proposals can take concrete shape and STPs/EHTPs really 
benefit from these initiatives. The details of progress made in each of 
the initiatives may be furnished within three months of presentation of 
this Report.”  
 
19. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“Software Technology Park of India (STPI) and Electronics Hardware 
Technology Parks (EHTP) - The details of progress made in each of the 
initiatives is as follows:  
 
 Preparation of Performance linked incentive scheme for STP  
registered units to ensure accelerated growth of IT/ITES exports 
and for dispersal of IT Industry in Tier II & III cities across the 
country and for supporting MSME sector, is under consideration 
of this Department as some modifications suggested by DeitY  
are being incorporated in the revised Detailed Project Report 
(DPR). 
 Establishment of a National Productivity Network (NPN) - A 
presentation was made by STPI to Productivity Enhancement 
Group, DeitY during April 2012. Based on the observations and 
feedback, the same was revised and resubmitted to DeitY.  The 
basic model has been accepted by DeitY.  This is now being 
dealt by the Productivity Enhancement Group, DeitY. 
 Strengthening of the present Incubation Programme of STPI 
units - This programme was initially handled by R&D in IT Group, 
DeitY.  However, STPI has now proposed to include the same as 
a component of the proposed performance linked incentive 
scheme.” 
 
20. Keeping in view the fact that the revenue generated by the STPI 
units is increasing every year and the competitive edge of these units need 
to be improved, the Committee had recommended the Department to act 
swiftly on the three proposed initiatives (i) Preparation of non-profit linked 
incentive scheme for STPI registered units (ii) Establishme nt of a National 
Productivity Network by STPI in association with DeitY and (iii) 
Strengthening of the present induction programme of STPI units for 
business incubation and entrepreneurial development for start  up units. 

 
 
However, the action taken reply of the Department shows that the matter 
has not progressed much from the stage where it was. Whereas action in 
respect of initiatives at (i) and (ii) above are still at consideration and 
approval stage; the Department after an elapse of considerable time has 
now proposed to include the incentives relating to strengthening of 
present incubation programme of STPI in the first set of initiatives i.e. 
performance linked incentive scheme.   The Committee feel that if it had to 
be incorporated in performance linked incentive scheme, the same could 
have been done at the first instance without wasting much of precious 
time.  While deploring the delay in taking up the above initiatives and 
unprofessional manner in which the Department has addressed the issue, 
the Commit tee reiterate their earlier recommendation and ex pect the 
Department to take these incentives seriously and expeditiously so that 
STPs/HTPs really benefit from these incentives.  
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Statement of the Minister under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Twenty -third Report of the Committee on „Demands for Grants          
(2011-12)‟ was presented to the House on 4th August, 2011. Under Direction 73A of 
the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister concerned shall make once in six 
months a statement in the House regarding the status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the Report of Departmentally Related Standing 
Committees with regard to his Ministry. In the present case, the Minister has not 
made a statement although stipulated time has elapsed. The Committee had 
observed a similar delay with regard to the Statement on Seventh Report on 
Demands for Grants (2010 -11). Hen ce, the Committee strongly exhort the 
Department to ensure that the statement is made expeditiously to the House in 
pursuance of the aforesaid Direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted. It is also stated that the 
statement has been made by Hon‟ble MoS(P) in the Rajya Sabha on 11.05.2012 and 
in the Lok Sabha on 16.05.2012. 
 
 
Broad Analysis of the Budgetary allocations and Utilization of funds by  the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) 
 
(i) Overview of Eleventh Five Year Plan allocations and utilizations 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
  While reviewing the financial achievement of the Department during the 
Eleventh Plan as a whole, the Committee find huge variation between the proposed 
allocations, allocations earmarked at Budget Estimates Stage, Revised Estimate 
Stage and the actual expenditure reported thereto.  Out of the total allocations of ` 
21835.89 crore proposed for the Eleventh Plan, the allocations made at Budget 
Estimates Stage were for     ` 11370 crore which were reduced to ` 10272.40 crore 
at Revised Estimates Stage.  The actual expenditure was ` 9480.90 crore i.e. 83.31 
percent of the allocations earmarked at Budget Estimates Stage. Coming to the 
projections made for the Twelfth P lan, the Committee note that ` 81378.45 crore 
have been projected by the Department for the Twelfth Plan which is more than 
eight times of the outlay utilized during the Eleventh Plan.  The aforesaid gaps in 
allocations projected and earmarked at various l evels indicates unrealistic planning 
in the Department.   
 
With regard to the basis for projecting such a higher allocation for the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan, the Committee during the course of deliberations have been 
informed that the projected outlay is bas ed on the recommendations of the 
„Working Group‟.  The Secretary during the course of deliberations while 
acknowledging that the gap between the projections and the allocations are quite 
high, has stated that the Working group had projected the requirement  without 
relating it to overall availability of resources with the Government of India or with 
the past performances possibly.  The aforesaid statement of the Secretary clearly 

 
 
indicates the impractical approach of the Department while making the projectio ns.  
The recommendations of the „Working Group‟ need to be analysed by the 
Department keeping in view their capacity to absorb the outlay, approval status of 
programmes and the past trends of expenditure before placing projections for 
schemes before Planni ng Commission/Ministry of Finance for the Five Year Plan as 
well as Annual Plan which has not been undertaken by the Ministry as is apparent 
from the response of the Secretary.  Not only that, the Department has not been 
able to justify the reasons for see king enhanced allocations for the Department 
during the Twelfth Plan which is apparent from the written note whereby it has been 
stated that the targets under planned schemes correspond to the approved 
schemes and reductions in allocations has no bearing in the targets laid down in the 
Outcome Budget (2012-13). 
 
The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates unrealistic planning on the part of the 
Department which result into blocking of country‟s scarce resources particularly 
when other critical projects of the Government are starving for funds.  While 
acknowledging the imperative need of IT projects and programmes particularly the 
flagship e -governance programmes, the Committee strongly emphasise the 
Department to increase their capacity of absorption of outlay by strict monitoring 
and streamlining the various procedures for implementation of programmes.  
Moreover there is a need to place realistic projections to the Planning Commission 
so that the scarce resources are not blocked in a particular year.  The Commi ttee 
desire that their observations should be kept in mind while making projections for 
the subsequent years.  Besides, the Department need to ensure utilisation of the 
allocated resources by ensuring effective implementation of various programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Observations of the Committee have been noted. For proper and full 
utilization of plan funds approved in BE 2012 -13, Annual Action Plan and Monthly 
Expenditure Plan in respect of each Plan Scheme have been prepared indicating 
month-wise and quarter -wise targets both in physical and financial terms. 
Achievements against the targets are being monitored/reviewed every month by 
Secretary, DeitY. 
 
Budgetary allocation for North-Eastern Region  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
 As far as the utilisation of outlay in the North Eastern region is concerned, the 
Committee find that during each year of the Eleventh Plan, there has been shortfall 
in utilisation of the allocations made for the region.  In fact, only 83 percent of the 
allocations made  at RE stage could be utilised.  The Committee note that the 
targets set under various Schemes, carried out in North -East Region, during the 
entire Eleventh Plan, have not been met by most of the States.  The Committee are 
given to understand that lack of connectivity in remote areas continues to be the 
biggest challenge.  The Committee emphasise that adequate steps need to taken to 
improve the situation of implementation of Schemes in the North -Eastern Region. 
For this, the Committee recommend that the Dep artment should coordinate with 
other Departments to sort out the impediments such as connectivity in remote 
areas and ensure that the benefits of IT reaches to every nook and corner of this 
region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The department is taking all pos sible steps for speedy implementation of the 
projects in the North Eastern Region. Regular follow -up with BSNL is undertaken to 

 
 
improve connectivity in the North -Eastern region. In addition DeitY has organized 
workshops, meetings and seminars for capacity building in the North Eastern region. 
A special meeting for the North Eastern states was conducted in June, 2012 in 
Shillong at the level of MoS to specifically address the issues pertaining to this area. 
Detailed State Action Plans have been prepared by e ach State / UT under the 
directions of DeitY and are being reviewed quarterly for monitoring the progress. 
 
 
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Secretary during the course of deliberations shared the success of „Mee-
sewa‟ in Andhra Pradesh whereby various services like providing land records were 
being provided to the masses.  The Committee here may like to emphasize that the 
good practices of various State Governments with regard to implementation of e -
Governance Programme need to be replicated in the under -performing States.  The 
Department need to work out a structured mechanism to find out the good 
practices of various State Governments and UTs with regard to e -Governance 
Programme.  Besides, the Committee obs erve that lack of computerized updated 
land records are leading to irregularities in purchase/sale of land and resulting into 
piling up of court cases in various States particularly in the metropolitan cities like 
Delhi and NCR areas.  There is an urgent n eed to replicate the good practices of 
various pioneering States.  The Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology should take up this issue with the respective State Governments to 
address the aforesaid problem. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Integrated Framework has been prepared under the e -District MMP which 
covers replication and rapid rollout of successful initiatives within and across states 
/ UTs. It also aims at developing synergies between the different components of the 
core infrastructure developed under NeGP. This has been shared with the States / 
UTs. 
 
Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 (EDS Bill, 2011) mandates that 
the Central Government, State Governments and public authorities shall deliver all 
public services by electronic mode within five years, conditionally extendable by a 
period of three years from the commencement of the Act.  The aforesaid proposed 
legislation has been referred to the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
for examination and report to the House. The Committee is undertaking 
examination in consultation with th e State Governments and various stakeholders 
and would firm up their recommendations/observations after detailed deliberations. 
When the Committee raised the issue of making the Electronic Delivery of Services 
mandatory in the existing scenario of power and connectivity constraints during the 
course of examination of Demands of Grants (2012 -13), the Department has 
proposed the use of cloud computing, increased use of laptop computers and hand 
held mobile devices as solution to the connectivity constraints.  Here, the 
Committee may like the Department to clarify how the laptop computers and hand 
held mobile devices can provide solution for electronic delivery of services without 
having the broadband connectivity.  On the suggestion of cloud computing, the 
Committee find that internationally also the cloud computing is still at the 
conceptual stage.  The Committee observe that the solution lies only by improving 

 
 
the overall telecom connectivity and broadband connectivity scenario in the country 
which can pace u p implementation of the various components of e -Governance 
Programme thereby making electronic delivery of public services a reality in the 
country.  As stated above, there is an urgent need to address the issue of 
connectivity in coordination with various  stakeholders, State Governments, Public 
Sector Undertakings and all concerned.  
. 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Knowledge Network which is in advanced stage of implementation 
along with Bharat optical fibre Network which is proposed to be completed by  
December 2013 will largely address the issue of Broadband Connectivity. 
 
The issues relating to connectivity constraints with regard to existing CSCs 
are being addressed on a priority basis. A Working Group under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary e Gov is regularly reviewing the provision of connectivity to 
CSCs through BSNL. 2,500 VSATs have also been sanctioned for CSCs in the North 
East and other remote areas for connectivity. 
 
National Policy on Electronics 2011 (NPE) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that the draft „National Policy on Electronics 2011 (NPE)‟ 
has been finalized in October, 2011 and put up in public domain for consultations.  
The Committee further note that the draft policy includes some important features 
such as (a)emphasis on multi -fold growth in production, investment and 
employment to achieve a turnover of about USD 400 billion by 2020 involving an 
investment of about USD 100 billion and employment opportunities to around 28 
million people at various levels in ESDM sector, (b) increasing the export from USD 
5.5 billion to USD 80 billion by 2020; (c) Creating a complete secure cyber eco -
system in the strategic use of electronics; (d)  encouraging LED lighting solutions 
especially in rural markets through innovati ve products like solar LED lamps, public 
places like street lighting, traffic lights etc. to promote the manufacture of LEDs and 
LED lights; (e) creating an eco -system for manufacture of set -top boxes and other 
broadcast equipment as part of the digitaliza tion of the broadcast network; (e) 
setting up of NEM with industry participation, as an institutional mechanism to 
formulate policy, to implement approved policy and to promote "Brand India" in 
Electronics; etc. The Committee strongly feel that each of the  above initiatives if 
implemented in the right earnest would totally change the face of Electronics and IT 
scenario of the country. While appreciating the Department's endeavour in bringing 
in such a comprehensive and all inclusive draft, the Committee rec ommend  that 
the draft policy should not remain just on paper but  modalities to implement each 
of the objectives should be worked out by the Department for achieving the 
targeted result, so that  India emerges as a recognised and  powerful country  in 
Electronics and IT sector, a force to reckon with in the world.”  
. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The draft NPE was put up on website of Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology ( www.mit.gov.in) for public consultation. Based on the 
inputs received, a draft Cabinet Note was prepared and circulated for Inter -
Ministerial consultations. The comments received were examined and incorporated 
in the Note. A final Cabinet Note prepared after Inter -Ministerial consultations has 
been submitted for consideration of the Cabinet on 5th July, 2012. The six key 
recommendations listed in ATN for para 10 above form part of the NPE. The 

 
 
Department has also been renamed as “Department of Electronics and Information  
Technology” (DeitY). 
 
Research and Development (R&D) initiatives with regard to Set Top Boxes 
required for digitization of cable TV 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 
The Committee find that creating an eco -system for manufacturing of set top 
boxes and other broadcasting equipments as part of the digitalization of the 
broadcasting network is one of the component of the aforesaid draft National Policy 
on Electronics, 201 1.  The Committee further note that the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Amendment legislation for introduction of Digital Addressable 
System (DAS) has recently been enacted.  As per the Act, the Ministry has notified 
the dates for switching over to digital addressable system from analogue cable 
services by December, 2014.  The Committee understand that following the 
enactment of the above legislation making digitalization mandatory, there is an 
ongoing demand for set top boxes in future and there will be large scale demand for 
Set Top Boxes to meet the requirement.  The representative of the Department of 
Information Technology during the course of deliberations informed the Committee 
that the expected demand by the deadline for the whole country is t o be over 200 
million units.  The issue of meeting the aforesaid demand of set top boxes through 
indigenous production was deliberated during the course of oral evidence.  The 
Committee understand that at present Set Top Boxes are being assembled in India 
and at least 20 to 30 per cent of the demand is met locally.  The foremost issue is 
that the industry is finding it difficult to compete with the imported ones because a 
large percentage of it is coming from China where the production cost is much 
lower.  One suggestion that emerged during the course of deliberations was to 
enhance the import duty from existing 5 per cent to 10 per cent to make our 
indigenous production price competitive.  
 
The Committee find that at present the Set Top Boxes are being assembled in 
India as elaborated above.  The Committee understand that the real challenge is of 
the card that is going into the system which is a technology mastered by only four 
or five different manufacturers worldwide.  In India also, similar technology has been 
developed.  The representative of   C -DAC during of deliberations informed the 
Committee that we would be ready about in six months time for first prototype of 
the card which can be manufactured in the country.  The Committee while taking 
note of the  status of R&D in the basic electronic component of the Set Top Boxes 
strongly recommend that all the financial support and other support should be 
provided to C-DAC so that the Set Top Boxes with our own technology solution can 
be manufactured in India.  Moreover, to promote indigenous market as stated above 
the Government may consider enhancing import duty from 5 per cent to 10 per 
cent.  
 
The Committee during the course of deliberations have also been apprised 
that the subsidy is proposed to be provided under the modified SIP scheme under 
which once the Policy is approved, 25 per cent subsidy would be available. The 
Committee are of the strong opinion that promoting indigenous Set Top Boxes 
would definitely provide employment opportunities to our people.  As such all the 
desired initiatives should be taken by the Government so that the country is ready 
to meet its expected demand of Set Top Boxes through indigenous production.  
Moreover the manufacturing of Set Top Boxes should lead from the assembling to 
finding out the solution for the required core technology through our own R&D 
initiative.  In this connection, the Committee may also like to recommend to take up 
the issue of extension of the proposed deadline for Set Top Boxes in various parts of 
the country with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. In this connection, 

 
 
the Committee may like to emphasize that the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology should coordinate with the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on the issue o f extension of the proposed deadline after having 
detailed strategy with regard to manufacturing of the required number of Set Top 
Boxes through indigenous production and also finalizing the policy issue with regard 
to providing competitive edge to our own country manufactured Set Top Boxes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the agenda for promotion of electronics hardware 
manufacturing in the country, DeitY has  proposed increasing  basic customs duty 
on Set Top Box (HS Code: 852871) from 5% to 10%, as part of Post Budget 2012-13 
recommendations to Ministry of Finance. The Modified Special Incentive Package 
Scheme to provide subsidy for capital investment in electronic hardware 
manufacturing sector has been approved by the Union Cabinet in its me eting held 
on 12.7.2012. The June 30, 2012 deadline for switchover of analogue cable TV 
networks to Digital Addressable System in the four metros (Phase -I), has been 
extended by four months. The Technical Committee of Experts constituted by DeitY 
for the development of a Conditional Access System (CAS) for the Indian market in 
view of digitalization of the Broadcast Sector shall submit its recommendations 
shortly. 
 
 
Micro-Electronics and Nano-Technology Development Programme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that even though the utilisation record under this 
programme during the Eleventh Plan period has been satisfactory, there has been 
under-utilisation of funds during 2011 -12. Non -initiation of one of the projects 
before March, 2011 has be en attributed as the reason for under -utilisation of fund. 
Further, the Committee also observe that there has been gross mismatch as far as 
proposed and approved outlay are concerned. The Committee while reiterating their 
earlier stand on DFG (2009 -10), re commend that efforts should be made to 
convince the Planning Commission in getting adequate allocation under the above 
head particularly keeping in view the fact  that research in this area is at very 
nascent stage in India.  Though the Department has made  significant progress in 
R&D of microelectronics, the Committee feel a lot has to be done in the area of 
Nano Electronics.  Considering the fact that India does not even have its own 
indigenous production of electronics hardware, the Committee strongly imp ress 
upon the Department to put in more effort to seek fund and increase R&D activities 
under this Scheme  and be ready for the global market for Nano technology 
products which is expected to reach 30.4 billion dollar by 2015, as per the study by 
Global Industry Analysts, Inc. . 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Some major projects have been initiated in the area of Nanoelectronics under 
the Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Development Programme during 11th 
Plan period. Future major projects will be initiated ba sed on the requirement of 
specific R&D activities, the interest and capacity of the organisations to undertake 
such major R&D projects and available human resources at DeitY to manage the 
programme. ` 100 crore have been allotted for this programme during the financial 
year 2012-13. Additional funds, if required, will be sought at RE stage. 
 
 

 
 
E-Learning 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that the National Knowledge Network (NKN) Scheme 
envisages to bring together all the stakeholders in Science, Technology Higher 
Education, Research & Development, and Governance with speeds of the order of 
gigabits per second coupled with extremely low latencies; through PoPs in the 
respective institutions/organizations. T he final phase of NKN project has been 
approved on 25 March, 2010 with an outlay of   ` 5990 crores for a period of 10 
years. The pr oposed outlay for the year 2012-13 is ` 2406 crore whereas the 
allocated outlay is to the tune of ` 360 crore which is just about 15 percent of the 
proposed sum.  Similar mismatch between the proposed and approved outlay under 
the programme had been noticed while examining Demands for Grants 2011 -12.  
While disapproving the ad -hocism of the Government, the Committee during 
previous Demands for Grants (2011-12), had strongly recommended for provision of 
adequate allocations at the BE stage itself so as to avoid uncertainty about the 
allocations of outlay at supplementary grant stage/RE stage.  However, the 
Committee are dishearte ned to note that in spite of the above recommendation of 
the Committee gross mismatch has been observed in the proposed outlay and 
actual allocation even during the year 2012 -13. More so, it is disquieting to note 
such a huge variation when the Department is well aware that without adequate 
and timely allocation of funds, the number of end user locations to be covered under 
NKN could be affected and additional fund would be required at Supplementary 
stage. Besides, the representative of the Department durin g evidence has 
submitted that the fund allocated during the Eleventh Plan could not be utilised in 
the month of March and the supplementary had to be taken out because they could 
not use in the last few days of March. In addition, they have submitted that for the 
huge programmes like the National Knowledge Network which in the first year 
required a Budgetary Support of ` 240 crore, ` 1,700 crore in the second year and 
`2300 crore in the third year. However, adequate budgetary support has not been 
forthcoming and in the second year they have got ` 1,262 crore which they are 
expecting in the subsequent year also. 
 
While expressing unhappiness over the way Planning Commission/Ministry of 
Finance has adopted adhocism in allocation of fund to the NKN programme wh ich is 
the backbone for e -Governance, forcing the Department to resort to asking for 
supplementary grants year after year, the Committee strongly disapprove the 
Department's laid back attitude on the Committee‟s recommendation for providing 
appropriate allocations at the BE stage itself and not placing the matter regarding 
the dire need for certainty of fund under the scheme which would facilitate effective 
implementation of the Programme convincingly  before the Planning Commission.  
The Committee, therefore, again exhort the Department to put their case strongly in 
front of Ministry of Finance/PC and apprise them about the Committee‟s concern.  
Besides, the Department should take proactive steps so that the project does not 
suffer during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Establishment of National Knowledge Network (NKN) was announced in the 
Budget Speech of 2009.  The NKN project was approved by the Cabinet Committee 
on Infrastructure (CCI) on 25th March, 2010 with an outlay of ` 5990 crores over a 
period of 10 years.  It may kindly be noted that NKN was not factored in the 11th 
Plan document and hence no separate provision was made in the 11th Plan outlay.  
Accordingly, funds are made available year -on-year basis as per the availability of 
funds. Similarly from the Departm ent‟s side demands are being raised at 1st and 

 
 
2nd Supplementary and RE stages.  In the 12th Plan Proposal the complete 
projection for NKN for FY 2012 -17 has been included.  As on date a provision of ` 
360 cr. has been made for FY 2012-13. Request for additional funds, would be made 
after the utilization of this allocation. 
 
National Institute of Electronic and Information Technology (NIELIT) 
(erstwhile DOEACC Society) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that DOEACC Society has been renamed as National 
Institute of Electronic and Information Technology (NIELIT).  The Committee would 
like to know about the Department‟s intention/vision for which they have changed 
the name of the society.  The Committee note with concern that though the 
financial achievement under the scheme has been satisfactory and the Department 
has been successful in utilising the entire  amount allocated, it has fallen short in 
achieving physical targets during the entire Eleventh Plan except for non -formal 
courses in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and formal course in the last three years of 
Eleventh Plan.  The Committee are given to understand that as the NIELIT is 
providing  non -formal and formal education course, they are trying to devise 
courses that addresses not just the higher end  but the lower end also and the issue 
is how to proliferate it much higher The NIELIT centres, which are accredited 
centres, are not enough to address the issue of computer literacy of the huge 
population and for this reason it has collaborated with e -Governance division to use 
common service centres as an instrumentality of proliferation. The Committee 
during deliberations have also been informed that the Department is planning to 
use NKN for e-Governance project. The Committee on the issue of linkages may like 
to observe that when various projects/schemes/network are being considered for 
linkages and common usages, the Department should have the basic core 
infrastructure in order, else this chain reaction of dependency will not work out and 
the basic purpo se would be defeated. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department should work out a plan of action to revamp its existing DOEACC 
centres as well as establish new ones so as to meet the urgent need of skill 
development of masses in IT sector.  
. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The current National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
(NIELIT) (formerly DOEACC Society), an Autonomous Scientific Society of the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology, Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology , is an amalgamation of three erstwhile Societies viz; 
DOEACC Society, Centre for Electronics Design & Technology of India (CEDTI) 
except its Mohali Centre and Regional Computer Centre (RCC), Chandigarh & 
Kolkata.  
 
The pre -merged Society, CEDTI had been functioning as separate 
autonomous scientific organisation of the Government of India in Electronics 
Product Design and related activities.  The CEDTI Centres were having a status as 
Centres of Excellence in Electronics Design & Technology and were providi ng 
consultancy to Industries in their respective region. RCCs were pioneer in providing 
Information processing solutions from the period of main frame computers era and 
DOEACC Society was implementing DOEACC Scheme, a joint scheme of Department 
of Electronics and Information Technology (erstwhile Department of Electronics) and 
the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) under which national level IT 
Software courses at O/A/B/C level are offered. 
 

 
 
These Societies were merged together in the year 2002 and all the Centres of 
CEDTI & RCCs were renamed as DOEACC Centres.  A revised mandate to carry out 
HR Development activities in the area of Information, Electronics and 
Communication Technology (IECT) was set for the merged Society.   
 
However, it was felt that the name of the Society is not reflecting its 
objectives and activities in line with the revised mandate of the merged society. 
After taking feedback from the all DOEACC Centres, the proposal for name change 
was placed in the 14th F&A Committee h eld on 6th Oct.2008.  F&A Committee 
suggested that the proposal may be referred to the Expert Committee constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Late Prof.C.S.Jha for recommending measures for 
strengthening and revamping of the activities of the Society inclu ding change of 
name in line with the objectives of the merged Society.  The Committee 
recommended changing the name of the Society to a more appropriate new one.  
Subsequently, the Governing Council of NIELIT in its 25th Meeting held on 3rd 
Nov.2009 considered and approved the proposal to change the name of the Society 
to „National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology‟ (NIELIT) subject to 
concurrence for the same by MHRD.  Later concurrence of MHRD was taken for the 
new name.  
 
Under the Skill Development Project, it has been proposed to upgrade the 
existing NIELIT Centres and to set up new Centres for increasing the training 
capacity of NIELIT. In the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of DietY on Skill 
Development in IT, it has been envisaged that NIELIT would make efforts to keep at 
least 40% of the training programmes (Certificate/ Diploma/ PG Diploma/ B Tech/ M 
TECH) in electronics and other hardware sector as emphasis of Govt. of India is on 
the electronics & Hardware sector, being strategic sec tor with reference to 
Manufacturing Technology and Product Design. 
 
A project proposal for Development of North -Eastern Region by enhancing 
the Training/ Education capacity in the IECT area has been approved by Cabinet.  
Under the project, it is proposed t o upgrade six NIELIT Centres and to set up 12 
Extension Centres in the NE region so as to increase the training capacity of NE 
Centres from the present 3080 students/annum to 14400 students per annum. It is 
expected that these upgraded NIELITs would be run ning training programmes to 
create specialized manpower in Electronics & Hardware. 
 
Further, Government of India has made a National Policy on Electronics under 
which it is envisaged to create a globally competitive electronics design and 
manufacturing ind ustry to meet the country's needs and serve the international 
market. Accordingly, the Society is planning more courses in the Electronics Sector 
especially in the Electronics System Design Manufacturing (ESDM) sector as lack of 
human resource is one of th e major challenges which are hampering the growth of 
the Indian Electronics Industry. 
 
 
E-Literacy 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee observe that a „Working Group on IT Mass Literacy‟ under the 
Chairmanship of Vice Chancellor, IGNOU has been cons tituted to take stock of the 
current literacy scenario in the country. This „Working Group‟ during its deliberation 
had indicated that before a survey of the literacy levels is undertaken, there was a 
need to define Literacy level for IT. To this effect, t he Working Group has initiated 
the process of consultations with various stakeholders and analyzing the present 

 
 
initiatives to evolve the definition. Besides, a survey on literacy rate in computer 
would be conducted under the aegis of the „Working Group‟.   
 
The Committee have consistently been recommending to find out the e -
literacy level in the country.  The Committee are concerned to note that even when 
the set target for computer literacy are being given by the Government, the 
Working Group is still grappling with the issue of defining literacy level for IT.  
Nevertheless, when the issue is being taken by the Working Group, the Committee 
strongly emphasize that the literacy level should be defined expeditiously followed 
by countrywide survey to know the literacy level in the country so that the roadmap 
to increase computer literacy in the country can be worked out. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Working Group on IT Mass Literacy in its meeting held on 9th July, 2012 
has recommended the definition of IT Literacy.  Further, the Working Group has 
recommended a proposal for conducting a house -hold survey on IT Literacy for 
consideration by the National Sample Survey Oganisation (NSSO) under the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
Taking note of the Media Report on few students from Tel Aviv University 
using digital traces of internet activity to track criminals and thereby strengthening 
security against terrorist  threats, the Committee during the course of exam ination 
of Demands for Grants raised the issue  of Department‟s  preparedness for „tracking 
crime in real-time‟. The Committee appreciate that the Department has already pro-
actively initiated a research project titled „Analyzing online content using data 
mining techniques to counter cyber crime‟, in February 2010 itself with an outlay of 
` 81.50 lakh. The Committee may be apprised about the outcome of the project 
along with the utilization status of the Outlay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The project on “An alyzing online content using data mining techniques to 
counter cyber crimes” was initiated at IIIT, Delhi in Jan. 2010 at a total estimated 
cost of ` 81.5 lakhs over a period of 3 years.  So far ` 54.29 lakhs has been released 
to IIIT for executing the project. 
 
The aim of the project is to use data mining and text mining on the online 
user generated contents including social networking sites to develop novel solutions 
to counter cyber crimes.  The prototype developed at the end of the project will 
have a m echanism to collect and analyze data from various online sites including 
social networking sites so that actionable intelligence from such information can be 
extracted.  The following tasks have been carried out in the project as per 
objectives: 
 Mining Vid eo contents i n social networking sites like y outube etc. to 
discover hate videos, users and hidden communities 
 Mining user common activity for detecting forum spammers in YouTube 
 Analysis of online activity through social networking sites during Mumbai 
blasts 
 Mining tweets for tag recommendation on social media 
 Analysis of hate and protest comments in social media. 
 
The following tasks are being carried out presently in the project as per the 
suggestions of user Agencies: 
 Hate and extreme community detection on twitter / Youtube 

 
 
 Automated classifications of online communities by data mining 
techniques. 
 Credibility ranking of information during events. 
 Analysis of terrorism related information available online in websites. 
 Development of ontology based analysis in extremist websites. 
 
International Cooperation/ MoU related to Cyber security 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
Keeping in view the myriad problems associated with cyber attacks 
originating from outside the country and the fact that it has become  technically and 
legally difficult to reach out to the perpetrators, the Committee in their Seventeenth 
Report had asked the Department to consider one of the important 
recommendations made in Fiftieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on „The 
Information Tech nology (Amendment) Bill, 2006‟ which in essence had 
recommended the Department to prepare a roadmap for materializing an Omnibus 
International Convention against cyber crime/cyber terrorism under the auspices of 
United Nations.  The Committee find that as a follow up to the above 
recommendation of the Committee, the Department has been working in close 
coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and actively participating in the 
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts (GGE); in the Council for S ecurity 
Cooperation in the Asia -Pacific (CSCAP); and in the deliberations of the UN 
Commission on crime prevention and criminal justice. The Committee also observe 
that the Department has entered MoU with six countries/CERT viz US -CERT, JP -
CERT/CC, Nationa l Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), South Korea, CERT Mauritius, 
CERT Kazakhstan and Government of Finland. 
 
While appreciating the Department‟s initiatives with respect to signing of 
MoU with 6 countries/CERT, the Committee feel that it is just a single step in this 
direction and more international collaboration is required.  Therefore, the 
Committee  would like to re -emphasise on  the views expressed by the participants 
in the Fourth Parliamentary Forum on 'Shaping the Information Society: The Triple 
Challenge of Cyber-Security: Information, citizens and Infrastructure' held from 18th 
to 20th May, 2011 at ILO Conference Centre, International Labour Organization 
(IPU), Geneva wherein India along with 36 other countries participated and 
acknowledged that a purel y national approach cannot go far enough to combat 
cyber crime and international cooperation is far more necessary. The participants 
had also observed that it is difficult to prosecute criminal offences initiated outside 
the national territory and there is  indeed an urgent need for an internationally 
agreed instrument that would provide a comprehensive framework for countries to 
coherently address cyber security issues in a coordinated manner. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to step up th eir efforts proactively in the 
direction of such an international agenda so as to reach out to more number of 
nations for international cooperation in an integrated manner so as to address the 
issues related to cyber crime and cyber security, and apprise t he Committee 
accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Strengthening international cooperation to effectively deal with cyber 
security issues has been one of the main focus areas of the Government.  
Accordingly, this aspect  is being attempted at Departmental level by way of MoUs 
between Indian Computer Emergency Response Team and its counterpart agencies 
that are willing to work together and share information in a timely manner for 
preventing cyber attacks as well as collaborating for providing swift response to the 
incidents.  Besides this, in view of interna tional relationships and cooperation 

 
 
issues, concerted efforts are being jointly made by the Ministry of External Affairs, 
National Security Council Secretariat, Ministry of Home Affairs and the Department 
of Information Technology, to determine the ways a nd means of expanding the 
collaboration efforts as well as exploring the possibility of commonly agreeable 
international agenda to address the issues of cyber crime and cyber security. 
 
Contemporary issues involved in IT sector 
 e-Procurement and e-Auction 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
 
The Committee note that as per the Report of First Data Corporation and ICICI 
Merchant Services the e -commerce market in India had reached close to ` 50,000 
cores and there are about 150 million internet users/around 75 milli on households 
that are ready for e -Commerce by the end of 2011.  The Committee also observe 
that as of now there is no uniformly accepted international index or measure in 
respect of progress of various countries in e -Procurement. As far as e -procurement 
in India is concerned the e -Procurement implementations in AP and Karnataka are 
10 and 5 years old which have matured significantly and they compare with the 
best practices across the globe.  The Department has also submitted that the e -
procurement solution s including e -Auctions and GePNIC solution are being 
developed by the National Informatics Centre. On the preparedness to adopt e -
Procurement in all Government Departments, the Committee observe that the 
Department is in the process of preparing the roadma p for adopting e-Procurement 
and advising all Department‟s societies and attached offices on similar lines.  
 
The Committee may like to emphasize that the Approach Paper to Twelfth 
Plan and the President‟s Address to Parliament on 12 March, 2012 refers to ICT 
solutions for reducing corruption.  The Committee are of the strong view that 
introduction of e -procurement procedures by all the Departments can bring 
transparency in our procurement procedures.  Keeping in view the urgency of the 
matter, the Committe e strongly recommend to develop uniform e -procurement 
procedures after taking into account e -procurement procedures of Andhra Pradesh 
and Karnataka and make e -procurement mandatory for all the Government 
Departments which would certainly bring transparency  and curtail corruption in 
procurements.   The urgent initiatives in this regard need to be taken in a stipulated 
timeframe.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Expenditure vide OM no. 10/1/2011 -PPc dtd 30/11/11  have 
issued instructions for mandatory publishing of tender enquires,  corrigenda thereto 
and details of contract awarded on the Central Procurement Portal with the  
following timelines: 
 
 Ministries/ Departments and their attached and subordinate   
 offices w.e.f.  1st Jan.2012 
 CPSEs  w.e.f. 1st  Feb 2012 
 Autonomous/Statutory bodies w.e.f. 1st April,2012 
 
As regards Certification of e -solutions, the DIT has already notified the 
“Guidelines for Compliance to Quality requirements” on the e -Governance 
Standards Portal (egovstandards.gov.in). 
 
 
 

 
 
Indigenous Tablets/PCs  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
 
On the plans to have cost effective indigenous Tablets/PCs like „Aakash‟, the 
Committee have been informed that the programme for development of „Aakash‟ 
Tablet is a part of the activities being taken under the National Mission on Education 
through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT) programme of 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD). The Department has also 
informed that in this regard, a Committee has been constituted which has 
submitted its recommendations which emphasized on the need to clearly spell out 
the technical and functional specifications as well as necessary requirements for 
reliability so that the devices that are procured have unquestionable quality and 
reliability. The Committee strongly feel there is an urgent need to have indigenous 
tablets/PCs which are cost effective and reliable in terms of quality and security. 
The Committee recommend the Department to coordinate with Ministry of Human 
Resource Development to wo rk out a strategy to deal with the issue and keep a 
track of the developments in the area. The Department should also accelerate R&D 
in this area so that e-literacy reaches every nook and corner of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Committee regarding continuous R&D and timely delivery of a Low Cost 
Access Device “Aakash” has been constituted vide Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology Order dated 22nd December, 2011. It is imperative to 
create an eco system for manufacturing “Aa kash” in India with more and more 
indigenisation and for driving the efforts aimed at attempting to continuously bring 
down the price per device as far as feasible. Five meetings of the Committee have 
been held so far. IIT Bombay is in process of doing a p ilot test with 100 devices 
under the Aakash -2 project. This is largely in simulated conditions. A more 
elaborate, real-life situation based testing is planned with 100,000 devices. MHRD 
and IIT Bombay expect that the test will commence in second half of Ju ly and get 
completed by September 2012. IIT Bombay proposes to involve IITs and NITs in the 
test. The feedback would be taken at the end of the test lasting nearly three 
months. The feedback from the students and faculty will provide a real assessment 
regarding the usability of the device by students and faculty across institutions. It 
has been recommended that full quantity would not be procured/manufactured by 
PSUs in one single lot, but in steps/phases so that they can get the right partner, 
transfer tec hnology, progressively enhance proportion of manufacturing by PSUs 
and facilitate Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC) acquiring 
technology to kick start their R&D efforts. The Committee feels that even as the 
devices are being procured in p hases, the domestic value-addition in each phase of 
procurement should be incrementally increased. This should lead to progressive 
indigenization of Aakash as well as greater Intellectual Property development by 
CDAC. The Committee also feels that with the  requirement to give preference to 
domestically manufactured electronic products, Aakash would contribute to the 
development of electronics manufacturing eco -system in the country. The 
Electronics Manufacturing Clusters Scheme to provide world -class infrastructure for 
attracting investments in the Electronics Systems Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) 
Sector and the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme to offset disability and 
attract investments in ESDM Industries that have been approved by the Union 
Cabinet in the month of July 2012 would provide the necessary impetus for creating 
an ecosystem for manufacturing of cost effective Tablets and PCs in the country. 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee have been consistently drawing the Department‟s attention 
towards the attrition of manpower in C -DAC and have been recommending the 
Department to finalise the Scheme of incentives at the earliest so that attrition rate 
in C-DAC is checked. However,  the Committee are perturbed to learn that the even 
though the matter was referred to the Ministry of Finance way back in 2002 and 
more than 10 years have elapsed, the Department is still examining a fresh 
proposal on performance incentive issue received from C -DAC on 26.03.2012. The 
Committee while disapproving the way the Department has dealt with this 
important issue conce rning C -DAC, a significant R&D organisation reiterate their 
earlier stand and exhort the Department to finalise the Scheme of incentives by 
taking some innovative measures so as to check the attrition rate in C-DAC, which is 
a premier R&D organisation in IT, Electronics and associated areas.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DeitY‟s proposal on Performance Incentive Scheme sent to Ministry of 
Finance, has been received back in the Department on 03.08.2012. Ministry of 
Finance have advised this Department to wait f or the finalization of PRIS for Central 
Government employees.  
 
As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee, a detailed proposal 
on Performance Incentive Scheme was obtained from C -DAC on 30.05.2012 and 
subsequent clarifications on 11.06.2012. On the advice of Ministry of Finance vide 
U.O. No.1(38)/E.Coord/02 dated 04.07.2002, the matter was also taken up with 
CSIR, ICAR, IITs, IIMs to find out whether any incentive payment scheme is in vogue 
or not in their organizations. All IITs, ICAR and most o f the IIMs have informed that 
there is no such scheme prevalent in their organizations. 
 
The proposal on Performance Incentive Scheme as received from C -DAC was 
examined in the Department.  It is observed that after the implementation of the 
6th Pay Commis sion Report, the problem of attrition is not there for the regular 
employees and that no regular employee has taken VRS. Attrition is among the 
contractual project employees which is also location based. This is generally the 
case in Chennai, Bengaluru, Hy derabad and Pune where alternative job 
opportunities exist.  
 
As per the information received from C -DAC, the attrition is not high and is 
practically limited to contractual project employees. Fixation of wages of 
contractual employees is within the powers  of the Board of Directors of C -DAC. In 
view of these observations, the need for formulation of a separate Performance 
Incentive scheme is not found feasible. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Position of Outstanding Utilisation Certificate (UCs) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
  The Committee have been repetitively raising concern over the huge 
pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs), especially regarding those implementing 
agencies who have been issued only one installment and never demanded the 
subsequent instalments and als o did not bother to furnish the Utilization 
Certificates. The Department has submitted that as on 31st December, 2011, there 
are 490 UCs pending amounting to ` 925.08 crore and 17 UCs (single installment) 
amounting to ` 18.72 crore which are pending with the implementing agencies.   
 
The Committee find from the written note furnished by the Department that a 
lot of efforts are being made on the part of the Department for liquidating pending 
Utilisation Certificates/Unspent Balances with the implementing agencies.   As a 
result of the i nitiatives taken by the Department 17 UCs (single installment) 
amounting to ` 18.72 crore are pending as compared to ` 72 UCs amounting to ` 
46.95 crore which were pending on 31.12.2009.  With regard to overall position of 
pendency of Utilisation Certificates, the pendency has declined to 490 amounting to 
` 925.08 crore as on 31.3.2012 as compared to 625 UCs amounting to `1107.77 
crore as on 01.04.2011.  The Committee understand that on 1.4.2012 more UCs 
would become due thereby negating the impact of clear ing pendency by the 
Department. The Committee feel that the scenario of pendency of UCs on the part 
of the implementing agencies indicates the problems in implementation of various 
projects by the implementing agencies.  Thus, there is an urgent need to review the 
implementation of the programmes particularly the National e -Governance Plan for 
which major part of the allocation is being earmarked.  Not only that there is a need 
to put in place a system whereby the penalty clause is included in the various 
agreements.  The Committee strongly recommend that the implementation of the 
programmes should be evaluated by some independent agency so as to find out the 
real issues involved in implementation of the programmes which would help the 
Department in identify ing the grey areas.  The evaluation followed by the desired 
corrective initiatives would certainly pace up the implementation of the various 
programmes.  The Committee hope that the Department would act on the 
suggested lines.   
 
The Department in their wr itten reply have informed that for ongoing 
projects, interest after accrued by the implementing agency is also taken into 
account as part of the total outlay of the project.  In this connection, the Committee 
would like to be apprised about the system of k eeping unspent balances as well as 
the amount of interest accrued year-wise.  The information may be furnished to the 
Committee State/UT wise.  The Committee in this connection may also like to 
emphasise that the real purpose of allocating outlay is not to  earn interest on the 
outlay, instead the real purpose is effective implementation of the programme.  The 
earnest initiatives need to be taken to ensure effective implementation of the 
programmes particularly when IT programmes are the priority programmes of the 
Government. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The following actions have been taken by DeitY in view of the 
recommendation of the Committee relating to outstanding UCs: 
 
(i)   As per the prescribed guidelines governing Grant -in-Aid, the grantee 
institutions are required to maintain separate audited accounts for the 
project. If it is found expedient to keep a part or whole of the grant in a 
bank account earning interest, the interest thus earned should be 
reported to this Department. The interest so earned w ould be treated 
as a credit to the grantee to be adjusted towards future installments. 
Accordingly, on release of grants -in-aid, the details are entered in the 
“UC Monitoring System” immediately to take care of monitoring of 
unspent balances with grantee i nstitutions from the date of issue of 
sanction/release of funds. Monitoring of unspent balances and UCs due 
is made through in -built statements generated though the UC 
Monitoring System. The statements generated include agency -wise, 
GC-wise, State/UT -wise reports containing amount released, UC 
received, UC due and unspent balance with the implementing 
agencies. A State/UT -wise statement w.r.t. unspent balances as on 
03.08.2012 is placed at Annexure-I.  
(ii)  Unspent balance and interest, if any, available/a ccrued with the 
implementing agency is accounted for, while releasing every 
subsequent installment. 
(iii)  Apart from the recommendation of Project Review and Steering Group 
(PRSG) for release of next installment of grants -in-aid (GIA), which is 
linked to the physical progress of the project, before releasing the 
subsequent installments of GIA, the submission of utilization of 
previous grants in the project is invariably insisted upon and monitored 
by the PRSG as well as by the Department. 
(iv)  The terms and conditions governing Grant in aid also binds the grantee 
institutions for spending the grant amount of the project within the 
specified time and also surrendering any portion of the grant which is 
not ultimately required for expenditure for the approved purposes.  
(v)  All possible measures are being taken to accelerate the pace of 
implementation of various projects under NeGP. State Action Plans 
have been formulated by all State / UTs under the directions of DeitY 
which are reviewed at the Secretary lev el and impediments in the 
implementation process are being reviewed and resolved. Also an 
expert Group constituted by the PMs Committee on NeGP under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Sam Pitroda, is reviewing NeGP to devise an 
action plan for speedy implementation of the programme.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
(vi)  The schemes under e-Governance are being implemented by the State 
Government. Before releasing the subsequent installments of GIA, the 
utilization of previous grants in the project  are also insisted upon. The 
pendency of UCs has been taken up on individual basis with all 
agencies and the respective state governments which has yielded 
good results. 
(vii)  Coordinated efforts have resulted in liquidation of large number of UCs. 
The to tal amount of liquidation of UCs during the period 1.4.2012 to 
30.06.2012 in respect of sanctions issued (I) up to 31.03.2011 for 
which UCs due and (II) for the period 01.04.2011 to 30.06.2012 for 
which UCs not due is  given below: 
 
 
 
 

 
 
S. 
No. 
Particulars Amount 
(` in crore) 
(I) Amount liquidated for which UCs are due 
(Sanctions issued up to 31.03.2011) 
145.03 
(II) Amount liquidated for which UCs are not 
due 
(a) Sanctions issued from 1.4.2011 to 
31.03.2012 
(b) Sanctions issued from 1.4.2012 to 
30.06.2012 
 
183.89 
12.12 
 Total liquidated amount 341.04 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
National e- Governance Plan (NeGP) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee find that National e -Governance Plan is one of the flagship 
programme of the Department for which substantial part of the allocation under 
Plan schemes is being provided.  So far as the financial achievement during the 
Eleventh Plan is concerned, the Committee observe that there are huge variations 
between the prop osed allocations, allocations provided at Budget Estimates stage, 
Revised Estimates stage and the expenditure met. ` 6106.43 crore were proposed 
during the Eleventh Plan and the allocations provided at Budget Estimates stage 
were ` 4617.13 crore.  The allocations at Budget Estimates stage were then reduced 
to ` 2533.49 crore at Revised Estimates stage.  Even the reduced allocations could 
not be utilised which is apparent from the data furnished by the Department.  
`1856.64 crore could be utilised which is 4 0.21 percent of the BE allocations and 
73.28 percent of the RE allocations.  The aforesaid analysis of the financial 
performance under NeGP clearly indicates that there are serious problems in 
implementation of the programme.  The component wise analysis i s done in the 
subsequent paras of the Report. 
 
The Committee have consistently been raising concern over shifting of 
deadlines of implementation of various components of e -Governance programmes 
viz. Common Service Centres (CSCs), State Wide Area Network (S WAN), State Data 
Centres (SDCs) and Mission Mode Project (MMPs).  Under CSCs, the target was for 
setting up of one lakh CSCs in various States.  In spite of shifting the deadline for 
several times, out of the target of one lakh CSCs, 97871 CSCs could be es tablished 
till 31.12.2011.  Not only that out of 97871 CSCs that could be established around 
88,000 CSCs could be made operational in the three States.  Besides, only 68,754 
CSCs could be connected by the internet.   Now, the deadline for completing the 
task of one lakh CSCs has been shifted to March, 2013.  State Wide Area Network 
(SWAN) could be made operational in 30 States/UTs and now the deadline has been 
shifted to March, 2013.  In respect of the State Data Centres (SDCs), 16 SDCs have 
been declared operational and now the extended deadline is by March, 2013.  With 
regard to MMP, NSDG target completion date is January, 2014, NLRMP is expected 
to be completed in August, 2016 and for Treasuries, Municipalities, Commercial 
Taxes, the completion date is 20 13-14.  The target date for one of the ambitious 
programme Gram Panchayat is still to be firmed up.  With regard to other important 
MMPs like, employment exchange, public distribution system, health and education, 
the target dates have not been indicated.  The MMPs are still at the 
conceptual/design and development stages. The shifting of deadlines of various 

 
 
components of this programme has been the major area of concern highlighted by 
the Committee in the respective reports.  The Department has repeatedly  been 
furnishing the same reasons which include constraints related to power connectivity 
and difficult location.  
 
The Committee have consistently been recommending use of alternate 
sources of energy particularly solar energy to address to the issue of po wer 
constraint. Even when the onus for power and power back up in case of CSCs was 
placed on the service providers, the Department has now stated that the level of 
power shortages in some States is much more than it was envisaged.  The 
Committee strongly feel that more initiatives need to be taken on the R&D front to 
make the alternate energy systems viable as well as cost effective.  With regard to 
broadband connectivity scenario, the Committee find that overall position with 
regard to broadband connectivi ty in the country is not so satisfactory.  The 
Committee in the context of examination of Demands for Grants of the Department 
of Telecommunications have been informed that there are 13.54 million broadband 
connections as on February, 2012 against the targ et of 20 million broadband 
subscribers by 2010.  With regard to telecom connectivity, the challenges are to 
improve teledensity in rural areas as well as to cover the difficult terrains.  The 
Committee strongly feel that the issue of connectivity need to b e taken in a holistic 
way.  Since various Departments of the Union Government particularly the 
Department of Telecommunications and its PSUs, BSNL and MTNL, and private 
sector service providers are involved in the task, the coordinated approach need to 
be taken to address the issue.  The Committee would like the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology to take up the issue of connectivity with the 
respective Ministries/State Governments/Telecom Service Providers as an 
integrated approach need to  be taken to address the issue.  The concerted action 
on the suggested line should be taken by the Department which would certainly 
help to pace up the implementation of various components of NeGP.  Besides, the 
penalty clause for delay in implementation of various projects should be included in 
the agreements which would ensure timely implementation of the various projects 
being implemented by the public/private sector agencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All possible measures are being taken to accelerate the pace of 
implementation of various projects under NeGP. State Action Plans have been 
formulated by all States / UTs under the directions of DeitY which are reviewed at 
the Secretary level every quarter and impediments in the implementation process 
are b eing reviewed and resolved. Also, an Expert Group constituted by the PM‟s 
Committee on NeGP under the Chairmanship of Shri Sam Pitroda is reviewing NeGP 
to devise an action plan for speedy implementation of the program.  
 
DeitY is preparing a special plan for addressing the issues of connectivity and 
power availability which impact the rollout of the scheme in remote and rural areas. 
NOFN and solar power are being explored as viable options for addressing these 
issues.  
 
Regular meetings with BSNL are being held to address the connectivity issue. 
Also, e-District Programme which is envisaged to give further impetus to the CSC 
programme is being implemented on a priority basis. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

 
 
Bharat Nirman Common Service Centre 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the Government of India has 
proposed to upscale the existing scheme of 1 lakh CSCs to 2.50 lakh CSCs so as to 
set up one Bharat Nirman Common Service Centre at each Pa nchayat.  The 
Department had submitted a note for the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure 
which considered the proposal and referred it to a Group of Ministers (GoM).  The 
GoM had its first meeting in January, 2012.  The next meeting of the GoM is 
expected soon.  The Committee appreciate the aforesaid proposal of the 
Government and would like the Department to pursue further so that the project is 
finally approved and execution starts during the year 2012.  However, the 
Department need to address basic issues confronting implementation of CSCs which 
include power and connectivity constraints.  Since the CSCs are proposed to be set 
up at each Panchayat, the Committee may like to recommend that some sort of 
coordinating mechanism with Panchayats should be form ulated in the guidelines 
which would help in speedy execution of the Programme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issues relating to power and connectivity constraints with regard to 
existing CSCs are being addressed on a priority basis. A Working Group under  the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary eGov is regularly reviewing the provision of 
connectivity to CSCs through BSNL. 2,500 VSATs have also been sanctioned for 
CSCs in the North East and other remote areas for connectivity. DeitY has also 
initiated discussions with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for exploring 
provision of alternate power sources to CSCs in the form of solar power and other 
renewable energy schemes. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
Adequate manpower in National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee have consistently been raising the issue of bridging the gap 
between the required and the existing manpower at various levels in their various 
Reports.  In spite of that, the Committee understand that the Demand of the 
requirement for additio nal manpower has still to be worked out by NIC.  Now, the 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani to examine the 
demand/requirement for additional requirements has been set up which is going to 
submit its Report within three months.  The C ommittee strongly emphasise that the 
manpower in NIC is the immediate concern which need to be addressed on an 
urgent basis by the Government particularly keeping in view the NIC mandate of 
providing wide range of e -governance, infrastructure and services in the country at 
various levels right from Centre to the District level.  
 
Now, when the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani is 
looking into the matter of demand/requirement of additional manpower and the 
Committee is likely to submit  its report in three months, the concrete initiatives to 
meet the gap between the required and the existing manpower need to be taken 
urgently by the Government.  The roadmap to fill up the vacancies within the 
stipulated timeframe should be formulated by NIC and the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology and the Committee apprised accordingly. 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Some of NIC‟s existing technical staff requirements for application 
development and handholding are met through outsourced ma npower. Few 
initiatives taken by the Department to resolve the problem of manpower are as 
follows: 
 
(i) Proposal for continuation of 265 posts for Data Centres is under 
process. 
  
(ii)  Regarding manpower for enhancing security of NICNET, a document 
has been prepared for approval. 
  
(iii)  For extension of manpower at the Block level, a EFC proposal is being 
prepared. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
 
 
e-Industry (IT-ITeS) 
Software Technology Park of India (STPI) and Electronics Hardware 
Technology Parks (EHTP) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note with concern that though the exports from STP/EHTP 
units have been increasing over the years, yet the number of new STP/EHTP units 
being registered are found to be decreasing every year.  When asked about any 
study being conducted to eva luate the feasibility of the registered STP/EHTP and 
about the details of the STP/EHTP that are functioning properly, the Department has 
simply stated that as per STPI, it was evident that SME‟s STP units would be hit by 
withdrawal of Income Tax benefits under Section 10A w.e.f 1st April 2011, therefore 
no study was conducted. However, a Non Profit Linked incentive scheme has been 
proposed for MSMEs STP units.  The reply of the Department reflects a non serious 
attitude especially when exports from these un its have generated a revenue of ` 
3,27,764 crore in just one year.  The Committee feel that the Department should 
have conducted a study on STP/EHTP specially after being hit by the withdrawal of 
Tax benefits units so that important issues with regard to e ffects of withdrawal of 
tax regime would have emerged in turn helping the Department to work out a 
proper strategy to deal with reducing number of STP/EHPT units.  
 
Further, with regard to the strategy of the Department to tackle the situation 
emerging out of withdrawal of tax holiday from STPI from 1 April, 2011 and increase 
in Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT), the Committee had  earlier been informed about 
three proposals (i) Preparation of non -profit link incentive scheme for STPI 
registered units (ii) Strengthening of the present induction programme of STPI units 
for business incubation and entrepreneurial development for startup units, and (iii) 
Establishment of a National Productivity Network by STPI in association with DeitY. 
On seeing that the Department has not worked on these three proposals, the 
Committee in their Twenty -seventh Report had recommended the Department to 
ensure that the aforesaid three proposed initiatives are given utmost importance.  
The Committee  note that while the draft Detailed Pro ject Report (DPR) for the Non-
Profit Linked Incentive Scheme for SME STP units has been prepared and is being 
processed for approval of the Competent Authority;  with regard to „Strengthening 

 
 
of the present incubation Programme of STPI units for business i ncubation and 
entrepreneurial development for start up units, the programme is still to be 
designed; and for establishment of a National Productivity Network(NPN), STPI is 
perusing the matter with E -Infrastructure Division, DeitY.  The Committee find the 
progress to be extremely slow and rather non-satisfactory.  Keeping in view the fact 
that the revenue generated by these units through exports is increasing every year, 
there is an urgent need to pay attention to the aforesaid proposed initiatives and 
other innovative measures so as to improve the competitive edge of these units.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly exhort the Department to act swiftly on the 
above three proposed initiatives during 2012 -13 so that the proposals can take 
concrete shape and STP s/EHTPs really benefit from these initiatives. The details of 
progress made in each of the initiatives may be furnished within three months of 
presentation of this Report.  
. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Software Technology Park of India (STPI) and Electronics  Hardware 
Technology Parks (EHTP) - The details of progress made in each of the initiatives is 
as follows:-  
 
 Preparation of Performance linked incentive scheme for STP registered 
units to ensure accelerated growth of IT/ITES exports and for dispersal 
of IT Industry in Tier II & III cities across the country and for supporting 
MSME sector, is under consideration of this Department as some 
modifications suggested by DeitY are being incorporated in the revised 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). 
 Establishment of a  National Productivity Network (NPN) - A 
presentation was made by STPI to Productivity Enhancement Group, 
DeitY during April 2012. Based on the observations and feedback, the 
same was revised and resubmitted to DeitY.  The basic model has been 
accepted by DeitY.  This is now being dealt by the Productivity 
Enhancement Group, DeitY. 
 Strengthening of the present Incubation Programme of STPI units - This 
programme was initially handled by R&D in IT Group, DeitY.  However, 
STPI has now proposed to include the s ame as a component of the 
proposed performance linked incentive scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM 
IN NATURE 
 
e-Innovation/R&D and e-Industry (Electronics Hardware) 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee understand that the demand of Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing in the country is projected to increase from USD 45 billion 
(approximately ` 20,500 crore) in 2009 to USD 400 billion by 2010.  The indigenous 
production of Electronics/IT Ha rdware in the country during five years of the 
Eleventh Plan was amounting to ` 5,14,560 crore whereas the quantum of import of 
electronics goods in the country during the aforesaid period was ` 4,76,301 crore.  
The Committee have consistently been recommending to provide more attention to 
promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing so as to attain the level of self -
reliance.  During the Eleventh Plan, the initiatives taken by the Government in this 
regard include a scheme „Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing‟.  The 
total budgetary support for the Eleventh Plan was provided for ` 1100 crore.  During 
the whole plan period, only ` 3.57 crore could be utilized.  As per the Department, 
special incentive package scheme (SIPS) was taken on 21.03.2007 and the last date 
for receipt of applications under the scheme was 31.03.2010.  The scheme did not 
have good response.  Out of 26 applications received, 11 applicants reported 
financial closure of more than threshold limit as on 31.03.2010.  Not o nly that on 
further evaluation, only four applicants have provided evidence of firm financial tie -
ups and these are being processed further.   
 
The Committee further observe that a Task Force was set up in August, 2009 
which submitted its report in Decembe r, 2009.  Out of 198 recommendations made 
by the Task Force, the information furnished by the Department indicates that the 
action is being taken with regard to only half a dozen recommendations that too are 
still at the consideration stage.  The Committee  are of the strong view that there is 
an urgent need to pay serious attention to the issue of Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing in the country.  The urgent action with regard to getting various 
clearances in respect of six key recommendations of the Ta sk Force which have 
already been identified for implementation should be taken so that the schemes can 
start during the first year of Twelfth Plan i.e. the current year 2012 -13.  The 
Committee further emphasize that the promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware  
Manufacturing should be given top most priority so as to make the country self -
reliant.  Moreover, the import of IT Hardware also involves security risk particularly 
when the major part of our imports relate to telecom equipments.  As such the issue 
needs more attention for the sake of security of our country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reference observation that the Committee is of the strong view that there is 
an urgent need to pay serious attention to the issue of Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing in the country, the present status of implementation of the six key 
recommendations for promotion of the sector is as under: 
 
1. Setting up Semiconductor Wafer Fabs 
 
An Empowered Committee (EC) has been set up for identifying 
technology and investors for setting up two Semiconductor Wafer 

 
 
Fabrication (Fab) Manufacturing facilities after obtaining approval 
of Cabinet in its meeting held on 20.4.2011. The EC after 
interacting with the potential investors will crystallize the nature 
and quantum of Government support in physical/financial terms 
and recommend to the Government the course of action to attract 
investments in the sector. The Expression of Interest (EOI) was 
sought through advertisement in leading global and national 
dailies and websites during June -July, 2011. The process for 
appraisal of business proposals received by DeitY for setting up of 
Semiconductor Wafer Fab facilities in the country is at an 
advanced stage and is likely to be completed shortly. 
 
2. Preference to Domestically Manufactured Electronic Goods 
 
Vide Gazette Notification dated 10th February, 2012, the 
Government has laid down the policy for providing preference to 
domestically manufactured electronic products, in procurement of 
those electronic products which have security implications for the 
country and in Government procurement not with a view to 
commercial resale or with a view to use in the production of goods 
for commercial sale. The policy i s expected to strengthen the 
cyber security ecosystem in the country as well as provide a boost 
to the domestic manufacturing. 
 
3. Electronics Manufacturing Clusters Scheme to provide world -class 
infrastructure for attracting investments in the ESDM Sector  
 
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 3.7.2012 approved the 
proposal to offer financial support for the development of 
Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMCs) as these EMCs would 
aid the growth of the ESDM sector, help development of 
entrepreneurial e cosystem, drive innovation and catalyze the 
economic growth of the region by increasing employment 
opportunities and tax revenues. 
 
The importance of clusters in ESDM is a well accepted 
phenomenon worldwide. A well developed cluster can give a unit 
located in it a cost advantage of 5 to 8% because of various 
reasons such as increased supply chain responsiveness, 
consolidation of suppliers, decreased time -to-market, superior 
access to talent and lower logistics costs. Setting up of EMCs is an 
integral part o f this strategy to make India a leading destination 
for the ESDM sector. 
 
The proposed EMCs scheme would support setting up of both 
Greenfield and Brownfield EMCs. The proposed scheme is 
expected to help flow of investment for the development of world-
class infrastructure specifically targeted towards attracting 
investment in the ESDM sector. The policy covers all States and 
districts and provides them an opportunity to attract investments 
in electronics manufacturing. 
 
4. Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme to offset disability and 
attract investments in Electronics Systems Design and 
Manufacturing Industries  
 

 
 
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 12.7.2012 approved the 
proposal to provide a special incentive package to promote large -
scale manufacturing in the ESDM sector. The scheme is called the 
Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M -SIPS). The scheme 
provides subsidy for investments in capital expenditure - 20% for 
investments in SEZs and 25% in non -SEZs. It also provides for 
reimbursement of CVD/excise for capital equipment for the non -
SEZ units. For high technology and high capital investment units, 
like fabs, reimbursement of central taxes and duties is also 
provided. The incentives are available for investments made in a 
project within a period of 10 years from the date of approval.  
 
The policy is expected to create an indigenous manufacturing eco-
system for electronics in the country. It will foster the 
manufacturing of indigenously designed and manufactured chips 
creating a more cyber  secure ecosystem in the country. It will 
enable India to tap on the great economic potential that this 
knowledge sector offers. The increased development and 
manufacturing in the sector will lead to greater economic growth 
through more manufacturing and c onsequently greater 
employment in the sector.  
 
5. Setting up an Electronics Development Fund (EDF) to promote 
innovation, R&D, Indian IP and development of Indian 
Microprocessor  
 
The Detailed Project Report for setting up of Electronics 
Development Fund has been prepared with the help of SIDBI and 
consultation with Stake holders. This has been sent to Planning 
Commission for in-principle approval.  
 
6. Setting up a National Electronics Mission (NEM)  
 
The draft Cabinet note was prepared after detailed dis cussions 
with stakeholders including industry associations and Government 
Departments etc. The draft Cabinet note was circulated for Inter -
Ministerial consultations. Approval of Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission is being pursued. Simultaneously, 
preparatory work within the Department was carried out in this 
direction. Action was taken to create and strengthen the 
institutional mechanism for promoting ESDM activities and a 
ESDM-PMU project at a total outlay of Rs.300 lakhs for two years 
has been approved. In furtherance thereof, a number of activities 
were carried out for engagement of Consultants and providing 
logistics etc.   
 
Communication and Marketing 
 
While Government of India is creating the policies which would make it 
attractive to invest in the sector, a concerted effort to market the policies 
and India as a destination for investment in ESDM is also proposed to be 
mounted. Initial work in this regard has already commenced.   
 
A meeting of Chief Ministers and Ministers concerned of the States  
was organized  on August 29, 2011 to highlight the importance of ESDM 
sector in India and role which the States can play in this sector by 

 
 
emphasizing the impo rtance of the role of the State Governments in the 
promotion of ESDM industry in the country by developing attractive 
policies for attracting the investment to their respective states like 
development of  Electronic Manufacturing Clusters; creating  necess ary 
human resource required by the industry and effective single window 
mechanisms so as to provide for ease of doing business in the State, etc. 
 
A Communications and Brand Building Campaign for promotion of 
ESDM sector in India has been launched with the  objective to build “Made 
in India” as leading global brand in ESDM and increasing awareness 
regarding initiatives taken by Government to promote investments in 
ESDM sector. As a part of the Campaign, State level workshops, specific 
verticals related Works hops and outreach activities in academia 
pertaining to ESDM are being promoted. A Communications Need 
Assessment Study to help orchestrate the Campaign is also underway.  
 
An e-Newsletter relating to ESDM has also been launched with the 
objective of keepin g the ESDM stakeholder community better informed 
about the policy initiatives, decisions and actions of the Government in 
the sector. 
 
Manpower development (including Skill development in IT) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that during the year 2010-11, the Department had been 
given a target of skill development of 10 million persons in IECT by 2022, under 
National Skill Development Policy of the Government. The Committee also observe 
that though the proposed outlay for this project, for th e year 2010-11 and 2011-12 
was ` 460 crore and ` 717.75 crore respectively, no expenditure could be incurred 
under the project the reason being that there has been no progress in getting 
approvals for the scheme. Even after an elapse of three years the Dep artment is 
still working on draft Detailed Project Reports(DPR) along with the draft EFC Memo 
circulated to Ministries/Departments concerned. The Committee also note that 
Planning Commission has now made serious observations on necessary resources to 
set up new centres by DOEACC and C -DAC and in view of the resource constraints 
advised the DIT to split the project into two parts; first stage focusing on revamping 
of the existing centres and establishing new centres along with necessary 
infrastructure at a l ater stage. Keeping in view the fact that ICT is the largest and 
fastest growing industry and a lot needs to be done to sustain the momentum of 
growth in IT sector, there is an urgent need to give attention for skill development. 
The Committee while expres sing dissatisfaction over the way the Department has 
progressed till now, strongly recommend the Department to examine the feasibility 
of Planning Commission‟s observations and take further action without any further 
delay so that the Scheme is definitely implemented during the year 2012 -13.  The 
Committee may be apprised about the Department‟s plan of action especially in 
light of the aforesaid observations of the Planning Commission.  
. 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the observations of the Planning Commission, the Detailed Project 
Reports of NIELIT and CDAC are being revised.  The same would be re -circulated to 
various line Ministries/Departments concerned and then submitted for appraisal to 
the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  Necessar y approvals would be solicited 
on clearance by EFC so as to initiate the Scheme at the earliest. 
 

 
 
As regards the setting up of ICT Academies in each State/UT the Planning 
Commission had suggested that these could be co -located in the existing IITs, IIITs 
that are being set up.  Accordingly, the Department has approached the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and the respective IITs, IIITs to consider the same. 
 
E-Security 
Cyber Security (Incl. CERT-In, IT Act) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee  have learnt that a total of 774 Government Websites have 
been reported to be hacked during last 5 years which appear to have come from 
cyberspace of countries such as Australia, Bahrain, Brazil, Egypt, Germany, 
Indonesia, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Pakistan , Saudi Arabia, Spain, Turkey, UAE, UK 
and USA. Further, an analysis of the year-wise activities of CERT–In also reveals that 
the defacement of Indian Websites has almost tripled from the year 2007.  The 
Committee are highly concerned to note that inspite of repetitive attacks on the 
Government websites, till now ISO -27001 standard has been implemented by only 
527 Government organisations and in only one Government Department the cyber 
Security assurance framework has been validated. Further, as of now only  3192 
Government Websites have been audited and audit of 3556 websites are still in 
progress. Not only that, the quantum of loss in terms of money due to e-fraud is also 
increasing every year. As per Reserve Bank of India (RBI) between 2009 to 2011 
there were 489 cases involving ` 2846.38 lakh and as per the Economic Offenses 
Unit of CBI there were 9 financial fraud cases registered between 2009 to  2012 
(February) leading to the loss of more than ` 43.92 crore.  
 
The Committee deplore the security management being carried out in the 
Government Departments specially when all the Government bodies are undergoing 
the paradigm shift towards usage of IT for providing transparency and corruption 
free services. The Commit tee strongly recommend for a multipronged strategy to 
tackle the issue of hacking, spam mails, financial fraud and accelerate the R&D 
activity in this direction.  
 
The Committee also recommend the Department to increase the number of IT 
security auditors i n the country which are just 60 in number so that auditing of 
remaining Government Departments can be done expeditiously, because numerous 
Government websites are hacked inspite of NIC auditing these websites before their 
formal launch.   
 
The Committee further observe that the revenue loss reported due to e -fraud 
may be just the tip of the iceberg and the loss occurring due to cyber fraud would 
be enormous which goes undocumented/unregistered.  Moreover, a lot need to be 
done to make our system regarding c yber crime as user friendly as well as in 
disseminating the prescribed procedures for reporting about the cyber crime cases 
amongst the masses.  Not only that as repeatedly emphasized by the Committee, 
focussed attention need to be given to training of Gov ernment officials/law 
enforcement agencies particularly to those dealing with the issue related to 
reporting and investigating the cyber crime cases.  The concrete and immediate 
initiatives in this regard need to be taken by the Government.  Moreover, ther e is a 
need to have a cyber crisis management plan to deal with the cyber frauds/critical 
issues related to cyber crimes for the country.  
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The area of Information Technology is characterized by rapid developments 
and fast changing obsolescence.  With every IT product introduced into the market, 
newer vulnerabilities are discovered, leaving scope for malicious actions.  As a 
result, the cyber security requirements to tackle the issue of hacking, spam, cyber 
crime, financial fraud etc. are quite dynamic that change with the threat 
environment.  In tune with the dynamic nature of Information Technology as well as 
ever changing cyber threat landsc ape, continuous efforts are required to be made 
to prevent and recover from cyber attacks.  As such, the protection of IT 
infrastructure of Government as well as critical sector organisations is a dynamic 
activity and continuous process.  
 
Government is aware of the nature of threats in cyber space and accordingly, 
the Government is following an integrated approach with a series of legal, technical 
and administrative steps to ensure that necessary processes and system are in 
place to address the growing thr eat of cyber attacks in the country.  In order to 
adopt a holistic approach to ensuring adequate cyber security, Department would 
pursue and strengthen the cyber security initiatives during the 12th Plan in six 
focussed areas such as enabling legal framewo rk; security policy, compliance and 
assurance; cyber security R&D: Cyber security incidents early warning and 
response: security awareness, skill development & training and collaboration. 
 
The approach to implementing security best practices in Government and 
critical sector organisations is taken up by way of implementing a comprehensive 
cyber crisis management plan. The „Crisis Management Plan (CMP) for countering 
cyber attacks and cyber terrorism‟ has been approved by the National Crisis 
Management Commi ttee for wider circulation and implementation among key 
Central Ministries and all States/UTs and all critical sector organisations within their 
domain. This CMP document provides guidelines for implementing information 
security best practices as per ISO 2 7001 standard as a means of systematic 
approach to protect the information and IT infrastructure assets and also proactively 
preventing the occurrence and recurrence of cyber security incidents. In addition, it 
also provides guidelines for handling cyber security related crises and describes the 
framework for cyber incident response coordination among all the stakeholder 
agencies in the country.  
  
The CMP document has been circulated to all the key central Ministries and 
all states /UTs and all necessary a ssistance is being provided by the Department to 
enable them in drawing their own sectoral Crisis Management Plans and 
organizational level crisis management plans.  Third party auditing for verification of 
implementation of security best practices is an i ntegral part of the crisis 
management plan. The implementation of crisis management plan along with the 
implementation of security best practices is being regularly reviewed by the 
Department as well as Secretary, Security in the Cabinet Secretariat for pe riodic 
reporting to the National Crisis Management Committee. 
 
The effectiveness of CMP is being regularly tested by way of conducting 
comprehensive cyber security drills to enable assessment of security preparedness 
of organizations and their ability to respond and mitigate cyber attacks as outlined 
in the CMP. So far 6 such drills have been conducted involving more than 60 
organisations in various sectors such as Finance, Telecom, Defence, Transport, 
Energy, Petroleum & Natural Gas and IT. 
 
With regard t o increasing the number of auditors in the country, it is 
submitted that existing empanelment process is under comprehensive review and it 

 
 
is expected that the new process to be put in place in the near future would enable 
the Department to increase the nu mber of auditors.  In this context, it is also 
submitted here that empanelment of auditors by CERT -In is an open process 
available to all competent and qualified auditors in the country.  Auditing is a 
commercial activity and as such the empanelment of aud itors gets determined by 
the demand for audits as well as the ability of auditors to qualify through the CERT -
In's empanelment process.  With the mandate of implementation of security best 
practices in place for critical sector organisations, it is expecte d that more number 
of auditors would seek empanelment and also the existing auditors would seek to 
expand their auditing strength to cater to the growing needs.   
 
Regarding training of Government/Law enforcement agencies on cyber crime, 
it is submitted he re that Ministry of Home Affairs deals with the aspect of building 
adequate technical capacity in handling Cyber Crime related issue including setting 
up of Cyber Police Stations and trained manpower in Law Enforcement Agencies 
across the country for detection, registration, investigation and prosecution of cyber 
crimes.  The Department of Electronics and Information Technology is playing an 
enabling role by taking a series of measures covering aspects like legal, technical 
and administrative steps to ensur e that necessary systems are in place to address 
the emerging cyber crimes effectively.  The steps taken by the Department include: 
 
 The Information Technology Act, 2000 as amended by the Information 
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 has been enforced on 27 .10.2009. 
The Act provides legal framework to address various types of cyber 
crimes and prescribes punishment also for such crimes. 
 A major programme has been initiated on development of indigenous 
cyber forensics specifically cyber forensic tools, setting  up of 
infrastructure for investigation and training of the users, particularly 
police and judicial officers in use of this tool to collect and analyse the 
digital evidence and present them in Court.   
 Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) and Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC) are involved in providing 
basic and advanced training of Law Enforcement Agencies, Forensic 
labs and judiciary on the procedures and methodology of collecting, 
analysing and presenting digital evidence.   
 Cyber forensic training lab has been set up at Training Academy of 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to impart basic and advanced 
training in Cyber Forensics and Investigation of Cyber Crimes to Police 
Officers associated with CBI. In addition, DeitY has set up cyber 
forensic training and investigation labs in the States of Kerala, Assam, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Jammu & Kashmir. 
 In collaboration with Data Security Council of India (DSCI), NASSCO, 
Cyber Forensic Labs have been set up at Mumbai, Bangluru, Pune and 
Kolkata for training of Law Enforcement personnel. National Law 
School, Bangalore and NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad are also 
engaged in conducting several awareness and training programmes on 
Cyber Laws and Cyber crimes for judicial officers.   
 DeitY has formulated a set of investigation manuals with procedures 
for Search, Seizure Analysis and Presentation of digital evidence in 
courts.  The manuals have been circulated to Law Enforcement 
Agencies in all States.   
 
In XII plan also, capacity building and training mechanism for developing a 
strong and dynamic skilled work force for investigation of Cyber crimes has been 
identified as a focused area.  Awareness programmes on Cyber Crimes and 

 
 
establishment of Centre for Excellence for capacity building for Law Enforcement 
Agencies and Judiciary will be launched during XII plan.  Also a Centre of Excellence 
in Cyber Forensics will be set up to carry out innovative R&D with focus on basic 
research and technology development, so that advanced Cyber Forensic Tools are 
developed indigenously to meet the requirements of Law Enforcement Agencies for 
investigating emerging Cyber crimes. 
 
 
Policy issues on e-waste 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
 
On the issue of e-waste generated in the country, the Department has 
informed that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has already come out with an 
extended producers responsibility rules under the relevant Environment Act, 
according to which every electronic manufact urer is expected to recover the used 
items once the life is over and these rules will come into effect sometime in May -
June, 2012.  The Department is in the process of discussing with the industry as to 
how they can facilitate to create capacity for recove ring and recycling of used 
items. The Committee in this regard would like to reiterate their recommendation 
made in Seventeenth Report and emphasize that Department should have proper 
coordination with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Indust ry so as to 
tackle the issue of huge quantum of e-waste generated in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) is nodal agency for policy, 
planning, promoting and coordinating the environmental programmes and is 
involved in enacting laws, guidelines referring to e -waste.  DeitY, being the nodal 
Department for issues related to electronics, is involved in the process of developing 
technological solutions to the e-waste management.   
  
Department is interacting with MoEF from time to time to get necessary data, 
status of present E -Waste Rules etc.  However, in order to have a structured and 
sustained mechanism to address various policy issues on e -waste, the Department 
has proposed to MoEF formation of a Working Group  on e-Waste, involving MoEF, 
DoT, industry associations like ELCINA, MAIT and other possible stakeholders.  The 
response of MoEF is awaited.  DeitY will continue follow -up on this to have a 
structured mechanism at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
     December, 2012  Standing Committee on 
    Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)         Information Technology 

 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 7 th December, 2012 from 1500 hours to 
1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
6. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Shri Salim Ansari 
8. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
9. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
10. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra Agrawal, 
a Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitting in accordance with 
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration of the Draft Action Taken 
Reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13) relating to ******** and the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology . After some discussion, the Committee 
adopted the same without any modification. The Committee, then, authorized the 
Chairman to finalize and present the reports to the House during the ongoing Session 
of Parliament. 
 
4.  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx. 
 
 
5.  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________ 
xxxxx Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24 & 25  
 Total 15 
 Percentage 60.00 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 13  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 04.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4, 5, 8, 9 and 15   
 Total 05 
 Percentage 20.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  10, 17, 20 and 23  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 16.00 
 
 