 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)  
 
51 


 
 
 
 
FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)  


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1-19 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
20-43 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
44 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
45-46 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
47-56 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 13th December, 2013………. 
 
57-58 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in their Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
59 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
10. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
11. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  B.K. Hariprasad 
27. Shri Basavaraj Patil  
28. Dr. Kunwar Deep Singh 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
30. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
31.  Vacant 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director  
4. Shri Abhishek Sharma - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee  on Information Technology (2013-14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifty–first 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2013-14)’ of the Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology). 
 
2. The Forty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
30th April, 2013. The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken Notes on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-third Report on 29th July, 2013.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
13th December, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Forty-third Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
     RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                                            Chairman, 
13 December, 2013                                                                                         Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for 
Grants (201 3-14)‟ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Forty -third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 30 April, 2013. It contained 20 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Depa rtment of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,8,10,12,15,16,18,19 and 20   
 Total 11 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4 and 5   
   Total 02 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  6,7,9,11,13,14 and 17  
 Total 07 
 Chapter V 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
A. Setting up of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) Labs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that SAR laboratories have been planned by the 
Department for verification of SAR values of mobile handsets and hand 
held devices as declared by the manufacturers in compliance with EMF 
exposure limits prescribed by DoT. Taking into consideration the existence 
of m illions of mobile handsets of a vast variety of makes and 
specifications involving a large number of manufacturers, the Committee 
do not feel amused to note that to handle all this for the entire country, so 
far, only one SAR Lab has been installed and com missioned in TEC 
headquarters at New Delhi and the Department is in the process of setting 
up of another SAR Lab at RTEC Mumbai. The Committee, therefore, feel 
constrained to observe that such an important issue which has a serious 
bearing on the health of  the people has not been given the kind of 
seriousness it deserves. The Department appears to be very casual in its 
approach in strictly enforcing the SAR norms and treating it as a mere 
formality. The Committee while deprecating such lackadaisical attitud e of 
the Department strongly recommend that the Department should urgently 
undertake a thorough review with regard to the number of SAR Labs 
required to be set up in the country and the verification of SAR values 
must be made a mandatory provision for all kinds of mobile handsets, and 
keep the Committee informed of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
 
 
7. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
“Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) has already set up a SAR lab at New 
Delhi, and has planned another one at Mumbai, at its regional Centre.  It 
is submitted that according to Office Memoranda issued by this 
Department on SAR value of mobile phones, all the mobile handset 
manufacturers, both indigenous and imported, shall pro vide a self 
declaration in respect of SAR value based on certificate from 
internationally accredited labs [International Laboratory Accreditation 
Cooperation (ILAC) accredited labs] or accredited by TEC, India to TEC 

3 
 
 
 
with a copy to this Department for nece ssary action. Such self declared 
SAR limits shall be subjected to TEC audit as and when required. Thus the 
labs being set up by the TEC are mostly for audit purposes only and 
manufacturer/importer may get their mobile phone tested from any 
internationally accredited labs or TEC accredited labs.” 
 
8. On the ve ry important issue of compliance of S pecific Absorption Rate 
(SAR) values of mobile handsets and handheld devices with EMF exposure 
limits prescribed by DoT , the committee in their original Report had strongly 
recommended that D epartment of Telecommunications must undertake a 
thorough review of the number of SAR Labs required in the country and the 
verification of SAR values must be made a mandatory parameter. The 
Committee are unhappy to note that Depa rtment instead of taking a concrete 
action on their recommendation has merely restated the existing provision 
and practice wherein all handset manufacturers of both indigenous as well as 
imported instruments are required to provide a self declaration in re spect of 
SAR value based certificate which shall be subjected to TEC Audit. The 
Committee strongly feel that Department should be equipped with sufficient 
number of SAR Laboratories so as to keep a strict vigil on the manufacturers 
with regard to  adhering  of EMF exposure limit. The Committee therefore 
reiterate their recommendation and desire that DoT should undertake 
thorough review of SAR Labs required in the country and take expeditious 
steps to set up the Labs. 
 
 
B. Non availability of EMF Testing Instruments  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that TERM Cells of the Department have been 
mandated with the work of cross checking the compliance of EMF 
Radiation norms in respect of telecom towers. The Committee have been 
informed that TERM Cell tests upto 10 per cent of New BTS sites randomly 
at its discretion. The Committee however, find it unbelievable to note that 
as on date no EMF testing instrument is available with TERM Cells and 
instead of procuring and using its own EMF instruments, TERM Cells are 

4 
 
 
 
carrying out the measurem ent of radiation level by using the test 
instruments provided by the Telecom Service Providers. The Committee 
are not in agreement with the response of the Department that there is 
no adverse effect in carrying out the measurement of radiation levels from 
various BTS towers on account of non -availability of EMF test equipment. 
Taking into consideration the increasing concerns over the harmful effects 
of electromagnetic radiation on human health and that the TERM Cells 
have been entrusted with the work of cr oss checking, the Committee feel 
deeply perturbed on this non -serious approach of the Department in 
dealing with such an important issue concerning radiations from BTS 
towers. The Committee feel that the Department owe an explanation as to 
under what autho rity it is using the instruments provided by TSP 
operators instead of having its own instrument and what could be the 
authenticity of such instruments and how such testing can be termed as 
authentic. Taking note of the fact that the Government have already  
formulated norms with respect to testing procedures and testing fee, the 
Committee fail to understand whether such norms permit the TERM Cells 
to use the equipment provided by TSP themselves instead of its own 
equipment. Now that the tender for procuring 69 test instruments had 
already been floated which shall be opened on 12 April, 2013, the 
Committee strongly recommend that serious efforts must be made by the 
Department to procure the requisite number of test instruments at the 
earliest to become self -sufficient in EMF testing. The Committee also 
recommend that efforts must be made to promote domestic production of 
EMF instrument instead of relying only on import.” 
  
(Recommendation No. 5, Para no. 2.10) 
 
10. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
 
“DoT instructions issued vide letter no. 800 -15/2010-VAS dated 8th April 
2010 mandated vide para 3(v) that tools and equipment for testing would 
be provided by the concerned Mobile Service Provider to the TERM Cell. 
Accordingly the TERM Cells are carrying out the cross checking of the 
compliance of EMF radiation norms in respect of Telecom Towers by using 
the instruments provided by Telecom Service Provider(TSP) till such time 
DOT procures its own test instruments. The  testing instruments provided 
by the TSPs are of standard make and measurements are carried out by 
TERM cells at BTS sites to ensure authenticity of the measurements. 
 
To avoid the dependence on TSPs for instruments, the case of 
procurement of 69 sets of Test Equipment for the TERM Cells is already 
under process in TEC. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 5, Para no. 2.10) 
 
11. While noting that TERM Cells of the Department have been mandated 
with the work of cross checking the compliance of EMF Radiation norms in 
respect of telecom towers  which has a serious bearing on human health , the 

5 
 
 
 
Committee in their recommendation, were deeply perturbed to note that no  
EMF testing instruments were available with TERM cells and instead the TERM 
Cells were carrying out the measurement of radiation level of upto 10 per cent 
randomly selected new BTS sites set up by Telecom Service Providers using 
the test instruments provided by the Telecom Service Providers themselves . 
The Committee had therefore recommended that Department s hould make 
serious efforts to procure sufficient number of instruments at the earliest to 
become self -sufficient in EMF Testing. Further, noting that process for 
procuring 69 testing instruments had been initiated, Committee had desired 
that serious efforts must be made to procure these equipments.  
  
The Committee express their serious displeasure over the fact that the 
Department has not shown any kind of urgency in procuring the EMF testing 
equipment and simply stated that the procurement of 69 sets of T est 
Equipments for TERM Cells is under process in TEC. The Committee take a very 
serious view of callous attitude of Department towards a very important issue 
of measuring of EMF radiations which concern with the human health and 
environment and strongly f eel that the existing mechanism wherein the TSPs 
provide the equipment for monitoring the radiation at BTS sites set up by 
themselves puts the credibility of the entire exercise under question. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and d esire that serious 
efforts must be made by the Department to procure the 69 EMF testing 
instruments within a specific timeframe so as to enable TERM Cells to measure 
EMF radiations from telecom towers and to ensure that stipulated norms with 
regard to EMF radiations emanating from telecom towers are well within the 
prescribed limits.  
 

6 
 
 
 
C. Setting up of Wireless Monitoring Stations 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Wireless Monitoring Organizations (WMO), a 
field unit of the Wireless Planning and Coordination wing (WPC Wing) 
is entrusted to ensure that interference to wireless networks, which 
may occur for a variety of reasons, is immediately resolved. Another 
concern of the WMO is to e nsure spectrum availability for the 
introduction of new wireless networks.  Protection to radio 
communication networks of public bodies (Government/Undertakings), 
security (defence, police and paramilitary organizations) and 
numerous networks of other agen cies also carry high priority with the 
WMO. To carry out its responsibilities, WMO operates a country -wide 
network of 28 Wireless Monitoring Stations (WMSs) . The Department 
has informed the Committee that the foremost responsibility of WMSs 
is to insure i nterference-free operations of mobile and DTH services, 
amongst others, affecting millions of people in the Country. Equally 
important for WMSs is to provide protection to  safety of life related 
communications in the aeronautical and maritime mobile servi ces. In 
the background of such important tasks being performed by WMSs , 
the Committee note with concern that the utilization of funds 
pertaining to development of WMSs is abysmally low. During 2012 -13, 
an amount of Rs.58 crore was allocated at BE stage fo r WMO which 
was reduced to Rs.3.50 crore at the RE stage and the actual utilization 
upto February, 2013 was only Rs 3.97 crore . The Committee also find 
it contradictory that on one hand , the Department has claimed that 
six new Wireless Monitoring Stations were planned and established at 
Bhubaneshwar , Dehradun , Lucknow , Patna , Raipur  and Vijaywada 
under Eleventh Five Year Plan ,on the other , it is stating that the bid 
document for procurement of technical infrastructure for the  WMSs  is 
still under revision and is yet to be submitted to the competent 
authority . In view of such important functions being performed by 
WMS, the committee strongly recommend that due importance be 
given to the timely execution of the projects so that the procuremen t 
of requisite technical infrastructure is not delayed any further. The 
committee also recommend the Department to ensure timely 
establishment of six new WMS during the Twelfth Plan in a time bound 
manner and ensure optimum utilization of funds allocated u nder 
annual Plan 2013-14.” 
 
13. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
“1. The expenditure shown are on the minimum mandatory 
expenses, on account of salary, office expenses for these newly 
established six WMSs and civil works of the permanent established  
WMSs. 
 

7 
 
 
 
2. Revised draft Bid document for the procurement of technical 
infrastructure for the six new WMSs is already submitted to the 
competent authorities for the necessary approvals. 
 
3. The case for the esta blishment of six new WMSs under the              
12th  Five Year Plan will be taken up shortly for the administrative 
approval of the competent authority.” 
 
14. Taking note of the important function performed by the Wireless 
Monitoring Stations (WMS) in handling the wireless networks across the 
country and feeling concerned at the abysmally low utilization of funds by the 
Department in developing new WMSs, the Committee in their original Report 
had recommended for timely execution of project s, avoiding delays in 
procurement of equipment and establishment of six new WMSs as planned 
during the 12th Plan Period in a time bound manner. 
  
From the action taken reply, the Committee note that though the bid 
document for procurement of technical infrastructure for  six new WMSs has 
already been submitted to the competent authority for necessary approvals, 
the case for establishment of six new WMSs during the 12 th Plan is yet to be 
taken up for administrative approval. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the further progress made in the case as well as the time frame fixe d for 
establishment of new WMSs  during the 12 th Plan, within three months of the 
date of presentation of this Report.  
 
D. Under utilization of funds under USOF Scheme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that telecom services are important drivers for 
development, delivery of public services such as education, health, etc. 
and integration of rural areas with the rest of the country. Recognizing the 
importance of telecom services, Universal Service Support Policy was 
announced by the Government in March, 2002 under which a separate 
fund i.e. USOF, for providing access to telegraph services to people in the 

8 
 
 
 
rural and remote areas was set  up. An analysis of the utilization of funds 
by the Department and the implementation of some of the important 
schemes under USOF, indicates that the efforts of the Department could 
not match up with the noble endeavor for which the fund has been set up. 
In this regard, the Committee note that the amount of Rs. 3000 Crore 
allocated at BE stage during 2012 -13 was reduced to Rs. 625 crore at RE 
stage and the actual utilisation upto February, 2013 was also Rs. 625 
crore. The Committee observe that as on 31.12. 2012, the available 
balance under USOF is Rs. 24,801.56 crore and with implementation of a 
new scheme i.e. National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) with a financial 
outlay of Rs. 20,000 and implementation of Mobile Tower in Left Wing 
Extremism (LWE) affected areas at an estimated sum of Rs. 3060 crore, 
the bulk of the accruals to USOF over the years would be utilized. The 
Committee recommend that the Department must pay serious attention to 
implementation of these two schemes as this would ensure the proper 
utilization of funds under USOF.” 
 
16. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
“1. National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN)  
The Project was approved by Cabinet on 25.10.2011. The project was 
envisaged to be executed by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The SPV 
[Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL)] was incorporated on 
25.02.2012 and the Directors of BBNL joined in July – August 2012. 
In the High Level Committee (HLC) of National Optical  Fibre Network 
(NOFN), constituted for the purpose of overseeing the implementation of 
the project, it was decided that a pilot be conducted to understand the 
ground realities before going for the main project. Three Pilot Projects 
have been completed on 15.10.2012 to cover all Gram P anchayats of 
Arain Block in Ajmer District (Rajasthan), Panisagar block in North Tripura 
District (Tripura), Paravada Block in Vishakhapatnam District (A.P.). Each 
of the 58 Gram Panchayats in these three Pilot Project Blocks have been 
provided with 100 Mb ps Bandwidth. The response of Telecom Industry at 
these locations is lukewarm. To trigger Government to Customer (G2C) 
Services at pilot locations, Department of Electronics & Information 
Technology (DeitY) has embarked on counterpart funding to take 
connectivity to 110 Govt. institutions (Schools/ Hospitals/ Offices etc.) in 
these pilot locations and also provide Customer Premises Equipment 
(CPEs) to showcase G2C applications. A Video conference was held as 
08.04.2013 with 3 pilot locations to test utilization of NOFN infrastructure.  
  
Alongside the completion of the pilot project, the survey for main project 
was started which is currently under progress. The tenders for supply of 
material and execution of the project are also under process by BBNL and 
3 CPSUs (BSNL, Railtel and Powergrid). 
 
NOFN project is envisaged as a Centre – State joint effort. State 
Government are expected to contribute by way of not levying any RoW 
charges. This requires suitable   tri-partite MoU to be signed by GOI, State 
Governments & BBNL. There have been delays in according the consent 
by some States.  
  

9 
 
 
 
Tri-partite MoU has been signed on 26.10.2012 with 13 states viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram , Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, and 3 Union Territories viz. Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & 
Diu and Puducherry. Further, the tripartite MoU has been signed on 
12.04.2013 with 9 States viz. Assam, Bihar Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Ka shmir, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha and Punjab and 1 
Union Territory viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Tri -partite MoU has been 
signed with West Bengal on 11.06.2013.  A total of about 2, 20, 000 
Gram Panchayats will get covered in these States and UTs. Eff orts are 
underway to sign the tripartite MoU with remaining States/ UTs.  
 
2. Mobile Towers in LWE affected areas: 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has identified and conveyed 2199 
locations to DoT in 9 States which are affected by Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE) and do not currently have any coverage by any service provider. 
These locations have been identified for installing towers and mobile 
equipment keeping in view the security and maintenance considerations. 
BSNL has submitted that they have already installed Mobile Towers at 363 
locations.  
 
State-wise details of these locations are as given below: 
 
S. NO. Name of the  
State 
No. of locations 
identified by MHA 
Towers already 
commissioned 
by BSNL 
1 Andhra Pradesh 227 3 
2 Bihar 184 0 
3 Chhattisgarh 497 351 
4 Jharkhand 782 0 
5 Madhya Pradesh 22 6 
6 Maharashtra 60 3 
7 Odisha 253 0 
8 Uttar Pradesh 78 0 
9 West Bengal 96 0 
 Total 2199 363 
 
Department of Telecom had sought approval of the Cabinet to extend 
USOF Subsidy Support to BSNL on nomination basis, for providing & 
managing Mobile Services in LWE affected areas, for general public as well 
as security personnel around these locations. 
 
The Union Cabinet has approved USOF supported scheme to provide 
mobile services i n areas affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE) on 4 th 
June, 2013.” 
 
17. Taking note of under -utilisation of funds in implementation of some of 
the important schemes under USOF, the Committee in their original Report had 

10 
 
 
 
recommended the Department to pay serious attention to the implementation 
of two important schemes namely, National Optical Fibre Network (NoFN) with 
a financial outlay of Rs. 20,000 crore and setting up of mobile towers in Left 
Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas at an estimated sum of Rs. 3060 crore. 
In this regard, from the action taken reply, the Committee are constrained to 
note that very little progress has so far been achieved. This is reflected from 
the fact that after presentation of this Report in April, 2013, the tripartite MoU 
(which is signed by GoI, State Governments and BSNL) has been entered into 
with only one more State namely West Bengal on 11.6.2013 taking the total 
tally to 23 States and 4 UTs. Similarly, for the USOF supported LWE scheme , 
the Cabinet approval has been obtained only on 4 June, 2013. The Committee 
while expressing their dissatisfaction at slow progress reiterate their 
recommendation and also desire that implementation of both the schemes 
may be expedited. The Committee woul d like to be apprised of the progress 
made in implementation of these schemes within 3 months of the date of 
presentation of this Report.  
 
E. Wireline Broadband Connectivity 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Under the Rural Broadband (Wireline) Scheme launched on 20th January, 
2009 with a roll out period of 5 years for providing wireline broadband 
connectivity in rural and remote areas, the Committee note that out of the 
target of providing 8,88,832 wireline b roadband connections through 
BSNL by January, 2014, the achievements as on December, 2012 was 
only 4,33,018. During the same period, the achievements with regard to 
providing wireline broadband kiosks were 10,713 against the target of 
28,672. The performan ce of broadband connectivity in North -Eastern 
Region is even worse as the achievement was merely 2460 against the 
target of 26,226. The Committee observe that the efforts of BSNL to 
provide wireline broadband kiosk through the exchanges have clearly not 
been able to match the popularity gained by Common Service Centre set 
up by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology under a 
national scheme which are based on a model where the village level 
entrepreneur  run them. The Committee desire that efforts must be made 
by the Department to increase broadband kiosk through the participation 

11 
 
 
 
of village level entrepreneur on the lines of Common Service Centers 
which have proved to be a big success in the remaining span of the 
scheduled time for completion of the scheme.” 
(Recommendation No. 8 Para no. 2.13) 
19. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
 
“Under the Rural Broadband (Wireline) Scheme launched on 20th January, 
2009 with a rollout period of 5 years fo r providing wireline broadband 
connectivity in rural and remote areas, as on 31st March 2013, 470299 
broadband connections and 11443 Kiosks have been provided by BSNL 
against the total target of 888832 connections and 28672 Kiosks by 
January 2014. The prog ress has been lagging in off -take of broadband 
connections due to following reasons as reported by BSNL: 
 
(i) Cost of computer is high as compared to house hold income in rural 
area.  
(ii) Poor power supply condition in rural and remote areas.  
(iii) Poor English literacy in rural areas and Non availability of contents 
in local language.  
(iv) Lack of computer literacy in rural and remote areas.  
(v) Shortage of relevant content for rural population. 
 
However, BSNL has assured it will put all its efforts to make the scheme 
more successful.” 
 
20. The Committee are unhappy to note that  under the Rural Broadband 
(Wireline) Scheme launched on 20th January, 2009 with a roll out period of 5 
years for providing wireline broadband connectivity in rural and remote areas, 
out of the target  of providing 8,88,832 wireline broadband connections and 
28,672 wireline broadband kiosks through BSNL by January, 2014, as on 31st 
March 2013, BSNL has been able to provide just 470299 broadband 
connections and 11443 wireline broadband Kiosks respectively. 
  
The Committee note that various impediments due to which progress 
has  been far below the target include high cost of computers, poor power 
supply in rural and remote areas, poor English literacy in rural areas and lack 
of relevant content in local language. The Committee desire that DoT should in 
consultation with BSNL take remedial steps to overcome the impediments so 
that the Rural Broadband (Wireline) scheme becomes successful.  

12 
 
 
 
 
F. Amount owed by Private Operators To BSNL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“As per the information furnished by the Department, the Committee note 
that as on 31.01. 2013 an amount of Rs. 1111 crore is outstanding from 
private operators to BSNL. The Committee  are dismayed to find that out 
of the outstanding of Rs. 1111 crore to be recovered from private 
operators, a sum of Rs. 986 crore is sub -judice in the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court and TDSAT and dispute pertaining to CDR (Call Detail Record) 
reconciliations and s ame is being pursued vigorously for an early 
settlement. The Committee while expressing a serious concern over such 
a huge outstanding amount as well as its disputed nature, strongly 
recommend that the company may analyse the reasons for such disputes 
and undertake appropriate remedial measures to avoid such disputes in 
the future.” 
22. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
“The amount owed by private operators to BSNL as on 31.03.2013, is 
given below: 
            
                                                                                         (Fig. In Crores) 
Name of the 
Operator 
Gross 
Outstanding 
Disputed 
Outstanding 
Net 
outstanding 
Bharti 239.46 212.03 27.43 
Reliance 184.42 163.67 20.75 
Vodafone 93.96 85.86 8.10 
IDEA 30.99 27.40 3.59 
Total 548.83 488.96 59.87 
Others 580.05 485.38 94.67 
Grand Total 1128.88 974.34 154.54 
 
An amount of Rs. 974.34 crores is locked up in various types of disputes, 
out of which most of the amount is sub-judice in the ongoing legal cases 
before the Hon‟ble TDSAT / Supreme Court. The disputes are mainly due 
to the following reasons: 
 
(a) Reduction of tariff in respect of Interconnect Usage Charges by TRAI 
against which BSNL has filed an appeal in Hon‟ble Supreme Cour t. BSNL 
continues billing on earlier rates for Carrier Charges, Port Charges, etc. 
which private operators are refusing to pay. 
(b) Likewise, the private operators have also approached Courts seeking relief 

13 
 
 
 
(i) from payment of infrastructure charges revised by BSNL. 
(ii) Against the disconnection notices of BSNL giving reasons for non -
payment as CDR (Call Detail Record) mismatch/CLI ( calling line 
identification) cases , etc. and 
(iii) Against Trunk Group Violation charges billed by BSNL for wrong 
routing of calls by private operators. 
 
Out of outstanding of Rs. 1129 Crore from private operators to BSNL as 
on 31.03.2013, an amount of Rs. 974 Crores is locked up in various types 
of disputes, of which, most of the amount is sub -judice in the ongoing 
legal  cases before the Hon‟ble TDSAT/Supreme Court. BSNL is making all 
out efforts for recovery of its payments.  Some of the r easons for these 
disputes and efforts made by BSNL for recovery of payments are as 
follows: 
Payment of Interconnect Usage Charges and port charges are governe d 
by mutual interconnect agreements between BSNL & Private Operators. 
However, charges payable by Private Operators to BSNL are modified by 
TRAI by way of Regulations issued from time to time.  
 
For instance, TRAI has reduced the  
a) Port charges from Rs. 55,000/- per port to Rs. 39,000/ - from 
01.04.2007 
b) Carriage charges in respect of intra circle cellular calls from Rs. 
0.65p  per minute to Rs.0.15p per minute from 01.04.2009. 
c) Port charges further from Rs. 39,000/- per port to Rs. 10,000/- per 
port (for PSTN ports) and Rs. 4000/ - per port (for GSM port) from 
01.10.2012. 
BSNL has challenged this huge reduction of rates by TRAI regulations in 
Hon‟ble TDSAT & Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India. These cases are 
pending at various levels in Hon‟ble TDSAT, High Court &  Supreme Court. 
 
 BSNL continued to raise the bills at old (higher) rates (so that its claim 
remains justifiable/claimable in these courts) leading to mounting of 
outstanding dues. Private Operators are not paying the outstanding 
amounts by taking advan tage of TRAI Regulations & pending 
decision/judgments from Hon‟ble TDSAT, High Court & Supreme Court. 
 
Presently, BSNL is not in a position to recover the outstanding dues from 
the private operators because of the orders of Hon‟bleCourts „not to take 
any c oercive against the Private Operators‟  in respect of disconnection 
notices issued by BSNL. 
 
BSNL has been engaging Solicitor General (SG) of India, Additional 
Solicitor General (ASG) of India & Ex SG & ASG‟s to defend its cases.  
 
23. The Committee in thei r original report had noted that an amount to the 
tune of Rs. 1129 crore was outstanding from private operators to BSNL as on 
31.03.2013, out of which Rs. 974 crore wa s locked up in various types of 
disputes, of which, most of the amount is sub-judice in the ongoing legal cases 

14 
 
 
 
before the Hon‟ble TDSAT/Supreme Court . The Committee had  therefore 
desired that appropriate measures may be taken to recover the outstanding 
dues. From the Action Taken r eplies Committee note that as BSNL is not in a 
position to recover the outstanding dues from the private operators because of 
the orders of Hon‟ble Courts „not to take any coercive action against the 
Private Operators‟ in respect of disconnection notices issued by BSNL.  
 
The Committee feel that the issue of long -pending disputes over huge 
outstanding amounts owed by private operators further exacerbates the 
declining financial position of BSNL and it is therefore imperative that DoT and 
BSNL should take st ringent steps to recover the dues. The Committee have 
been informed that BSNL has been engaging Solicitor General (SG) of India, 
Additional Solicitor General (ASG) of India & Ex SG & ASG‟s to defend its 
cases. The Committee desire that  DoT and BSNL should  periodically hold 
meetings with the Ministry of Law, Solicitor General of India and Additional 
Solicitor General of India and urge upon them to take appropriate steps for 
early decision in cases pending before Hon‟ble TDSAT/Supreme Court.  
 
G. Financial performance of MTNL and Revival Plan for ITI 
 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos . 13 & 14) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee feel extremely concerned at the continuing trend of 
increasing losses MTNL year after year.  During 2009 -10, MTNL had 
incurred loss of Rs. 2610.92 crore which was increased to Rs. 2801.92 
crore during 2010-11.  The loss incurred by MTNL during 2011-12 was Rs. 
4109.78 crore.  The Committee also deprecate the low utilization of IEBR 
by MTNL during 2012-13. The Committee note that main reasons for such 
heavy losses being incurred by the company include overstaffing, revision 
of wages/arrears, pro vision for spectrum charges, pension 
payment/actuarial valuation, accounting for balance amount of VRS 
payments, reduction in tariffs and service area constraints etc.  As a 
result, the MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem and is 
borrowing money to meet its day to day requirements.  The Committee 
note that most of these issues need Government intervention for their 

15 
 
 
 
settlement, but the same is not forthcoming.  The Committee, therefore, 
feel that there is an urgent need for the Government to addr ess all such 
issues besides chalking out a detailed strategy to restore MTNL as a viable 
Telecom PSU in the country.  The Committee also note that the proposal 
of MTNL for surrendering the BWA spectrum allotted to them and refund 
of full price of Rs. 4533. 99 crore plus interest (Rs. 766.90 crore) is 
pending with the Department of Telecommunications for their 
consideration.  The Committee recommend that the Department may take 
a final decision on this issue at the earliest.  The Committee further 
recommend that the Department should urgently go into the merits of the 
assistance sought by MTNL for other proposals viz. sovereign guarantee 
for raising long term bonds, monetization of land and buildings, financial 
assistance for excess spectrum in 2G, funding sup port for VRS and 
creation of a common Pension Trust for all groups of absorbed employees.  
The Committee desire that all steps necessary  for revive MTNL are 
implemented in a time bound manner so as to prevent any further slide in 
the financial and physica l performance of the Company.  The Committee 
also desire the MTNL to  improve percentage of utilization of IEBR 
component of Rs. 786.93 crore in 2013 -14, as utilization during 2012 -13 
upto January, 2013 was very low i.e. 38.36% w.r.t. RE.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 13, Para no. 2.18) 
 
“The Committee note that during 2013 -14, the amount proposed for ITI 
was Rs. 1453 crore but the allocation made at BE stage was merely Rs. 1 
lakh only because the revival proposal of ITI is yet to be approved by the 
Government and hence non -allocation of pl an outlay by the Planning 
Commission. The Committee find it an irony that when the Indian telecom 
sector has seen an impressive expansion with large investments in the 
past several years and teledensity increasing from 28.2 percent in 2008 to 
more than the  70 percent in 2012, ITI Limited, the first public sector 
undertaking of independent India, established in 1948, to supply telecom 
equipments to then telecom service providers, i.e., Department of 
Telecommunications, is today not in a position to generate internal 
resources to meet the planned capital expenditure due to lack of orders 
and continuous losses. It could be clearly seen that ITI has not been able 
to compete in a highly competitive market after the liberalization of 
economy in the early 90s. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
revised Draft Rehabilitation Scheme, as a part of ITI‟s Revival proposal, 
submitted by the Operating Agency (State Bank of India) and approved by 
BIFR in November, 2012 may be urgently considered and approved by 
BRPSE so that the same may be sent to CCEA for approval at the earliest. 
The Committee further recommend that the Revival Plan may be urgently 
finalized so that adequate capital funding may be made available for 
upgrading manufacturing infrastructures and absorp tion of new 
technologies in all the ITI plants. The Committee also desire that BSNL 
and MTNL being the major customer from ITI, emphasis should also be 
given by them in procuring telecom equipment from ITI for their network 
expansion wherever possible. In this regard, the Committee trust that the 
policy of the Government for providing purchase preference to 
domestically manufactured telecom equipment as announced under NTP -
2012 will definitely give a boost to the company in its revival plan.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 14, Para no. 2.19) 

16 
 
 
 
 
25. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note has stated as 
under:- 
“MTNL has sought for Government support for its revival. For this 
purpose, MTNL has submitted a revival plan seeking government 
assistance in the following key areas:- 
 
• Sovereign guarantee for raising long term bonds. 
• Surrender of BWA Spectrum 
• Raising resources through monetisation of fixed assets 
• Financial assistance for retention of excess spectrum in 900 MHz & 1800 
MHz bands. 
• Funding support for rationalization of staff. 
• Pension issues of all absorbed employees in MTNL in line with BSNL.  
 
A Group of Ministers (GoM) has been constituted for revival and 
revitalization of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar 
Telephone Nigam Limited  (MTNL). The above issues are presently under 
consideration of the Government. MTNL has prepared a revival plan for 
orienting itself to the evolving telecom market to increase revenues. The 
revival plan has been placed before the GoM for consideration. 
MTNL has submitted that the actual utilization of funds (provisional), as 
on March 2013, is Rs 260.49 Cr which is 58.61% w.r.t. RE of Rs 444.48 
Cr. MTNL is making all endeavor to optimally and judiciously utilize the 
plan outlay for 2013-14 as required to meet its targets.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 13, Para no. 2.18) 
 
“In the Revival Plan of ITI, an amount of Rs. 4156.79 Crore was forecast. 
The Revival Plan was forwarded on 8 th March 2013 to Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) for  their 
recommendation. The Revival plan was taken up by BRPSE in July 2013. 
After obtaining the recommendation of BRPSE the plan will be sent for 
approval of the CCEA. 
As per the directives of DoT, BSNL and MTNL are continuing the policy of 
Reservation Quo ta orders on ITI for 30% of their requirements for 
products manufactured by ITI as well as on turnkey projects. This policy 
will remain in force for the period up to 20th September 2013. The 
proposal for extension of reservation Quota policy to ITI beyond 20th 
September   2013 is already in process.  
The Revival proposal of ITI has been worked out looking at the 
opportunities emerging out of the National Telecom Policy (NTP) 2012 
announced by Government of India. The market opportunity for domestic 

17 
 
 
 
manufacturers as a consequence have also been factored into Revival Plan 
of ITI Ltd.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 13, Para no. 2.19) 
 
26. While expressing serious concern at the continuing trend of increasing 
losses of MTNL year after year, the Committee had desi red that all steps 
necessary for revival of MTNL may be implemented in a time bound manner so 
as to prevent any further slide in the financial and physical performance of the 
company. In its reply, the Department has furnished that the revival plan of 
MTNL seeking government assistance in a number of key areas has been 
placed before the GoM for consideration. The Committee desire that 
Department of Telecommunication should vigorously pursue the matter with 
GoMs and urge them for an early decision in the matter. 
 While finding it ironic that despite impressive growth in the Indian 
telecom sector in the past several years , ITI Limited, the first public sector 
undertaking of independent India, established in 1948, to supply telecom 
equipments to then telecom service providers is today not in a position to 
generate internal resources to meet the planned capital expenditure du e to 
lack of orders and continuous losses , the Committee strongly recommended 
that the revised Draft Rehabilitation Scheme, as a part of ITI‟s Revival 
proposal, submitted by the Operating Agency (State Bank of India) and 
approved by BIFR in November, 2012 may be urgently considered and 
approved by BRPSE so that the same may be sent to CCEA for approval at the 
earliest. The Committee also desired that emphasis should be given by BSNL 
and MTNL in procuring telecom equipment from ITI for their network 
expansion wherever possible.  From the Action Taken replies, the Committee 
note that the Revival plan was taken up by BRPSE in July 2013. After obtaining 
the recommendation of BRPSE the plan will be sent for approval of the CCEA. 
The Committee emphasize that Depar tment of Telecommunications should 

18 
 
 
 
vigorously pursue the matter for early recommendation from BRPSE and 
approval of CCEA. Thereafter, necessary action with due promptitude should 
be taken to revive the ITI.  
 
H. Free nationwide roaming and full number portability 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that one of the salient features of National Telecom 
Policy, 2012 is to achieve one nation full Mobile Number Portability and 
work towards one nation free roaming. In this regard, the Committee note 
that the Cabinet had cleared a proposal to allow free roaming across the 
country and had also endorsed full number portability. The Committee 
while endorsing the noble objective of the National Telecom Polic y, 2012 
to achieve one nation full Mobile Number Portability and free roaming, 
recommend that consultation process initiated by TRAI for the 
implementation of the above policies should be completed at the earliest. 
The Committee are of the view that the im plementation of these policies 
would be a big relief to the huge subscribers in the country and would 
constitute a milestone in the history of Indian telecom sector. They would 
keenly await progress made under these two components of NTP-2012.” 
 
28. The Department of Telecommunications in the action taken note have stated as 
under:- 
“One of the objectives under NTP 2012 is to achieve “One Nation – Full 
Mobile Number Portability” and work towards “One Nation – Free 
Roaming”. DoT vide letter dated 27.12.2012 has requested TRAI to 
provide its recommendations on the subject of “One Nation - Full Mobile 
Number Portability”.  TRAI had floated a consultation paper on this issue 
on 20.2.2013 seeking comments of stakeholders by the 7th March, 2013. 
TRAI submits the re commendations to the Government after considering 
the comments of the stakeholders. Further necessary actions for the 
implementation of full mobile number portability will be taken by DoT 
after considering the recommendations of TRAI which are awaited.   
 
As per provisions of TRAI Act 1997 as amended in the year 2000, TRAI 
prescribes tariffs for the telecommunication services in India which inter -
alia includes the issue of roaming. TRAI has floated a consultation paper 
on 25.2.2013 for seeking written comme nts of stakeholders by 
18.03.2013 and counter comments by 25.3.2013 on the issue of free 
roaming. After considering the comments and counter comments of the 
stakeholders TRAI may issue a tariff order on this subject. TRAI does not 
submit recommendations to the Government on the tariff matters.  
 
Therefore as explained above, action has been initiated to fulfill the 
objective under NTP to achieve “One Nation – Full Mobile Number 
Portability” and work towards “One Nation – Free Roaming”.” 

19 
 
 
 
 
29. On the issue of  achieving „One National-Full Mobile Number Portability‟ 
and „One Nation -Free Roaming‟ as enshrined under National Telecom Policy  
(NTP), 2012, the Committee in their original Report had recommended that 
the consultation process initiated  by TRAI for the i mplementation of the 
above objectives should be completed at the earliest. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that the action taken reply of the DoT merely state 
about the consultation paper issued by TRAI in February, 2013 and does not 
indicate the latest progress in the matter. While strongly deprecating this kind 
of half baked reply, the Committee desire that the latest efforts and progress 
made in achieving the objectives may be furnished to the Committee within 3 
months of the date of presentation of this Report. 

20 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that the Detailed Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Department of Telecommunications were laid in Lok Sabha on 18th March, 2013.  The 
Committee observe that for the 12th Five year plan against an amount of Rs. 77,221.23 
crore under Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) sought by DoT, the GBS approved by the 
Planning Commission is only Rs. 20,825 crore.  For th e year 2013-14, the Department 
has been allocated a plan outlay of Rs. 12,239.93 crore comprising of both the GBS and 
IEBR components.  The Committee endorse the same. However, an analysis of the 
information furnished by the Department reveals that the Pla n allocation is Rs. 
2,991.46 crore lesser than the outlay allocated at BE stage for the previous year.  The 
analysis further reveals huge variations in the BE, RE and Actuals under IEBR + GBS 
outlay of the Department during each of the last two years.  Dur ing 2011 -12, the 
allocation at BE was Rs. 19,881.09 crore which was reduced to Rs. 11,878.07 crore at 
the RE stage and the actual utilization was only Rs. 6,290.81 crore.  During the year 
2012-13, again the allocation at RE was reduced to Rs. 8,286.48 cror e from Rs. 
15,231.39 crore of the BE allocation and the actual utilization was only Rs. 4,619.11 
crore (upto February, 2013).” 
 
(Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.1) 
 
The Committee find that the under -utilization of IEBR during 2012 -13 was 
mainly on account of lower expenditure by the PSUs. An analysis of the performance of 
IEBR during 2012 -13 indicates poor performance by both BSNL and MTNL. For BSNL, 
IEBR at BE stage was Rs. 9,504 crore which was reduced to Rs. 5,409 crore at the RE 
stage and the actual ut ilization upto February, 2013 was only Rs. 2,148.85 crore i.e. 
39.72 percent w.r.t. RE.  In the case of MTNL, IEBR at BE was Rs. 887.39 crore which 
was reduced to Rs. 444.48 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization up to February, 
2013 was Rs. 224 cror e i.e. 50.39 percent w.r.t. RE. The main reasons cited by the 
Department for under -utilisation by BSNL includes lower capital expenditure than 
anticipated on expansion of capacity for GSM equipment, procurement of NGN 
equipment, UG cables & Telephone instr ument, broadband equipment and Cable & 
Transmission equipment.  Market conditions and hyper -competition in the telecom 
sector has also adversely affected the generation of internal resources of BSNL.  In the 
case of MTNL, the Committee observe that the company is passing through severe cash 
flow problem and is under a serious debt burden.  MTNL is also borrowing money to 
meet its day to day requirements.  For the year 2013 -14, the Committee note that 
amount of Rs. 6,439.93 crore for IEBR of PSUs (BSNL, MTNL  & C -DOT) has been 
approved by the Planning Commission. The Committee feel dismayed at the trend of 
underutilization under IEBR by PSUs in the last two years and the performance of the 
PSUs, especially the inability of BSNL to expand its GSM networks and t he financial 
position of MTNL where it is borrowing money to meet its day to day expenditure. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.2) 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
Under GBS, the allocation of funds during 2012-13 at BE level was Rs.4800 crore 
which was reduced to Rs. 2393 crore at the RE stage and the actual utilisation upto 
February, 2013 was Rs. 2220.48 crore i.e. 92.79 percent w.r.t. RE. The Committee 
observe massive deductions at RE stage under schemes/ unit like WMO, WPC, TEC, C -
DoT, DS, NICF, USOF etc. The Committee are of the view that the Finance Ministry had 
taken into consideration the poor utilization of funds by the Department that while 
making reduced allocation at RE stage under GBS during 2012 -13. For the year 2013 -
14, under GBS, the Planning Commission has allocated only Rs. 5,800 crore out of the 
proposed Rs. 24,539.59 crore. The Department has particularly stated that funds 
allocated for USOF (includ ing NOFN) would not be sufficient and the MoF would be 
requested to provide the same at the RE stage. The Committee feel that the aforesaid 
scenario reveals that there are serious lacunae in planning process of the Department 
and under GBS, there is an urgent need for the Department to improve its performance 
under the schemes/units like WMO, WPC, TEC, C-DoT, DS, NICF, USOF etc.  
 
(Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.3) 
 
 
The Committee are dismayed at the way in which the entire planning processes 
of the Department are being done. The reason why the Planning Commission had made 
lesser allocation at BE stage than the amount proposed by the Department and the 
reduced allocati on made at RE stage by the Finance Ministry merit a special 
consideration by the Department . The Committee are of the view that the Department 
should first assess its ability and potential to utilise funds instead of making unrealistic 
projections. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that the Department may 
undertake a review of its planning process in implementation of various schemes 
undertaken by it in a realistic manner. The Department also needs to focus on financial 
management as well as monitoring m echanism so that the funds allocated are utilized 
properly and the desired targets are achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee 
would like the Department to act on the above observations as it would definitely help 
the Department in proper utilization of funds in a planned manner.  
 
(Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.4) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL 
  
 The budget allocation under Capital Outlays made by BSNL under BE, RE and the 
Actual Capital Expenditure during 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 is given below: 
        
                                                                          (Fig. in Crores) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2011-12 15277.63 9095.34 3853.08 
2012-13 9086.22 5408.85 2519.71* 
2013-14 5592.99   
 
 
Note: * The actual expenditure during the year 2012-13 is provisional and unaudited. 
        

22 
 
 
 
 
MTNL  
 
The reasons for the difference in BE & RE and poor utilization of funds by MTNL in  
the main reply are as under: 
 
The IEBR component of MTNL during the last two years is given below:- 
                                                                                      (Rs. in Crore) 
 
Year BE RE Actuals % of utilization 
wrt RE 
2011-12 1145.46 792.25 486.69 61.50 
2012-13 736.20 444.48 260.49  
(provisional) 
58.61 
 
 
It is submitted that, in the telecom sector which is driven by very stiff competition, fast 
changing technologies and falling prices of the telecom equipments, it is becoming 
increasingly difficult to predict/ forecast the requirements well in advance. The  
projections are made keeping in view the future demand, technological up -gradation 
required in the various network elements, introduction of any new technology/ service 
to effectively face competition and the commitments towards completed / ongoing 
projects. These provisions are reviewed at the Revised Estimate stage keeping in view 
the spare capacity available vis -à-vis demand, availability of fund / cash flow position 
and status of ongoing projects.  
 
Sometimes due to the reasons beyond the control of MT NL, the new projects for which 
funds are provisioned during the year do not materialize or get delayed. In such cases 
the funds allotted against these projects remain unutilized and results in lower 
expenditure as compared to outlay. 
 
We would like to submit here that MTNL is drafting its annual plan after reviewing the 
progress of the ongoing projects and the status of the new / upcoming projects to be 
taken up during the next year. The reduction at RE stage is based on a revised 
projection of anticipated expenditure keeping in view the status of projects. Further, the 
payment liabilities against various projects are also considered while reducing the 
Budgetary Estimates and allocating the funds for next year.  
 
As regards low utilizati on of funds during 2011 -12 and  2012 -13 is concerned, MTNL 
would like to bring to the kind attention of the Hon‟ble Committee that this is primarily 
due to the reasons that during this year the main planned projects like GSM/3G up -
gradation/ expansion, up-gradation / expansion of M/W backhaul network of GSM/3G, 
Broadband expansion and migration of legacy TDM fixed line switch to NGN/IMS based 
technologies are deferred to the next year for the following reasons- 
 
Enough capacity in these networks was available. 
 
All the services were available on demand.  
MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem and is under a serious debt burden 
of around Rs 11,821.11 Cr.(Rs. 7,177.35 Cr long -term & Rs. 4,643.76 Cr short term / 
over draft). The refund of returned BWA  spectrum charges along with interest which 
was supposed to ease the cash flow problem is expected from the Govt. during the next 
financial year.  
 

23 
 
 
 
With regards to lower expenditure, it is further submitted that the expected expenditure 
targets against ongoing projects could not be reflected despite equipments against such 
projects having been installed and in commercial use, as projects could not be closed 
due to some pending issues to be fulfilled / resolved by the vendor(s). 
It is submitted that MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem. Therefore, it 
becomes important for MTNL not only to continuously review its spending but also 
ensure that funds are utilized judiciously.  
 
It is further submitted that MTNL generates the required funds through it s internal 
resources / arrangements and is not taking any Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) till 
now.  Therefore, as far as MTNL is concerned, funds earmarked are generated / 
managed from its‟ own resources. MTNL has to borrow money not only for the new 
projects but also for its day to day operation, as cash reserves of around Rs. 5000 Cr 
had been largely used in payment of spectrum charges (3G and BWA) to the Govt.  
Accordingly, money is withdrawn as and when needed for a project and as such there is 
no unspent balance available at the end of each financial year.  
 
As compared to the GBS utilization percentage of 96.97% and 99.62% respectively in 
2011-12 and 2012 -13 the corresponding utilization of IEBR has been 44.31% and 
47.74%. Since in terms of weightage th e IEBR component of the Plan proposals far 
outweighs the GBS, the resultant drop in overall utilization of the plan outlay due to 
less than anticipated expenditure of the IEBR is far more pronounced.  
 
Since the major part of the plan outlay is on account of the plan outlays i.e. IEBR of the 
PSUs (BSNL & MTNL), less than anticipated expenditure has resulted in low utilization 
percentage.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.1) 
 
BSNL:        
 
The reduction in planned outlay from BE 2012-13 to RE 2012-13 and reduction in 
actual expenditure is due to the following reasons: 
 
While framing Budget Estimate BSNLanticipated that execution of GSM project 
under Phase VII would be underway in all the four Zones across the country. But it 
could not be started ou t in East Zone due to delay in acceptance of advance purchase 
order by L-1 bidder. For West Zone the capacity was reserved for M/s ITI, but M/s ITI 
after taking various extension, expressed its inability to accept the reserve quota order. 
Subsequently a tender for 0.63 Million lines was invited, but no bids were received. 
 
Tender for procurement of 4 Million lines of NGN Class -5 has been finalized but 
supply and commissioning of equipment will be done during the year 2013-14. 
 
Also, the implementation of Phase–I of MAX-NG-CDOT project could not take off 
due to delay in the developments (R&D) by CDOT and pending validation tests. For 
migration of CDOT MAX switches to CDOT MAX NG in BSNL, CDOT equipment was 
tested for field trial at three places and main ite ms of these tests took time and 
completed by November, 2012.  Being indigenous technology developed by CDOT, an 
undertaking was submitted by CDOT to BSNL that the pending issues of validation tests 
like integration of Soft switch with Clarity / Provisionin g (CDR System) and Inter -
working with various existing new systems of BSNL, Traffic Report generation, etc. 
(which are under process of development in CDOT R&D) shall be cleared in next six 
months time. 

24 
 
 
 
 
BSNL had signed a MoU titled “Migration of CDOT MAX switches to CDOT MAX -
NGN” on 19.12.2012 with CDOT for implementation in BSNL network. It is planned that 
in Phase-I, NGN (Next Generation Network) Core equipment will be commissioned at 
two places viz. Gurgaon and Kolkata by CDOT & 100 CDOT MAX switches wi ll be 
upgraded to CDOT MAX-NGN in North & East Zone in next one year i.e. 2013-14. These 
NGN Core equipment will be working in geographical redundant mode. 
After successful completion of Phase -I, six NGN Core equipment will be installed by 
CDOT at different places and remaining CDOT MAX switches i.e. around 1750 nos. will 
be migrated to CDOT MAX-NGN in BSNL network in financial years 2014-15 and  2015-
16. 
Procurement of PIJF(Polyethylene insulated jelly filled) cable was also delayed as 
some vendors failed to supply and the cable could not be procured during Financial 
Year2012-13.  
BSNL has made following plans for effective utilization of IEBR and GBS: 
 
Review allotment of funds at BE stage after consider full justifications which may 
be revised at RE stage on the basis of utilization. 
 
E-tendering and Reverse- auctions are being used to streamline the procurement 
process. 
 
Periodic reviews of funds utilization are being undertaken.   
  
Further, BSNL has formulated its annual plan taking in to consideration past 
experience.The status of the new/upcoming projects to be taken in near future are 
reviewed and funds are allocated based on the expenditure likely to be booked under 
various heads. BSNL is trying to formulate a more realistic plan where it hopes to spend 
all its plan outlay for the achievement of its physical targets. 
 
MTNL:  
 
It is submitted that IEBR allocation during 2012 -13 was Rs 736.20 Cr instead of 
Rs 887.39 Cr. The IEBR component of MTNL during the last two years is given below:- 
                                                                               (Rs. in Crore) 
 
Year BE RE Actuals % of utilization 
wrt RE 
2011-12 1145.46 792.25 486.69 61.50 
2012-13 736.20 444.48 260.49 
( 
provisional) 
58.61 
 
The telecom sector is driven by very stiff  competition and fast changing 
technologies. 
 
MTNL has been formulating its annual plan after reviewing the progress of 
ongoing projects and the status of the new / upcoming projects to be taken up during 
the next year. The reduction at RE stage is based on a revised projection of anticipated 
expenditure keeping in view the status of projects and the availability of internal 
resources. Further, the payment liabilities against various projects are also considered 
while reducing the Budgetary Estimates and allocating the funds for next year.  
 

25 
 
 
 
As regards low utilization of funds in 2012 -13, it is submitted that during this 
year the main planned projects like GSM/3G upgradation/ expansion, upgradation / 
expansion of M/W backhaul network of GSM/3G, Broadband expansion and migration of 
legacy TDM fixed line switch to NGN/IMS based technologies have been deferred for the 
following reasons- 
 
MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem that constrained generation of 
internal resources. 
All the services were available on demand.  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.2) 
 
WPC and WMO 
 
1.  For  2012-13 
 
1.1  WMO was allocated funds of Rs. 58.0 crore in the BE 2012-13.  Major funds were 
to be utilized for the technical schemes.  Draft Bid document/TC Memos on the 
technical schemes were submitted for requis ite approval but the same could not 
materialize due to administrative reasons. 
 
1.2 Subsequently, the entire BE funds for Technical Schemes under 2012 -13 were 
surrendered at RE stage. 
 
2.  For  2013-14 
 
2.1. WMO had proposed allocation of Rs. 63.22 crore f or the Technical & Civil 
schemes in the annual  plan 2013 -14. However allocation from Planning Commission 
has been made to the tune of Rs. 50 crore. 
 
3.1   After allocation of the funds in FY 2013 -14 (Plan), WMO has taken requisite 
actions for effective utilization of funds under the head: 
 
3.1.1  Technical scheme: 
 
i) Draft Bid document prepared for procurement of Six nos.of  V/UHF 
 vehicle mounted mobile terminals and portable terminals  
for the six new WMSs :    Rs. 28 crore 
 
ii) Proposal for procurement of 6 nos, fixed HF monitoring facilities for six new WMSs   :    
Rs. 04 crore  
                                                            
(iii) Procurement of 28 SHF terminals in a phased manner.Out of 28 SHF terminals 4 
will be procured in the FY 2013-14 :   Rs. 20 crore  
 
Total  :    Rs 52 crore 
 
(iv) WMO is also in a process for the procurement of Radio Network analysers in a 
phased manner for all the WMSs. Initially, WMO is proposing Radio Network Analysers 
for all five International Wireless Monitoring Stations and Wireless Monitoring Stations 
in Metro cities during FY 2013-14 at a cost of Rs 3.0 crore. 
 

26 
 
 
 
3.1.2 Civil Works 
 
WMO has taken the following actions: 
 
(i) WMO has already procured the land at Dehradun, Rajpur & Bhubaneswar and also in 
process of acquisition of land at Lucknow, Patna & Vijaywada. 
 
(ii)  A case for the procurement of land at Dibrugarh was initiated by WMO since long 
but could not be materialized due to some administrative reasons.  WMO has now 
identified a small piece of land for establishing permanent WMS at Dibrugarh and 
requested the State Govt. authorities for the allocation of the same at the earliest. 
 Expenditure on this account will be met from the allocated funds of Rs 50 lakh 
under NE region. 
 
(iii) Construction of two office buildings of WMO at Jallandhar & Siliguri and staff 
quarters at ISMES, Jalna is already in progress and major funds allocated under the 
relevant head are likely to be utilized during the FY 2013-14 only. 
 
(iv) WMO has requested CPWD to start the construction work of boundary wall at 
Dehradun at the earliest and also requested CPWD to submit the preliminary estimates 
for the boundary wall of WMSs at Raipur and Goa. 
 
(v) WMO is in process for finalization of the drawing f or the new buildings at 
Mumbai, Dehradun and Goa. 
 
WPC 
 
 WPC Wing was allocated major funds of Rs. 4.7 crore under M& E for maintenance of 
Equipments/facilities installed under World Bank assisted NRSMMS project under BE 
2012-13. The case for website redesigning, AMC of ASMS, Maintenance of Equipments 
procured under World Bank Project, has been approved for the  amount of  Rs. 
99.76701 lakh  in March, 2013. It could not be materialized due to the paucity of funds 
as the funds were reduced to 50 lakh at RE stage. 
  The recommendations of Committee has been noted and efforts would be made 
to improve performance. 
 
C-DoT 
 
The t otal budget allocation for C -DOT in form of GBS at BE stage was Rs. 250.00 
crores. C-DOT requested to retain the same amount at the RE stage also. However, it 
was reduced by Ministry of Finance to Rs. 150 Crores. The total expenditure 
(provisional) incurred during financial year 2012 -13 is Rs. 226.61 crores (against Rs. 
150.00 Crores received as GBS and balance from internally generated funds), which is 
approx. 78% of the total outlay of Rs. 290 crores planned for the year at BE stage 
wherein GBS was planned as  Rs. 250.00 crores and IEBR was Rs. 40 crores.   
 
Based on the trends of the expenditure incurred during the FY 2012 -13, plans have 
been made to fully utilize the GBS allocated for financial year 2013 -14.  These 
programs include Technology Field Imple mentations & Roll -outs (i.e. Centralized 
Monitoring System, Shared GSM Radio, etc.) and R&D activities in the cutting edge 
technology such as Next Generation Mobile Technology, Optical Core Network, Secure 
Wireless, Software Applications for Telecom Services. 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
NICF 
 
This office prepared the B.E. for 2012-13 based on the number of works/projects which 
were to be taken up during the year.  Some of these projects could not be got 
sanctioned in time, leading to reduced expenditure.  The RE was therefore prepa red in 
line with the estimated expenditure during the remainder of the year so as to ensure no 
unnecessary blockage of funds. 
 
USO(F)                                       
 
 During the year 2012 -13, Rs. 3000/ -Cr. (BE) was allocated for USOF activities.  
An amount of Rs 2546.73  Cr, a major portion of  BE 2012 -13 was  earmarked for 
NOFN project. Taking note of the fact that Pilot projects were completed in 3 developed 
blocks across 3 States and that survey work, a pre requisite as per Cabinet approval, 
which was then underway and noting that Tender specifications for the whole project 
were under finalization and that the tenders were unlikely to be finalized in the 
financialyear, the   requirement for funds for NOFN were reduced . Hence the Ministry 
of Finance reduced the allotment   at the RE stage  to  Rs. 625/- Cr.  
 There was a liability to release Rs. 1500 Crore in favour of BSNL in F/Y 2012 -13 
for the activity “Sustenance of Rural Wireline Connections installed by BSNL before 01 -
04-2002”. It was based on  TRAI recommendations and its  acceptance by Telecom 
Commission and approval by the Competent Authority. Department of Telecom had 
requested Department of Expenditure to revise RE from Rs. 625/ - Crore to Rs. 2125/ - 
Crore for USOF, to enable release of fund s to BSNL. This request for enhanced 
allotment was not accepted by the Dept. of Expenditure, MoF. If the same were to be 
accepted at that point in time, the expenditure in F/Y  2012 -13 under USOF could have 
been Rs. 2125 crore, which would have been over 7 0% of the BE of Rs. 3000 Crore 
(2012-13). 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.3) 
 
USO (F) 
 
 In BE, Funds for USOF are estimated on the basis of average claims received during 
the last 4 quarters, pending liabilities and additional requirements for the new 
Schemes. Accordingly, a monthly plan is drawn to release the funds for payment of 
subsidy as Compensation to service providers  on account of various activity of USOF 
during the financial year. Once a scheme has been implemented then subsidy paymen t 
is a contractual liability as per terms and conditions of USOF activities. The funds 
allotted to USOF are optimally utilized as may be seen in the table given below:  
                  
(Rupees in crore) 
 
Year Proposed BE  RE  Actuals %  of 
utilization 
w.r.t. RE 
Remarks 
2008-09 2900 2000 1600 1600 100  
2009-10 3000 2400 2400 2400 100  
2010-11 3000 2400 3100 3100 100  
2011-12 2100 2100 1700 1687.96 99.29 Final 
allotment 
was 

28 
 
 
 
restricted 
to 
actuals 
2012-13 3000 3000 625  625 100  
 
During discussion with Planning Commission for F/Y 2013 -14, USOF had 
projected total Demand of Rs. 15804/ - Crore. The requirement for NOFN was Rs. 
13645/- Crore as part of USOF demand projection.  
 
For F/Y 2013-14, BE approved for USOF is Rs. 3000/ - Crore. This is inadequate 
allocation considering the fact that the estimated cost of  NOFN project (as approved by 
the Cabinet) is Rs. 20100/ - Crore, and a time frame of 2 years has been given to 
execute the project.  
 
The Department of Telecom has requested Finance Ministry and Planning 
Commission (at the highest level) to make adequate allocation for NOFN project in F/Y 
2013-14. Keeping in view that BE is Rs. 3000/ - Crore, efforts will be made during F/Y 
2013-14, as the pace of the project picks up, to seek enhanced allocation for USOF to 
fund the NOFN project. Inadequate allocation of funds for NOFN project will inevitably 
lead to delay in execution of the Flagship Project.  
 
It is furthermore stated that USOF has a li ability to release Rs. 1500 Crore in 
favour of BSNL in F/Y 2013 -14. This is for the activity “Sustenance of Rural Wireline 
Connections installed by BSNL before 01 -04-2002” based on TRAI recommendations 
and after due recommendation by Telecom Commission and approval by the Competent 
Authority. 
 
The annual plan is prepared after reviewing the progress of the ongoing projects 
and the status of the new/upcoming projects to be taken up during the next year.  
Scheme-wise/Unit-wise Annual plan Proposal of the Depa rtment is discussed at the 
Adviser and Member level meetings in the Planning Commission.  The Planning 
Commission then makes the final scheme -wise/unit-wise allocation of GBS after 
thorough deliberations.  Hence, at times the final scheme -wise/unit-wise allocation is 
less than proposed demands.  
 
The revision at RE stage by the Finance Ministry is done based on a revised 
projection of anticipated expenditure keeping in view the status of projects.  Similarly, 
the payment liabilities against various projects are also considered while projecting the 
BE for next year.  Sometimes due to reason beyond control, the projects do not come 
up or get delayed.  In such cases the funds allotted against such projects remain 
unutilized resulting in lower expenditure.   
 
            The observations of the Committee are taken note of. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 1, Para no. 2.4) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Revenue receipts of the Department 
 

29 
 
 
 
The  Committee observe that the license fee and the spectrum charges  collected 
from the Telecom Service Providers are the major and regular sources of non -tax 
revenue of the Government of India.  The Committee also note that on license fee and 
spectrum charges, the Department had received Rs. 13,719.67 crore during 2010 -11 
and Rs. 16,983.23 crore during 2011 -12.  During 2012 -13, if the anticipated amount 
upto 31st March, 2013 is taken into consideratio n, the revenue receipts of the  
Department under license fee and spectrum charges will be Rs. 18,641.31 crore.  The  
Committee are concerned to note that revenue collection on account of dividend 
payment from the CPSUs is in a declining mode on account of their pathetic financial 
performance.  From an amount of Rs. 72.18 crore collected as dividend during 2009 -
10, it has declined to Rs. 16.50 crore during 2012-13.  Another significant source of the 
revenue for the Department is the revenue generated through spectrum auction.  Under 
this head, the Department collected Rs. 1,06,264.73 crore during 2010 -11 and Rs. 
1,722.24 crore during 2012-13.  In this regard, the Committee note that to enhance its 
revenues, the National Telecom Policy, 2012 envisages delinking of spectrum in respect 
of all future licenses and making spectrum at a price determined through market 
related process.  The Committee have also been informed that an amount of Rs. 
23,177.66 crore has been levied on Telecom Service Providers for holding spectrum 
beyond 4.4/6.2 MHz in respect of GSM operators and the matter is presently under 
litigation.  Besides, an amount of Rs. 3032.20 crore has been levied in respect of CDMA 
operators for holding spectrum beyond 2.5 MHz and the due date for payment is 10th 
April, 2013. 
  
(Recommendation No. 2 Para no. 2.5) 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL 
 
BSNL was formed on 1st October 2000.  BSNL is having one of the largest 
switching and transmission network in the country. 
 
Till a couple of years back, BSNL was performing well in spite of being a late 
entrant in mobile segment as it was given mobile license only in 2000 whereas private 
operators had got the license in 1994 -95.  BSNL was a pioneer in providing mobile 
services in rural areas and played an important  role in the past against possible 
cartelization when there were only a few mobile operators.  However, of late BSNL is 
losing its market share in Mobile.  In addition, low tariff in mobile services and 
exponential growth in mobile connections are resultin g into surrender of landlines.  
These have caused considerable financial strain on BSNL.  Some other factors such as 
high manpower cost, inadequate skill set of employees, legacy systems, uneconomic 
service in rural areas through landlines, etc. have also led to incurring losses. 
 
BSNL has been incurring losses since 2009 -10 onwards.  Hence, BSNL could not 
pay dividend from the year 2009-10 onwards i.e. 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13. 
 
MTNL 
Since its inception in 1986 upto the year 2008 -09, MTNL had been maki ng 
profits and continuously paying dividend to its shareholders including Government. 
Further, MTNL has stated that it had contributed about Rs. 46,580 Crores to Govt. 
exchequer in form of various levies, taxes and fees from the year 1986 till 2011-12. 
 
MTNL has stated that on account of payment of Rs.740 crores towards wage 
revisions/Arrears and Rs. 2934 crores towards Pension and provisions on actuarial 
basis, MTNL incurred loss in the year 2009-10. During the year 2010-11, MTNL paid Rs. 

30 
 
 
 
11098 crores towards 3G & BWA Spectrum Charges after taking loans from the Banks. 
This not only wiped out MTNL‟s cash reserves of around Rs.5000 crores but also led it 
into debt trap.   Since then, due to ever increasing staff cost (which stands around 
132% of revenue duri ng the year 2012 -13) and requirement of servicing the debt, 
MTNL has been continuously incurring losses and has not been able to pay the 
dividends.   
     
TCIL has all along been paying dividend except for the years 2005 -06 to 2007-
08.  TCIL has so far pai d total dividend of Rs.177.63 crore to the Government against 
Government‟s investment of Rs.30 lakhs in TCIL in two tranches.  Further, the 
company‟s Paid up Capital has also increased to Rs.43.20 crore after seven Bonus 
issues amounting to Rs.42.90 crore by capitalization of reserves.   
 
       The major reason for declining dividend is the company‟s requirements for 
investments in its projects through internal accruals.  The post tax profit for 2011 -12 
has been reduced to Rs.8.03 crore as against Rs.13.57  crore during 2010-11 because 
the company had to provide for extra income tax liability for the assessment years 
2000-01, 2005-06 and 2006-07 as TCIL has lost the appeals for these years in Income 
Tax Appellate Tribunal on the issue of exclusion of income from foreign projects with 
whom the Govt. of India has signed Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA). 
 
“Consequent upon complete erosion of net worth of M/s ITI Ltd, it was referred 
to BIFR in the year 2004 and was declared a sick PSU by BIFR.  Since, then the 
accumulated losses of ITI Ltd have been  increasing every year and stand at Rs. 3975 
Cr. as on 31.03.201.    The Company has therefore not been in a position to pay 
dividend. 
However, the Revival Plan of M/s ITI Ltd. has been formulated and forwar ded to 
BRPSE for their recommendation.  After obtaining the recommendation of BRPSE the 
plan will be sent for approval of CCEA.  It is expected that after implementation of 
Revival Plan M/s ITI will turn profitable”. 
 
DOT issued orders regarding levy of one time spectrum charges for CDMA above 
2.5MHz to M/s Tata Teleservices Ltd. (Rs. 1152.68 crore), M/s Reliance Communication 
Ltd. (Rs. 1757.89 Crore), M/s MTNL (Rs. 107.44 Crore) and M/s BSNL (Rs. 15.19 
Crore).  M/s Tata Teleservices Ltd. and M/S Reliance C ommunication Ltd.  have 
challenged these orders in High Courts  at Bombay and Calcutta.  Replies to these 
Petitions are under process. 
 
However TTL has paid Rs. 62.910 Crore towards annual payment for Mumbai and 
Delhi Service Area and opted for conditional  surrender in rest of the circles.  M/s 
Reliance Communication Ltd.  has not paid amount in this regard.  M/s BSNL has opted 
surrender option for excess CDMA spectrum in Kerala Service area. 
  
(Reply to Recommendation No. 2, Para no. 2.5) 
 
 (Ministry of Co mmunications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Taking into consideration the way the telecom sector is expanding in the country 
as well as the way the private telecom operators have flouris hed during the last few 
years, the Committee, are concerned to note that during the last three years, there has 
been a very marginal increase in the revenue receipts of the Department.  The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that something is amiss in  the revenue 
generation policy of the Department as the same does not appeared to be 

31 
 
 
 
commensurate with the growth of telecom sector.  The Committee, therefore, feel that 
there is an urgent need for the Department to introspect its policy and procedures and  
evolve a long term strategy to increase its revenue receipts.  At the same time the 
Committee would like to emphasise that  such policies and procedures should be fair, 
transparent and legally tenable so as to not leave much scope for frequent litigation 
during the levy of charges of any kind, as has happened during the levy of charges for 
holding additional spectrum by GSM operators.  The Committee would like the DoT to 
ensure that it carry out efforts to collect their due recoveries, monitor periodically  the 
collection process and strengthen its accounting procedures. 
 
(Recommendation No. 2 Para no. 2.6) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Telecom Policy (NTP -2012) envisages delinking of spectrum in 
respect of all future licences and making spectrum available at a price determined 
through market related process. The auction in the 2G  bands of 800 MHz and 1800 
MHz was conducted in November,2012.The second  round of auction for 1800 MHz,800 
MHz and 900 MHz has also been conducted in March,2013. 
 
Further following prompt actions are taken to realize the Spectrum charges:- 
 
(i) Assessment of Spectrum Usage Charges as per rules. 
 
(ii) Monitoring of trend of revenue on account of Spectrum Usage Charges. 
 
(iii) Necessary action to realize the outstanding Spectrum Usage Charges.  
 
As regards collection of Revenue, it is submitted that as per Licence Agreements 
the Licence Fee payable by the Licensee Companies is a percentage of Adjusted Gross 
Revenue of the Licen see Company. Licensee pays the said percentage of Revenue 
Share quarterly on self assessment basis according to Revenue accrued during the 
quarter. The details of Revenue are submitted in the prescribed format of Statement of 
Revenue and Licence Fee along with payment of Licence Fee. 
 
 The Department carries out the annual Assessment of Licence Fee dues of the 
Licensee Company on the basis of the Audited Profit & Loss Account, Audited 
Statements of Revenue and Licence Fee and other Audited Financial Stateme nts 
submitted by the Licensee Company. As a result of this Assessment a Demand cum 
Show Cause Notice is issued to the Licensee Company. Almost all the Licensee 
Companies have approached different legal foras i.e. Hon‟ble TDSAT, Hon‟ble High 
Court s of Kera la, Gauhati and Madras and obtained stay against enforcement of the 
demands raised, thus hindering the  collection process. 
 
As regards the marginal increase in the revenue during the last three years, it is 
stated that Department could assess the Licence Fee dues from Financial Year 2005-06 
onwards due to the Hon‟ble TDSAT judgment dated 30.08.2007 in Petition No. 7 of 
2003 in AGR case. The judgment of the Hon‟ble TDSAT redefined the definition of Gross 
Revenue, which was contrary to that defined in the Li cence Agreement. Department 
filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5059 of 2007 before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court against the 
judgment dated 30.08.2007 of the Hon‟ble TDSAT. Only after the judgment dated 
11.10.2011 of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in CA No. 5059 of 2007 , Department started 
assessing the Licence Fee dues of the Licensees. During the intervening period 
Licensees were paying Licence Fee on self assessment basis as per Clause 20.2 to 20.4 

32 
 
 
 
of the UAS Licence Agreement. Moreover, the Licenses approached variou s judicial 
foras against the Demands raised by the Department and obtained stay against the 
enforcement of demands. 
 
In order to plug the arbitrage opportunity, Department has introduced payment 
of uniform percentage of revenue share (Licence Fee) regime across all Telecom 
Licences w.e.f. 01.04.2013.  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 2, Para no. 2.6) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Recoveries under Special Audit  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Telecommunications had ordered a 
special Audit of Accounts for the years 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 of five Telecom Group 
companies viz. Reliance Communications, Bharti Airtel, Idea Cellular, Tata Teleservices 
and Vodafone. The Committee are concerned to note that it was only after conducting 
the special audit for the years 2006-07 and 2007-08, that the DoT had raised a demand 
on the said companies for Rs. 1,846.51 crore (Rs. 896.05 crores principal and Rs. 
950.46 crore as interest upto November, 2012/February, 2013). The Committee 
however observe that all the licensee companies have approached the courts and have 
obtained stay against the enforcement of such demand from Hon‟ble High Court of 
Kerala, Hon‟ble High Court of Madras, Hon‟ble Agartala Bench of Guwahati High Court 
and Hon‟ble TDSAT.  
 
(Recommendation No. 3 Para no. 2.7) 
 
The Committee feels that the DoT should have vigilant to garner its revenue for 
the year 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 and thereafter instead of waiting and resorting to 
Special audit so late. It is also not clear as to why the specia l audit has not been 
conducted for the periods of 2008 -09 to 2011 -12. The Committee trusts that the 
Department would take all necessary steps to recover its due. As regards the future 
remedial measures, the Committee have been informed that to prevent under reporting 
of revenues, the Department has initiated measures like reconciliation between the 
revenue reported through statement of Revenue and License Fee and revenue reported 
in the Audited Annual Accounts of the licensees, issuing suitable instructions  to the 
licensees for reporting items indicated in the special Audit report and introducing a 
uniform annual License Fee regime w.e.f. 01.04.2013. The Committee recommends the 
Department to evolve a transparent and accountable system so as to avoid any 
ambiguity in determining the real revenue earnings of the telecom licensees and in 
preventing under reporting of revenue and subsequent litigations.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 3 Para no. 2.8) 
 

33 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Clauses 22.5 and 22.6 of the UAS Licence Agreement are reproduced as under:   
 
22.5 The LICENSOR may, on forming an opinion that the statements or 
accounts submitted are inaccurate or misleading, order Audit of the accounts of the 
LICENSEE by appointing au ditor at the cost of the LICENSEE and such auditor(s) shall 
have the same powers which the statutory auditors of the company enjoy under Section 
227 of the Companies Act, 1956.  The remuneration of the Auditors, as fixed by the 
LICENSOR, shall be borne by the LICENSEE. 
 
 
22.6  The LICENSOR may also get conducted a „Special Audit‟ of the LICENSEE 
company‟s accounts/records by “Special Auditors”, the payment for which at a rate as 
fixed by the LICENSOR, shall be borne by the LICENSEE.  This will be in the nat ure of 
auditing the audit described in para 22.5 above.  The Special Auditors shall also be 
provided the same facility and have the same powers as of the companies‟ auditors as 
envisaged in the Companies Act, 1956. 
 
 Above mentioned two Clauses of UAS Lice nce Agreements empowers the 
Licensor to order Audit/Special Audit of a Licensee Company in case the Licensor comes 
to a conclusion that the Licensee is underreporting or misleading the Licensor in 
disclosing the actual revenue accrued to the Licensee.  
 
Accordingly when the Licensor i.e. Department of Telecom in the year 2008 
came to know from media reports that some of the Licensee Companies are under 
reporting their revenues through the Audited Statements of Revenue and Licence Fee, 
Department ordered a S pecial Audit of the major five Licensees viz. M/s Reliance 
Communications Ltd., M/s Bharti Airtel Ltd., M/s Idea Cellular Ltd., M/s Vodafone Ltd 
and M/s Tata Teleservices Ltd and their Group Companies having Telecom Licenses for 
the years 2006-07 and 2007-08 in the year 2009. It may be mentioned here that the 
Department had carried out the assessment for the year 2006-07 by then. 
 
Regarding Special Audit from the Financial Years 2008 -09 onwards, it is 
submitted that the Department could not proceed with the  annual assessment after 
2006-07 due to legal complexities. During the assessment of Licence Fee Department 
tries to include all the revenues that are omitted by the Licensee Companies, on the 
basis of the Audited Profit & Loss Account of the Company. 
 
After the pronouncement of orders dated 11.10.2011 in the AGR case by the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court, the Department has been able to resume the assessment 
process for the post 2006-07 periods. While doing so, the Department has been seeking 
information from the Licensee Companies on the basis of Special Audit Report/findings 
which may not be easily retrievable from the Profit & Loss Account of the Company. 
 
Since, the concerned clause of the UAS Licence Agreement lays down that 
Special Audit is to be got conducted  when the Department forms an opinion to the 
effect that some revenue leakage is there, and since the Department is in process of 
finalizing the assessments and seeking required information from the Licensees, the 
Special Audit for subsequent periods has n ot been ordered yet. However, in case, after 
the furnishing of the required information by the Licensee and examination of the same, 
the Department concludes that there is some kind of revenue leakage, then the 
concerned Clause of the Licence Agreement will be invoked and Special Audit instituted.  
 

34 
 
 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 3 Para no. 2.7 and 2.88) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Wireline Broadband Connectivity 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
Under the Rural Broadband (Wireline) Scheme launched on 20th January, 2009 
with a roll out period of 5 years for providing wireline broadband connectivity in rural 
and remote areas, the Committee note that out of the target of providing 8,88,832 
wireline broadband connections through BSNL by January, 2014, the achievements as 
on December, 2012 was only 4,33,018. During the same period, the achievements with 
regard to providing wireline broadband kiosks were 10,713 against the target of 
28,672. The performan ce of broadband connectivity in North -Eastern Region is even 
worse as the achievement was merely 2460 against the target of 26,226. The 
Committee observe that the efforts of BSNL to provide wireline broadband kiosk 
through the exchanges have clearly not be en able to match the popularity gained by 
Common Service Centre set up by the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology under a national scheme which are based on a model where the village 
level entrepreneur  run them. The Committee desire that efforts must be made by the 
Department to increase broadband kiosk through the participation of village level 
entrepreneur on the lines of Common Service Centers which have proved to be a big 
success in the remaining span of the scheduled time for completion of the scheme.  
 
(Recommendation No. 8 Para no. 2.13) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Rural Broadband (Wireline) Scheme launched on 20th January, 2009 
with a rollout period of 5 years for providing wireline broadband connectivity in rural 
and remote areas, as on 31st March 2013, 470299 broadband connections and 11443 
Kiosks have been provided by BSNL against the total target of 888832 connections and 
28672 Kiosks by January 2014. The progress has been lagging in off-take of broadband 
connections due to following reasons as reported by BSNL: 
 
(i) Cost of computer is high as compared to house hold income in rural area.  
(ii) Poor power supply condition in rural and remote areas.  
(iii) Poor English literacy in rural areas and Non availability of contents in local 
language.  
(iv) Lack of computer literacy in rural and remote areas.  
(v) Shortage of relevant content for rural population. 
 
However, BSNL has assured it will put all its efforts to make the scheme more 
successful. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8 Para no. 2.13) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  20 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 

35 
 
 
 
Financial performance of BSNL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the financial performance of BSNL has 
continued to be in a declining mode over the last few years and the company is 
incurring heavy losses. During 2009 -10, BSNL had incurred a loss of Rs. 1823 crore, 
which increased to Rs. 6384 crore in 2010 -11 and the amount of loss for 2011 -12 was 
Rs. 8851 crore. The Committee note that not much headway has been made to address  
the cause of the loss which have continued to remain the same such as decrease in 
revenue due to fixed  to mobile substitution, stiff competition, frequent downward 
revision of tariff, outgo of Rs. 18,500 crore as payment towards 3G and BWA spectrum 
charges  resulting in deduction of interest income and increase in expenditure due to 
huge legacy workforce r esulting in payment of 50 per cent of revenue as salary and 
wages, inheritance of legacy wire line system, providing telecommunication in rural, 
remote and inaccessible areas where expenditure far exceeds revenue, etc. The 
Committee feel that if this trend  is allowed to continue any more, it may not be very 
long before the company will finally collapse. Similarly, every year it is being reported 
by the Department / BSNL that measures like setting up of sales and marketing team; 
focusing on customer care ser vices; monetizing the huge assets of land and building; 
towers and bandwidth; focusing in improving the quality of network and IT setup; 
opening of internet data centre; identification of revenue earning telecom district and 
regularly monitoring their perf ormance etc. have been initiated by BSNL to arrest its 
increasing losses. The committee, however, do not find any visible effect of such 
measures on the overall financial performance of the company. The Committee feel 
unhappy in concluding that it is for t he Government to decide as to how much further 
deterioration of the company should be allowed to take place before any concrete 
decision is taken on the issues plaguing the company. The Committee, therefore, once 
again strongly emphasise that there is an u rgent need to revive BSNL in a time bound 
manner and making it a financial viable organization as it was in the past. The 
Committee further recommend that strong monitoring mechanism needs to be evolved 
and put in place for achieving the projected growth in physical parameters as envisaged 
during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period. The Committee also desire the BSNL to 
improve percentage of utilization of IEBR component of Rs. 5593 crore 2013 -14, as 
utilization during 2012-13 up to February, 2013 was very low i.e. 39.72% w.r.t. RE.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 10, Para no. 2.15) 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL has taken following steps to increase the revenue:- 
 
(i) Broadband and Value Added Services:  BSNL has made all out efforts to increase 
the wire line Revenue through enhanced utility by providing several Value Added 
Services including broadband services, Intelligent Network Services and 
broadband based value added services like Video/Games/Music on demand  etc. 
 
(ii) Network Upgradation: Efforts have been made for m odernization of wire line 
network with new technology digital switching systems. 
 
(iii) BSNL is making efforts to upgrade the external plants and extend connectivity to 
new upcoming colonies to provide wire line telephones on demand. 
 

36 
 
 
 
(iv) Inductions of new customer care (single window) and billing platform, 
provisioning system. 
 
(v) Quality of Service (QoS): Monitoring of Quality of Service parameters for 
improving customer services.  
 
(vi) Calling Line Identification Two way speaker Phone (CLIP) handsets are being 
provided to the landline customers for their retention as well as for improving 
customer satisfaction. 
 
(vii) Strengthened Sales & Distribution Channel of wire line and broadband 
connections through Project Udaan by making aggressive marketing and sales, 
competitive tarif f structure and optimum utilization of existing wire line 
capacities. 
 
(viii) Various attractive tariffs plans i.e. One India Plan, Sulabh Plan, Annual (12 
months)/biennial (24 months) fixed charges plans for wire line service, STD Call 
@ local charges for call in BSNL wire line network anywhere in India etchas been 
implemented in order to arrest the decline of the wire line connections. New 
attractive bundled tariff plans such as Broadband +wire line Combo Unlimited 
within BSNL network and wire line + Broadband + GSM Combo Plans for specific 
cities, easy online payment etc have been implemented. 
 
(ix) Monetizing the Huge assets of Towers: 
 
 BSNL has signed agreement with sharing operators viz. M/s TTSL/TTML, 
M/s Aircel, M/s Datacom, M/s Reliance, M/s Bharti Airtel & M/s  Idea 
Cellular for sharing of BSNL‟s towers on PAN -India basis and with M/s 
Vodafone at circle level in various circles viz. Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Bihar, Kerala, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal& Andhra Pradesh for  sharing of BSNLs towers in 
the circles. 
 
 Physical and Financial achievements of BSNL in sharing of its Passive 
Infrastructure (Towers) since commencement of sharing business by 
BSNL are as under:  
 
Achievement of tower sharing by BSNL 
Year Physical  
(No. of towers leased out) 
Revenue 
FY 2009-10 341 1.8 Crore 
FY 2010-11 491 29.38 Crore 
FY 2011-12 609 42.67 Crore 
FY 2012-13 877 73.63 Crore 
 
 BSNL is seeking expert advice for assuming of strategic options, business 
proposal for a new company for the creation of new company (100% 
subsidiary or JV Company or any other suitable business model). 
 

37 
 
 
 
(x) BSNL is also exploring possibilities of monetizing of its Land Assets: 
(xi) The revenue from Enterprise services has grown from Rs. 1352.73 Crore in 
2009-10 to Rs. 2290.12 crore in 2012-13. 
 
 Further, ten Internet data centres (IDCs) in association with M/s SIS and 
Dimension Data on revenue sharing business have been opened and has 
started working. This has resulted in generating a new stream of 
continuous revenue earning for BSNL. 
 Government is very much seized of the financial performance of BSNL and 
is taking initiatives for its revival. A Group of Ministers (GOM) has been 
constituted on 28.05.2013 for revival and revitalization of BSNL and 
MTNL.  
The following short term i nitiatives are being taken through the aforesaid GOM 
for BSNL: 
 Provide support to BSNL for continuing service to rural wire line 
subscribers before 1.4.2002 as recommended by the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) in its recommendations of 14.5.2 012 and in 
accordance with the Cabinet decision on 25.9.2000 at the time of 
corporatization of BSNL. 
        Assistance for retention of spectrum beyond 4.4 MHz (GSM) and 2.5 MHz (CDMA) 
by BSNL. 
        Surrender with refund of BWA (Broadband Wireless Access) spectrum in 6 service 
areas held by BSNL. 
       Support for implementing a Voluntary Retirement Scheme in BSNL to reduce staff 
costs. 
 Preferential treatment for BSNL services in Government and PSU usage. 
 Financial support to BSNL for provision of socially desirable but uneconomic 
telecommunication services in the North East, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep and Jammu & Kashmir and for continued operation of Village Public 
Telephones (VPTs). 
 Waiver of Government Loan to BSNL. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 10, Para no. 2.15) 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 

38 
 
 
 
Mobile Number Portability Ratio 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee are also dismayed to note that the performance of BSNL with 
regard to mobile number portability and augmentation of its network has not been very 
satisfactory. In the case of mobile number portability the ratio of porting in to porting 
out is 1:1.4, which means mor e subscribers are porting out of BSNL . For instance as 
on 28.02.2013, the actual number of subscribers ported out from BSNL were 30,16,464 
and only 21,44,200 subscribers ported into BSNL. 
  
On analysis of the data furnished by the Department in respect of  porting out 
and porting in with regard to BSNL, the Committee find that in all circles excepting 
Andhra Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Odisha, and Tamil Nadu, the porting out 
is more than the porting in and cumulative All India Ratio of  porting in t o porting out 
as on 28.02.2013 is 1:1.4. Though it had been claimed by the Secretary, DOT, during 
evidence before the Committee that the number of porting in is improving consistently, 
the Committee find that the ratio has remained the same as it was during the last year. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the company may carry out a survey for 
ascertaining the main reasons for porting out of subscribers and take appropriate 
remedial measures to address the same so that the ratio of porting in to port ing out is 
ultimately reduced to less than one i.e. the number of porting in is more than the 
number of porting out.  
(Recommendation No. 12 Para no. 2.17) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has asked its Circle Offices to carry out the survey for ascertaining  the 
main reasons for the porting out of subscribers and take appropriate remedial measures 
to address the same so that the ratio of port-in to port-out is ultimately reduced to less 
than one i.e. the number of port-in is more than the number of port-out. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 11 Para no. 2.16) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated    25.07.2013) 
  
National Telecom Policy, 2012  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
 From the information provided by the Department, the Committee find that 
earlier Telecom Policy i.e. NTP, 1999 was the catalyst for growth of the telecom sector 
as India emerged as one of the fastest growing telecom markets in the world and 
constituting significantly to the country‟s economic growth. However, the digital divide 
in the country continues to be significant with rural areas accounting for only 34% of 
the total connections and the ability of the poor both in rural and urban areas needs to 
be enhanced. It was against this backdrop that the National Telecom Policy, 2012 has 
been conceived and approved by the Government of India on 31 st May, 2012. While 
appreciating the achievements made by the Department under NTP, 1999, the 
Committee also observe that the Department has set up ambitious targets under NTP 
2012, such as, increasing rural teledensity from the current level of around 39 to  100 
by 2020, 600 million broadband connection by 2020, m aking India a global hub for 

39 
 
 
 
manufacturing; achieving one Nation Full Mobile Number portability and work towards 
one Nation-Free Roaming, etc. The Committee would like the Department to bring out 
the detailed guidelines to operationalise the policy at the earliest as envisaged in the 
Cabinet Note on NTP, 2012. The Committee hope that the Department would make 
utmost efforts for achieving the objectives enumerated in NTP -2012 in line with the 
implementation plan which has already been formulated. 
 
(Recommendation No. 15 Para no. 2.20) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To implement National Telecom Policy -2012 (NTP-12), specific areas of NTP -12 
have been assigned to each Responsibility Centre in DoT with a bi -monthly review of 
the progress  made. 
 
Department is taking all necessary action to achieve objectives enshrined in NTP-
12. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 15 Para no. 2.20) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated   25.07.2013) 
 
 
Increasing Broadband connectivity 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee also note that one of the objectives of NTP -12 is to provide 
affordable and reliable broadband -on-demand by the year 2015 and to achieve 175 
million broadband connections by 2017 and 600 million by 2020. The Department has 
now stated that major means to achieve the target will be through assimilating the 
cable TV network into the broadband infrastructure and through 3G and 4G ser vices. 
The Committee recommend that the Department must expedite the process so that 
broadband revolution picks up in the country in the same way the mobile revolution has 
taken place in the country. 
 
(Recommendation No. 16 Para no. 2.221 
Reply of the Government 
 
USOF, through BSNL, has started „Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme‟ to provide 
wire-line broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas. As on 31st March 2013, a 
total of 4,70,299 broadband connections have been provided under this scheme. 
 
 National Optical Fiber Network (NOFN) scheme approved by Government is 
being implemented by Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) to provide Optical 
Fibre connectivity to 2.5 Lakhs (Approx.) Gram Panchayats in the country. State 
Governments are expected to contribute by way of not levying any Right of Way (RoW) 
charges and Tri -partite MoU has been signed with 23 States and 4 Union Territories. 
Non-discriminatory access to the network will be provided to all categories of service 
providers to launch various services including broadband service in rural area.  
 

40 
 
 
 
Roll-out obligation for 3G / BWA spectrum is that licensee of 3 G / BWA 
spectrum, in Metro service area shall be required to provide street level coverage using 
3G Spectrum, in at least 90 % of servi ce area within 5 years of the effective date. 
Effective date is the date when the right to use awarded spectrum commercially 
commences. For category A, B and C service area, the licensee of 3 G spectrum shall 
ensure at least 50 % of the District Headquarte rs (DHQ) will be covered, out of which 
at least 15 % of the DHQ should be rural Short Distance Charging Areas (SDCA) within 
5 years of effective date. DHQ /town would mean that at least 90 % of the area 
bounded by municipal / local body should get the requ ired street level coverage. For 
category A, B and C service area, the licensee of 3 G spectrum shall ensure at least 50 
% of the rural Short Distance Charging Area are covered within 5 years of effective 
date. Coverage of rural SDCA would mean that at leas t 90 % of the area bounded by 
municipal / local body limit should get the required street level coverage. 
 
Access to internet through authorized Cable Operator is permitted without 
additional licensing subject to applicable Cable Laws (The Cable Television  Networks 
(Regulation) Act 1995) 
 
 As on 31st March 2013, there were 15.05 million Broadband connections in the 
country.   
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 16 Para no. 2.21) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated    25.07.2013) 
 
R & D in telecom equipment manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that in pursuance of National Telecom Policy, 2012, which 
includes promotion of Telecom Equipment manufacturing as  one of the objectives, the 
Department has constituted an Expert Group on creation of Telecom Entrepreneurship 
Development, Telecom R&D and Telecom Manufacturing Promotion. The Expert Group is 
expected to submit its report shortly. The Committee have been informed that within 
the Government, the premier organization in the Department of Telecommunications 
for research is the Centre for Development of Telemetics (C -DoT). R&D are being done 
by C-DOT for development of telecom equipment and security programme for which an 
amount of Rs. 1000 crore and Rs. 550 crore has been proposed respectively during the 
12th Five Year Plan. Apart from Government R&D, private sector has also been carrying 
out R&D and coming up with different products. With regard to Import and  export of 
telecom equipment, the committee note that the total telecom export during 2011 -12 
was Rs. 20070 crore, whereas during the same period, the total import of telecom 
equipment stood at Rs. 52441 crore. The Committee are of the view that there is a n 
urgent need to develop telecom R&D facilities so as to ensure that not only India‟s 
Telecom equipments are procured domestically but also to facilitate emergence of India 
as a major telecom manufacturing hub in the world. In this regard, the committee 
appreciate the initiative of the Government in laying down the policy for providing 
preference to domestically manufactured electronic products including telecom 
equipment in procurement. More than the economic implications, the committee are of 
the view that having robust R&D facilities in telecom sector will strengthen the security 
requirements of the telecom networks of the country. The committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that apart from R&D for indigenous development of telecom 

41 
 
 
 
equipment, equal efforts should also be devoted to develop test facilities and standards 
so as to ensure that imported telecom equipment conform to highest security 
standards. 
(Recommendation No. 18 Para no. 2.23) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Telecom Policy-2012 provides a roadmap for India to become a leader 
in cutting edge, state of the art technologies through R&D, creation and incorporation of 
Indian IPRs in global standards. This will require measures for boosting 
entrepreneurship and creating a major global manufacturing hub for telecommunication 
equipment to achieve self - sufficiency while squarely addressing security and strategic 
concerns.  
 
The Targets for Manufacturing and R&D during 12 th Five Year Plan has been 
proposed in Working Group report of telecom sector as under: 
 
(i)   Making India a hub for telecom manufacturing by incentivising domestic 
manufacturers with thrust on IPR, product development and 
commercialization.  
 
(ii)   Preferential market access for indigenously manufactured products. 
 
(iii)  Increasing local content in manufacturing. 
 
(iv)    Thrust for R&D, IPR and Product commercialization. 
 
C-DOT for the 12th Plan period has already put in its technology research and 
development thrust towards meeting National, Strategic Security needs of the Telecom 
Technologies and to bridge the digital -divide in the urban and rural with a focus on 
establishing a sound manufacturing-echo system for the technology proliferation in the 
network over the next few years.  Transfer  of Technology have been done to about 8 -
10 manufacturers for some of these technologies, namely, Gigabit Passive Optical 
Network, Next Generation Packet Technology, Wireless etc. These manufacturers have 
set-up requisite infrastructure for production. Bes ides, significant efforts are also 
ongoing in the proliferation of technology for lawful interception and monitoring, secure 
communication network, network management, etc.  
 
As regards the security testing of telecom equipment is concerned, Government 
has already mandated the Telecom Service Providers to induct only those network 
elements which have been security tested against the relevant national / international 
security standards.  The Government has also decided to set up telecom testing and 
security certification centre for development of processes systems, formulate or adopt 
security standards and developed necessary test tools. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 18 Para no. 2.23) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated    25.07.2013) 
 

42 
 
 
 
Foreign telecom equipments and related security concerns 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
The committee note with concern that Permanent Select Committee on 
Intelligence of US Government in their report titled “Investigative Report on US 
National security issues posed by Chinese Telecommunications Companies Huawei & 
ZTE” had expressed the appre hension that Huawei could not establish beyond doubt 
that it is not a company functioning under the direct control of Chinese army and the 
decision making is not influenced by the same. The committee are concerned to note 
that without conducting any system atic study to ascertain the long term security 
implications due to dependence on imported equipments including Chinese 
Telecommunications Companies Huawei and ZTE, the BSNL had finalized tender for 
14.4 million lines of GSM network in favour of M/s ZTE whi ch is a Chinese 
Telecommunication company. Even though the Secretary, DoT submitted before the 
committee that it has come through a competitive bidding process and there is a 
significant price differential and also security cannot be compromised because of  price, 
the committee are of the view that commercial interest rather than nation‟s security 
seems to have been the guiding factor in finalizing this tender by BSNL with M/s ZTE. 
As per the Secretary, DoT‟s own admission, the threat from imported telecom 
equipment is real and that vulnerability cannot be removed completely. The committee 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Department must urgently identify both the 
short term and long term measures to handle the threat that may arise from imported 
telecom equipment. Some of the short term measures may include developing a sound 
testing standards and setting up adequate number of test centres at the earliest for 
elimination of security threats to the extent possible. The long term may include R&D 
for indigenous manufacture of telecom equipments, especially of sensitive requirements 
should be urgently taken up by the Department.   
 
(Recommendation No. 19 Para no. 2.24) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For self reliance, the NTP 2012 has objective of promoting the ecosystem for 
design, Research and Development, IPR creation, testing, standardization and 
manufacturing i.e. complete value chain for domestic production of telecommunication 
equipment to meet Indian telecom sector demand to the extent of 60% and 80% with  
a minimum value addition of 45% and 65% by the year 2017 and 2020 respectively. 
The strategies mentioned at para 2.23 are aimed at development of Indian IPR and 
development and commercialization of indigenous products to make country self 
reliant.   
 
The Standing Committees‟ suggestions are noted.  As regards the security 
testing of telecom equipment is concerned, Government has already mandated the 
Telecom Service Providers to induct only those network elements which have been 
security tested against the relevant national / international security standards.  The 
Government has also decided to set up  
 
telecom testing and security certification centre for development of processes systems, 
formulate or adopt security standards and develop necessary test tools.    
  
(Reply to Recommendation No. 19 Para no. 2.24) 
 

43 
 
 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Enhanced and continued adoption of green policy in telecom and incentivize 
use of renewable resources of sustainability 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee not that one of the objectives enshrined in NTP, 2012 is 
„enhanced and continued adoption of green policy in telecom and incentivize use of 
renewable resources of sustainability‟. The Committee feel that this is a laudable 
objective as there is an acute problem of power in the far flung and rural areas of the 
country. The Committee are of the view that renewable energy sources particularly the 
solar power devices could be the best option for ensuring uninterrupted communication 
network in such areas which presently suffer on account of acute power shortages. As 
regards funding of the cost of installation of such devices, the Committee note that as 
on 31.12.2012, the available balance under USOF, which is primarily meant for use in 
the development of rural telecommunications is Rs. 24,801.56 crore. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the USOF may be utilized for installing solar power devices 
in the rural areas for supplying power to the telecommunication towers and other 
related activities. The Committee further recommend that this work may be entrusted 
to the BSNL which has a vast telecom infrastructure as well as expertise in the rural 
areas.  
(Recommendation No. 20 Para no. 2.25) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1) DOT has constituted a committee i n March 2013 under the chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary (T), consisting of members from DOT, MNRE, BSNL, Industry 
Associations and RESCO to examine the Renewable Energy deployment in telecom 
sector.  The Committee to prepare a road map and propose a co mprehensive 
programme for deployment of renewable energy options in the telecom sector.  
 
2) As per the extant USOF rules, selection of a IP/Universal Service Provider is 
decided based on a transparent bidding process amongst eligible operators. 
         The guiding principle in selection of service provider (USP/IP etc.) and 
formulation of schemes so as to discharge the statutory obligation of USOF has been to 
ensure (a) technology neutrality & (b) operator neutrality.  The implementation of 
„Green Policy‟ for USOF funded schemes will be guided by aforementioned principle. 
3) USOF is encouraging the use of RETs  in all its future schemes : 
 
a.  Mobile services in LWE -affected areas/ uncovered villages in the country 
and National Optical Fibre Network (N OFN) Project being implemented 
with funding from USOF using energy -efficient GPoN equipment at Gram 
Panchayats powered by solar energy. 
b.  7300 towers installed in rural areas as part of Shared Mobile 
Infrastructure Scheme, funded by USOF using Renewable Ene rgy 
Technologies (RETs). 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 20 Para no. 2.25) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated    25.07.2013) 

44 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL--

45 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Setting up of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) Labs  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that SAR laboratories have been planned by the 
Department for verification of SAR values of mobile handsets and hand held devices as 
declared by the manufacturers in compliance with EMF exposure  limits prescribed by 
DoT. Taking into consideration the existence of millions of mobile handsets of a vast 
variety of makes and specifications involving a large number of manufacturers, the 
Committee do not feel amused to note that to handle all this for the entire country, so 
far, only one SAR Lab has been installed and commissioned in TEC headquarters at New 
Delhi and the Department is in the process of setting up of another SAR Lab at RTEC 
Mumbai. The Committee, therefore, feel constrained to observe that such an important 
issue which has a serious bearing on the health of the people has not been given the 
kind of seriousness it deserves. The Department appears to be very casual in its 
approach in stri ctly enforcing the SAR norms and treating it as a mere formality.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
The Committee while deprecating such lackadaisical attitude of the Department strongly 
recommend that the Department should urgently undertake a thorough review with 
regard to the number of SAR Labs required to be set up in the country and the 
verification of SAR values must be made a mandatory provision for all kinds of mobile 
handsets, and keep the Committee informed of the progress made in this regard. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4 Para no. 2.9) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) has already set up a SAR lab at New Delhi, 
and has planned another one at Mumbai, at its regional Centre.  It is submitted that 
according to Office Memoranda issued by this Department on SAR value of mobile 
phones, all the mobile handset manufacturers, both indigenous and imported, shall 
provide a self declaration in respect of SAR value based on certificate from 
internationally accredited labs [International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperati on 
(ILAC) accredited labs] or accredited by TEC, India to TEC with a copy to this 
department for necessary action. Such self declared SAR limits shall be subjected to 
TEC audit as and when required. Thus the labs being set up by the TEC are mostly for 
audit purposes only and manufacturer/importer may get their mobile phone tested from 
any internationally accredited labs or TEC accredited labs. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 4 Para no. 2.9) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated   25.07.2013) 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
Revenue receipts of the Department 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that TERM Cells of the Department ha ve been mandated 
with the work of cross checking the compliance of EMF Radiation norms in respect of 
telecom towers. The Committee have been informed that TERM Cell tests upto 10 per 
cent of New BTS sites randomly at its discretion. The Committee are, howe ver, find it 
unbelievable to note that as on date no EMF testing instrument is available with TERM 
Cells and instead of procuring and using its own EMF instruments, TERM Cells are 
carrying out the measurement of radiation level by using the test instrument s provided 
by the Telecom Service Providers. The Committee are not in agreement with the 
response of the Department that there is no adverse effect in carrying out the 
measurement of radiation levels from various BTS towers on account of non-availability 
of EMF test equipment. Taking into consideration the increasing concerns over the 
harmful effects of electromagnetic radiation on human health and that the TERM Cells 
have been entrusted with the work of cross checking, the Committee feel deeply 
perturbed o n this non -serious approach of the Department in dealing with such an 
important issue concerning radiations from BTS towers. The Committee feel that the 
Department owe an explanation as to under what authority it is using the instruments 
provided by TSP operators instead of having its own instrument and what could be the 
authenticity of such instruments and how such testing can be termed as authentic. 
Taking note of the fact that the Government have already formulated norms with 
respect to testing procedures and testing fee, the Committee fail to understand whether 
such norms permit the TERM Cells to use the equipment provided by TSP themselves 
instead of its own equipment. Now that the tender for procuring 69 test instruments 
had already been floated which shall be opened on 12 April, 2013, the Committee 
strongly recommend that serious efforts must be made by the Department to procure 
the requisite number of test instruments at the earliest to become self-sufficient in EMF 
testing. The Committee also recomme nd that efforts must be made to promote 
domestic production of EMF instrument instead of relying only on import.” 
  
(Recommendation No. 5, Para no. 2.102 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DoT instructions issued vide letter no. 800 -15/2010-VAS dated 8th April 2010  
mandated vide para 3(v) that tools and equipment for testing would be provided by the 
concerned Mobile Service Provider to the TERM Cell. Accordingly the TERM Cells are 
carrying out the cross checking of the compliance of EMF radiation norms in respect of  
Telecom Towers by using the instruments provided by Telecom Service Provider(TSP) 
till such time DOT procures its own test instruments. The testing instruments provided 
by the TSPs are of standard make and measurements are carried out by TERM cells at 
BTS sites to ensure authenticity of the measurements. 
 
To avoid the dependence on TSPs for instruments, the case of procurement of 69 
sets of Test Equipment for the TERM Cells is already under process in TEC. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 5, Para no. 2.10) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  11 the Chapter I) 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 

47 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Setting up of wireless Monitoring Stations 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that Wireless Monitoring Organizations (WMO), a field unit 
of the Wireless Planning and Coordination wing (WPC Wing) is entrusted to ensure that 
interference to wireless networks, which may occur for a variety of reasons, is 
immediately resolved. Another concern of the WMO is to ensure spectrum availability 
for the introduction of new wireless networks.  Protection to radio communica tion 
networks of public bodies (Government/Undertakings), security (defence, police and 
paramilitary organizations) and numerous networks of other agencies also carry high 
priority with the WMO. To carry out its responsibilities, WMO operates a country -wide 
network of 28 Wireless Monitoring Stations (WMSs) . The Department has informed the 
Committee that the foremost responsibility of WMSs is to insure interference -free 
operations of mobile and DTH services, amongst others, affecting millions of people in 
the Country. Equally important for WMSs is to provide protection to  safety of life 
related communications in the aeronautical and maritime mobile services. In the 
background of such important tasks being performed by WMSs , the Committee note 
with concern that the utilization of funds pertaining to development of WMSs is 
abysmally low. During 2012 -13, an amount of Rs.  58 crore was allocated at BE stage 
for WMO which was reduced to Rs.3.50 crore at the RE stage and the actual utilization 
upto February, 2013 was only Rs 3.97 crore . The Committee also find it contradictory 
that on one hand , the Department has claimed that six new Wireless Monitoring 
Stations were planned and established at Bhubaneshwar , Dehradun , Lucknow , Patna , 
Raipur  and Vijaywada unde r Eleventh Five Year Plan ,on the other , it is stating that 
the bid document for procurement of technical infrastructure for the  WMSs  is still 
under revision and is yet to be submitted to the competent authority . In view of such 
important functions being performed by WMS, the committee strongly recommend that 
due importance be given to the timely execution of the projects so that the 
procurement of requisite technical infrastructure is not delayed any further. The 
committee also recommend the Department  to ensure timely establishment of six new 
WMS during the Twelfth Plan in a time bound manner and ensure optimum utilization of 
funds allocated under annual Plan 2013-14.   
 
(Recommendation No. 6, Para no. 2.11) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The expenditure shown are on the minimum mandatory expenses, on account of 
salary, office expenses for these newly established six WMSs and civil works of 
the permanent established  WMSs. 
2. Revised draft Bid document for the procurement of technical infrastructure for 
the six new WMSs is already submitted to the competent authorities for the 
necessary approvals. 
3. The case for the establishment of six new WMSs under the 12th  Five Year Plan 
will be taken up shortly for the administrative approval of the competent 
authority 
 

48 
 
 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 6, Para no. 2.11) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  14 the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Under utilization of funds under USOF Scheme  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee observe that telecom services are important drivers for 
development, delivery of public services such as education, health, etc. and integration 
of rural areas with the rest  of the country. Recognizing the importance of telecom 
services, Universal Service Support Policy was announced by the Government in March, 
2002 under which a separate fund i.e. USOF, for providing access to telegraph services 
to people in the rural and re mote areas was set up. An analysis of the utilization of 
funds by the Department and the implementation of some of the important schemes 
under USOF, indicates that the efforts of the Department could not match up with the 
noble endeavor for which the fund has been set up. In this regard, the Committee note 
that the amount of Rs. 3000 Crore allocated at BE stage during 2012-13 was reduced to 
Rs. 625 crore at RE stage and the actual utilisation upto February, 2013 was also Rs. 
625 crore. The Committee observe that as on 31.12.2012, the available balance under 
USOF is Rs. 24,801.56 crore and with implementation of a new scheme i.e. National 
Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) with a financial outlay of Rs. 20,000 and implementation 
of Mobile Tower in Left Wing Extremi sm (LWE) affected areas at an estimated sum of 
Rs. 3060 crore, the bulk of the accruals to USOF over the years would be utilized. The 
Committee recommend that the Department must pay serious attention to 
implementation of these two schemes as this would en sure the proper utilization of 
funds under USOF. 
 
(Recommendation No. 7, Para no. 2.12) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN)  
 
The Project was approved by Cabinet on 25.10.2011. The project was envisaged 
to be executed by a Speci al Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The SPV [Bharat Broadband 
Network Limited (BBNL)] was incorporated on 25.02.2012 and the Directors of BBNL 
joined in July – August 2012. 
 
In the High Level Committee (HLC) of National Optical  Fibre Network (NOFN), 
constituted for  the purpose of overseeing the implementation of the project, it was 
decided that a pilot be conducted to understand the ground realities before going for 
the main project. Three Pilot Projects have been completed on 15.10.2012 to cover all 
Gram Panchayats of Arain Block in Ajmer District (Rajasthan), Panisagar block in North 
Tripura District (Tripura), Paravada Block in Vishakhapatnam District (A.P.). Each of the 
58 Gram Panchayats in these three Pilot Project Blocks have been provided with 100 
Mbps Bandwidth. The response of Telecom Industry at these locations is lukewarm. To 
trigger Government to Customer (G2C) Services at pilot locations, Department of 
Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY) has embarked on counterpart funding to 
take connectivity t o 110 Govt. institutions (Schools/ Hospitals/ Offices etc.) in these 

49 
 
 
 
pilot locations and also provide Customer Premises Equipment (CPEs) to showcase G2C 
applications. A Video conference was held as 08.04.2013 with 3 pilot locations to test 
utilization of NOFN infrastructure.  
 
Alongside the completion of the pilot project, the survey for main project was 
started which is currently under progress. The tenders for supply of material and 
execution of the project are also under process by BBNL and 3 CPSUs (BSNL , Railtel 
and Powergrid). 
 
NOFN project is envisaged as a Centre – State joint effort. State Government are 
expected to contribute by way of not levying any RoW charges. This requires suitable   
tri-partite MoU to be signed by GOI, State Governments & BBNL . There have been 
delays in according the consent by some States.  
 
Tri-partite MoU has been signed on 26.10.2012 with 13 states viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Rajasthan , Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and 3 
Union Territories viz. Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Puducherry. Further, the 
tripartite MoU has been signed on 12.04.2013 with 9 States viz. Assam, Bihar Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Maha rashtra, Nagaland, Odisha and Punjab and 
1 Union Territory viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Tri-partite MoU has been signed with 
West Bengal on 11.06.2013.  A total of about 2, 20, 000 Gram Panchayats will get 
covered in these States and UTs. Efforts are un derway to sign the tripartite MoU with 
remaining States/ UTs.  
 
Mobile Towers in LWE affected areas: 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has identified and conveyed 2199 locations to 
DoT in 9 States which are affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE) and do not currently 
have any coverage by any service provider. These locations have been identified for 
installing towers and mobile equipment keeping in view the security and maintenance 
considerations. BSNL has submitted that they have already installed Mobile Tow ers at 
363 locations. State-wise details of these locations are as given below: 
 
S. NO. Name of the State No. of locations 
identified by MHA 
Towers already 
commissioned by BSNL 
1 Andhra Pradesh 227 3 
2 Bihar 184 0 
3 Chhattisgarh 497 351 
4 Jharkhand 782 0 
5 Madhya Pradesh 22 6 
6 Maharashtra 60 3 
7 Odisha 253 0 
8 Uttar Pradesh 78 0 
9 West Bengal 96 0 
 Total 2199 363 
 
Department of Telecom had sought approval of the Cabinet to extend USOF 
Subsidy Support to BSNL on  nomination basis, for providing & managing Mobile 
Services in LWE affected areas, for general public as well as security personnel around 
these locations. 

50 
 
 
 
 
The Union Cabinet has approved USOF supported scheme to provide mobile 
services in areas affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE) on 4th June, 2013. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 7, Para no. 2.12) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  17 the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
National Optical Fibre Networks (NOFN) Project 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 Another project funded by USOF which demands attention is the National Optical 
Fibre Network (NOFN) which is planned to connect 2.50 lakh Gra m Panchayats in the 
country through optical fibre which will provide various applications like e -Health, e-
education, e -Governance etc. The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of 
implementation of this important project. While the project was app roved by the Union 
Cabinet on 25.10.2011 with on outlay of Rs. 20,000 crore to be completed within a 
period of 2 years time, so far, the MoU has been signed only with 13 States and 3 UTs. 
Inspite of the 2 years period given for completion of this project, only three Pilot 
Projects have been completed in Arian Block in Ajmer District (Rajasthan), Panisagar 
Block in North Tripura District (Tripura) and Paravada Block in Vishakhapatnam District 
(Andhra Pradesh). The Committee observe that since central feature  of the NOFN is in 
bringing about broadband connectivity especially in rural and remote areas, the 
Department should have made maximum efforts to complete the projects within the 
prescribed timeline i.e. by the end of the current year. Feeling concerned at  such 
sluggish pace of the execution of the project, the Committee, recommend that all out 
efforts should be made by the Department to sign MoUs with the remaining States and 
UTs at the earliest. Needless to emphasis that the project would not be allowed t o 
suffer on account of shortage of funds. 
 
(Recommendation No. 9, Para no. 2.14) 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Project was approved by Cabinet on 25.10.2011. The project was envisaged 
to be executed by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The SPV [Bharat Broadband 
Network Limited (BBNL)] was incorporated on 25.02.2012 and the Directors of BBNL 
joined in July – August 2012. 
 
NOFN project is envisaged as a Centre – State joint effort. State Government are 
expected to contribute by way of not levying any RoW charges. This requires suitable   
tri-partite MoU to be signed by GOI, State Governments & BBNL. There have been 
delays in according the consent by various State Governments.  
 
Tri-partite MoU has been signed on 26.10.2012 with 13 states viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and 3 
Union Territories viz. Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Puducherry. Further, the 
tripartite MoU has been signed on 12.04.2013 with 9 States viz. Assam, Bihar Gujarat, 

51 
 
 
 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha and Punjab and 
1 Union Territory viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Tri-partite MoU has been signed with 
West Bengal on 11.0 6.2013. A total of about 2, 20, 000 Gram Panchayats will get 
covered in these States and UTs. Efforts are underway to sign the tripartite MoU with 
remaining States/ UTs. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 9, Para no. 2.14) 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
Amount owned by Private Operators to BSNL 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
As per the information furnished by the Department, the Committee note that as 
on 31.01.2013 an amount of Rs. 1111 crore is outstanding from private operators to 
BSNL. The Committee are dismayed to find that out of the outstanding of Rs. 1111 
crore to be recovered from private operators, a sum of Rs. 986 crore is sub -judice in 
the Hon‟b le Supreme Court and TDSAT and dispute pertaining to CDR (Call Detail 
Record) reconciliations and same is being pursued vigorously for an early settlement. 
The Committee while expressing a serious concern over such a huge outstanding 
amount as well as its disputed nature, strongly recommend that the company may 
analyse the reasons for such disputes and undertake appropriate remedial measures to 
avoid such disputes in the future. 
                                                    
(Recommendation No. 11 Para no. 2.16) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The amount owed by private operators to BSNL as on 31.03.2013, is given 
below: 
            
                                                                                         (Fig. In Crores) 
Name of the Operator Gross Outstanding Disputed 
Outstanding 
Net outstanding 
Bharti 239.46 212.03 27.43 
Reliance 184.42 163.67 20.75 
Vodafone 93.96 85.86 8.10 
IDEA 30.99 27.40 3.59 
Total 548.83 488.96 59.87 
Others 580.05 485.38 94.67 
Grand Total 1128.88 974.34 154.54 

52 
 
 
 
 
 An amount of Rs. 974.34 crores is locked up in various types of disputes, out of 
which most of the amount is sub-judice in the ongoing legal cases before the Hon‟ble 
TDSAT / Supreme Court. The disputes are mainly due to the following reasons: 
 
(c) Reduction of  tariff in respect of Interconnect Usage Charges by TRAI against 
which BSNL has filed an appeal in Hon‟ble Supreme Court. BSNL continues billing 
on earlier rates for Carrier Charges, Port Charges, etc. which private operators 
are refusing to pay. 
(d) Likewise, the private operators have also approached Courts seeking relief 
(iv) from payment of infrastructure charges revised by BSNL. 
(v) Against the disconnection notices of BSNL giving reasons for non -payment 
as CDR (Call Detail Record) mismatch/CLI (calling line identification) cases , 
etc. and 
(vi) Against Trunk Group Violation charges billed by BSNL for wrong routing of 
calls by private operators. 
 
 Out of outstanding of Rs. 1129 Crore from private operators to BSNL as on 
31.03.2013, an amount of Rs. 974 Crores is locked up in various types of 
disputes, of which, most of the amount is sub -judice in the ongoing legal  cases 
before the Hon‟ble TDSAT/Sup reme Court. BSNL is making all out efforts for 
recovery of its payments.  Some of the r easons for these disputes and efforts 
made by BSNL for recovery of payments are as follows: 
Payment of Interconnect Usage Charges and port charges are governed by 
mutual interconnect agreements between BSNL & Private Operators. However, 
charges payable by Private Operators to BSNL are modified by TRAI by way of 
Regulations issued from time to time.  
 
For instance, TRAI has reduced the  
d) Port charges from Rs. 55,000/- per port to Rs. 39,000/- from 01.04.2007 
e) Carriage charges in respect of intra circle cellular calls from Rs. 0.65p  per 
minute to Rs.0.15p per minute from 01.04.2009. 
f) Port charges further from Rs. 39,000/- per port to Rs. 10,000/- per port (for 
PSTN ports) and Rs. 4000/- per port (for GSM port) from 01.10.2012. 
BSNL has challenged this huge reduction of rates by TRAI regulations in 
Hon‟ble TDSAT & Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India. These cases are pending 
at various levels in Hon‟ble TDSAT, High Court &  Supreme Court. 
 
 BSNL continued to raise the bills at old (higher) rates (so that its claim remains 
justifiable/claimable in these courts) leading to mounting of outstanding dues. 
Private Operators are not paying the outstanding amounts by taking advantage 
of TRAI Regulations & pending decision/judgments from Hon‟ble TDSAT, High 
Court & Supreme Court. 
 
Presently, BSNL is not in a position to recover the outstanding dues from the 
private operators because of the orders of Hon‟bleCourts ‘not to take any 
coercive against the Private Operators’  in respect of disconnection notices 
issued by BSNL. 
 
BSNL has been engaging Solicitor General (SG) of India, Additional Solicitor 
General (ASG) of India & Ex SG & ASG‟s to defend its cases.  
 

53 
 
 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 11 Para no. 2.16) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  23 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B (Pt.) dated    25.07.2013) 
 
 
Financial performance of MTNL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee feel extremely concerned at the continuing trend of increasing 
losses MTNL year after year.  During 2009 -10, MTNL had incurred loss of Rs. 2610.92 
crore which was increased to Rs. 2801.92 crore during 2010 -11.  The loss incurred by 
MTNL during 2011 -12 was Rs. 4109.78 crore.  The Committee also deprecate the low 
utilization of IEBR by MTNL during 2012-13. The Committee note that main reasons for 
such heavy losses being incurred by the company include overstaffing, revision of 
wages/arrears, provision for spectrum charges, pension payment/actuarial valuation, 
accounting for balance amount of VRS payments, reduction in tariffs and service area 
constraints etc.  As a result, the MTNL is passing through severe cash flow problem and 
is borrowing money to meet its day to day requirements.  The Committee note that 
most of these issues need Government intervention for their settlement, but the same 
is not forthcoming.  The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent n eed for the 
Government to address all such issues besides chalking out a detailed strategy to 
restore MTNL as a viable Telecom PSU in the country.  The Committee also note that 
the proposal of MTNL for surrendering the BWA spectrum allotted to them and refund of 
full price of Rs. 4533.99 crore plus interest (Rs. 766.90 crore) is pending with the 
Department of Telecommunications for their consideration.  The Committee recommend 
that the Department may take a final decision on this issue at the earliest.  The  
Committee further recommend that the Department should urgently go into the merits 
of the assistance sought by MTNL for other proposals viz. sovereign guarantee for 
raising long term bonds, monetization of land and buildings, financial assistance for 
excess spectrum in 2G, funding support for VRS and creation of a common Pension 
Trust for all groups of absorbed employees.  The Committee desire that all steps 
necessary  for revive MTNL are implemented in a time bound manner so as to prevent 
any further slid e in the financial and physical performance of the Company.  The 
Committee also desire the MTNL to  improve percentage of utilization of IEBR 
component of Rs. 786.93 crore in 2013-14, as utilization during 2012-13 upto January, 
2013 was very low i.e. 38.36% w.r.t. RE. 
(Recommendation No. 13, Para no. 2.18) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MTNL has sought for Government support for its revival. For this purpose, MTNL 
has submitted a revival plan seeking government assistance in the following key 
areas:- 
 
• Sovereign guarantee for raising long term bonds. 
• Surrender of BWA Spectrum 
• Raising resources through monetisation of fixed assets 

54 
 
 
 
• Financial assistance for retention of excess spectrum in 900 MHz & 1800 
MHz bands. 
• Funding support for rationalization of staff. 
• Pension issues of all absorbed employees in MTNL in line with BSNL.  
 
A Group of Ministers (GoM) has been constituted for revival and revitalization of 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
(MTNL). The above issues are presently under consideration of the Government. MTNL 
has prepared a revival plan for orienting itself to the evolving telecom market to 
increase revenues. The revival plan has been placed before the GoM for consideration. 
 
MTNL has submitted that the actual utilization of funds (provisional), as on March 
2013, is Rs 260.49 Cr which is 58.61% w.r.t. RE of Rs 444.48 Cr. MTNL is making all 
endeavor to optimally and judiciously utilize the plan outlay for 2013 -14 as required to 
meet its targets.  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 13, Para no. 2.18) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  26 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
 
Revival Plan for ITI 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee note that during 2013 -14, the amount proposed for ITI was Rs. 
1453 crore but the allocation made at BE stage was merely Rs. 1 lakh only because the 
revival proposal of ITI is yet to be approved by the Government and hence non -
allocation of pl an outlay by the Planning Commission. The Committee find it an irony 
that when the Indian telecom sector has seen an impressive expansion with large 
investments in the past several years and teledensity increasing from 28.2 percent in 
2008 to more than the  70 percent in 2012, ITI Limited, the first public sector 
undertaking of independent India, established in 1948, to supply telecom equipments to 
then telecom service providers, i.e., Department of Telecommunications, is today not in 
a position to generate internal resources to meet the planned capital expenditure due to 
lack of orders and continuous losses. It could be clearly seen that ITI has not been able 
to compete in a highly competitive market after the liberalization of economy in the 
early 90s. The Committee strongly recommend that the revised Draft Rehabilitation 
Scheme, as a part of ITI‟s Revival proposal, submitted by the Operating Agency (State 
Bank of India) and approved by BIFR in November, 2012 may be urgently considered 
and approved by BRPSE so that the same may be sent to CCEA for approval at the 
earliest. The Committee further recommend that the Revival Plan may be urgently 
finalized so that adequate capital funding may be made available for upgrading 
manufacturing infrastructures and absorption of new technologies in all the ITI plants. 
The Committee also desire that BSNL and MTNL being the major customer from ITI, 
emphasis should also be given by them in procuring telecom equipment from ITI for 
their network expansion wherever possible. In this regard, the Committee trust that the 
policy of the Government for providing purchase preference to domestically 
manufactured telecom equipment as announced under NTP -2012 will definitely give a 
boost to the company in its revival plan.” 

55 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 14, Para no. 2.19) 
 
Reply of the Government 
In the Revival Plan of ITI, an amount of Rs. 4156.79 Crore was forecast. The 
Revival Plan was forwarded on 8 th March 2013 to Board for Reconstruction of Public 
Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) for their recommendation. The Revival plan was taken up 
by BRPSE in July 2013. After obtaining the recommendation of BRPSE the plan will be 
sent for approval of the CCEA. 
As per t he directives of DoT, BSNL and MTNL are continuing the policy of 
Reservation Quota orders on ITI for 30% of their requirements for products 
manufactured by ITI as well as on turnkey projects. This policy will remain in force for 
the period up to 20th September 2013. The proposal for extension of reservation Quota 
policy to ITI beyond 20th September   2013 is already in process.  
The Revival proposal of ITI has been worked out looking at the opportunities 
emerging out of the National Telecom Policy (NTP) 201 2 announced by Government of 
India. The market opportunity for domestic manufacturers as a consequence have also 
been factored into Revival Plan of ITI Ltd..” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 14, Para no. 2.19) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  26 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
 
Free nationwide roaming and full number portability. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that one of the salient features of National Telecom Policy, 
2012 is to achieve one nation full Mobile Number Portability and work towards one 
nation free roaming. In this regard, the Committee note that the Cabinet had cleared a 
proposal to allow free roa ming across the country and had also endorsed full number 
portability. The Committee while endorsing the noble objective of the National Telecom 
Policy, 2012 to achieve one nation full Mobile Number Portability and free roaming, 
recommend that consultation  process initiated by TRAI for the implementation of the 
above policies should be completed at the earliest. The Committee are of the view that 
the implementation of these policies would be a big relief to the huge subscribers in the 
country and would constitute a milestone in the history of Indian telecom sector. They 
would keenly await progress made under these two components of NTP-2012. 
 
(Recommendation No. 17, Para no. 2.22) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

56 
 
 
 
One of the objectives under NTP 2012 is to achieve “ One Nation – Full Mobile 
Number Portability” and work towards “One Nation – Free Roaming”. DoT vide letter 
dated 27.12.2012 has requested TRAI to provide its recommendations on the subject of 
“One Nation- Full Mobile Number Portability”.  TRAI had floated a consultation paper on 
this issue on 20.2.2013 seeking comments of stakeholders by the 7th March, 2013. 
TRAI submits the recommendations to the Government after considering the comments 
of the stakeholders. Further necessary actions for the implementation  of full mobile 
number portability will be taken by DoT after considering the recommendations of TRAI 
which are awaited.   
 
As per provisions of TRAI Act 1997 as amended in the year 2000, TRAI 
prescribes tariffs for the telecommunication services in India which inter-alia includes 
the issue of roaming. TRAI has floated a consultation paper on 25.2.2013 for seeking 
written comments of stakeholders by 18.03.2013 and counter comments by 25.3.2013 
on the issue of free roaming. After considering the comments and counter comments of 
the stakeholders TRAI may issue a tariff order on this subject. TRAI does not submit 
recommendations to the Government on the tariff matters.  
 
Therefore as explained above, action has been initiated to fulfill the objective 
under NTP to achieve “One Nation – Full Mobile Number Portability” and work towards 
“One Nation – Free Roaming”.  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 17, Para no. 2.22) 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2013-B  dated   25.07.2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
13 December, 2013  Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)         Information Technology 

57 
 
 
 
 Annexure-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 13th December, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agrawal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
9. Shri Abdul Rahman  
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Joy Abraham 
11. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
12. Shri Salim Ansari 
13. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
14. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Garg  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 

58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra Agrawal, a 
Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitt ing in accordance with Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee……xxxxx…... Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration two Draf t 
Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) relating to the Department of 
…..xxxxx….. and Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology). The Committee adopted the same without any modification. 
The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the reports to the 
House during the ongoing Session of Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance provided by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee in 
drafting of the Report.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****   Matter not related to Report. 
 

59 
 
 
 
 Annexure-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-THIRD REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,8,10,12,15,16,18,19 and 20  
 Total   11 
 Percentage 55.00 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 00.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4 and 5  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 10.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  6,7,9,11,13,14 and 17  
 Total 07 
 Percentage 35.00 
 
 
 