 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
DISBURSEMENT OF WAGES TO LABOURERS UNDER MAHATMA GANDHI 
NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT BY POST OFFICES  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Bhadra, 1933 (Saka) 
 
25 


ii 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
DISBURSEMENT OF WAGES TO LABOURERS UNDER MAHATMA GANDHI 
NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT BY POST OFFICES  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25/08/2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25/08/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2011/Bhadra, 1933 (Saka) 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
Composition   iv 
Introduction   v 
 REPORT  
 PART I  
   
I Introductory 1 
II The amount disbursed as well as number of MGNREGA accounts in Post Offices during each of the 
year since the Post Offices started disbursement of wages to labourers. 
3 
III The overall share of Post Offices in disbursement of wages to labourers under MNREGA vis-à-vis 
Banks 
5 
IV State-wise status of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 6 
V Wages disbursed through cash  6 
VI Satisfaction level of wage earners under MNREGA-Performance of Posts vis-à-vis Banks 9 
VII Delay in payment of wages 10 
VIII Average time taken for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 12 
IX Payment of compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages under MNREGA 13 
X Corruption and role of middlemen in disbursement of wages 13 
XI Appointment of Ombudsman  16 
XII Toll Free Helpline Number for redressal of grievances  17 
XIII Monitoring and Vigilance Committees 17 
XIV Social Audit 18 
XV Structured mechanism for inspection by the Senior Officers 19 
XVI Constraints in disbursement of wages through accounts by Post offices     
MoU entered between the State Governments and the Department of Posts 
19 
XVII Technological Intervention    23 
XVIII ICT Devices 23 
XIX Integration of MNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS 24 
XX The procedure with regard to disbursement of wages under MGNREGA by Posts  25 
XXI Linking of MNREGA with UIDAI 26 
XXII Business Correspondent Model 26 
XXIII Inadequate Manpower 27 
XXIV Payment of Wages at workplace 28 
XXV Helping the Labourers in opening of MNREGA accounts 29 
XXVI Training to employees of Posts in handling the task of disbursement of wages under MNREGA 29 
XXVII Support for payment of wages to MGNREGA workers through Post Offices 30 
 
 
Part-II 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 33-52 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
I. Provision for Financial Audit of the Accounts of MGNREGA as per the Operational Guidelines, 2009 
 
53 
II. Obligations of the Department of Posts and MGNREGA Authority as per  the MoU entered between 
the State Governments and the Department of Posts 
 
54 
III. Minutes of the  Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 12 January, 2011 
 
56 
IV. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 10 August, 2011  
 
59 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Vacant ** 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Prem Das Rai 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
17. Dr. Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
20. Shri C. Sivasami 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
*25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
 
  * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
  **      vice Shri Milind Deora, ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent on 
          his appointment as Minister of State for Communications and IT on 12.07.2011. 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty -fifth Report on the subject  „Disbursement of wages to 
labourers under Mahatma Gandhi Na tional Rural Employme nt Guarantee Act  
(MGNREGA) by Post Offices ‟ related to the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2.  Since the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) 
is the nodal Department with regard to im plementation of MGNREGA, the 
Committee besides getting input  from the Department of Posts  also procured the 
feedback from the Department of Rural Development through written replies and 
deliberations held on the various aspects related to examination of th e subject. 
The Committee took oral evidence of both the Departments viz. Department of 
Posts and the Department of Rural Development at their sitting held on               
12 January, 2011. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their  sitting 
held on 10 August, 2011.  
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Posts (Ministry of  Communications and Information Technology ) 
and the Department of Rural Developmen t ( Ministry of  Rural Developm ent) for 
appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and information which 
the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations 
of the committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH     [ 
23 August, 2011  Chairman 
1 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)         Standing Committee on  
Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 

REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
 
Introductory 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), a 
landmark social security legislation, epitomizes the right to employment on 
demand and aims to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 
100 days of guaranteed wag e employment in a financial year to every household 
whose adult member volunteer to do unskilled manual work. MGNREGA, which 
includes 34 sections and two Schedules, was enacted in September, 2005 and was 
notified in 200 districts in the first phase with ef fect from 2 February, 2006. 
Further, it was made applicable to all the rural areas of the country w.e.f.              
1 April, 2008.  Currently, MGNREGA covers the entire country, spanning 619 
Districts, 6400 Blocks, 6 lakh villages and around 2.35 lakh vi llage Panchayats.  
However, it does not cover the Districts that have a hundred per cent urban 
population. 
2. Payment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS) wages, as per paragraph 31 of the Schedule -II of MGNREGA,  are to 
be made through the individual or joint saving accounts of the MGNREGS workers 
opened in Banks or in Post Offices. Sub -section 3 of Section 3 of the M GNREGA 
provides that the disbursement of daily wages shall be made on a weekly basis or 
in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such work was done. 
For payments of wages, Banks have been associated with the Scheme since its 
inception. However, Post Offices joined later on, when the Ministry of Rural 
Development, which is overseeing the ta sk of implementation of the Act, showed 
interest in getting the wage disbursal to the wage earners done through Post 
Offices saving accounts for ensuring accuracy and transparency in the system of 
wage disbursal. The notification for payment through Post O ffices was issued in 
February, 2009 and accordingly, the Department of Posts undertook the work of 
wage payment under MGNREGA. Currently, the Scheme of disbursement of 
MGNREGS wages through Post Office accounts is operational in 19 Postal Circles 
(26 States and 5 UTs) of the country.  However, the MGNREGS wages are not paid 
through the Post Offices in Delhi, J&K, Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. 

2 
 
3. In States where MGNREGS wages are being paid through Post Offices a 
model Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was prep ared in consultation with 
the Ministry of Rural Development, which has been signed by the Postal Circles and 
the concerned State Governments. In this MOU, the obligation of the Department 
of Posts, State Governments and MGNREGA Authority has been explained . Under 
the present arrangement, the Post offices receive funds from State Governments 
along with the wage lists of beneficiaries and the payment is made through the 
accounts opened by the Post Offices in the name of the MGNREGS beneficiaries 
and in accord ance to the wage schedules received from the State Government 
authorities. 
4. The Committee during the course of deliberations of the subject 
„Modernization of Post Offices‟ held detailed discussion regarding the role of Post 
Offices in disbursement of wag es to the labourers under MGNREGA and how to 
make it more effective with the modernization of Post Offices at their sitting held 
on 18 August, 2010.  The representatives of the Department of Posts and the 
Department of Rural Development which is nodal Depa rtment for implementation 
of MGNREGA were present at the aforesaid sitting of the Committee.  After detailed 
deliberations, the Committee decided to select the subject „Disbursement of wages 
to labourers under MGNREGA by Post Offices‟ taking into considera tion the 
importance of the matter for detailed examination and report to the House.  In the 
aforesaid background, the Committee selected the said subject for examination 
and report to the House.  Since the Department of Rural Development is the nodal 
Department with regard to implementation of MGNREGA, the Committee besides 
getting inputs from the Department of Posts also procured the feedback from 
Department of Rural Development through written replies and deliberations on 
various aspects related to examin ation of the subject.  The detailed 
material/documents received from the Department of Posts and the Department of 
Rural Development with regard to disbursement of wages under MGNREGA by 
Posts as received in the context of the subject „Modernization of Post  Offices‟ 
remained as the Preliminary Material for the purpose of examination of the subject 
„Disbursement of wages to labourers under MGNREGA by Post Offices‟. 
5. The various issues pertaining to the subject which include the percentage 
share of Post Offices in disbursement of wages to labourers, delay in disbursement 

3 
 
of wages, wages disbursed through cash, satisfaction level of labourers, corruption 
and role of middlemen in disbursement  of wages and the system of Redressal of 
grievances of labourers along  with the constraints  in disbursement of wages as 
expressed by the Department of Rural Development and Department of Posts have 
been examined in this report. As stat ed above, the Department of Rural 
Development is the nodal Union Department in the context  of the examination of 
the aforesaid subject . The Committee desire the Department of Posts to pursue 
with the Department of Rural Development on the various issues raised in the 
report and ensure that the recommendations/observations made are du ly 
implemented.   
The amount disbursed as well as number of MGNREGA accounts in Post 
Offices during each of the year since the Post Offices started 
disbursement of wages to labourers. 
6. As per the information furnished by the Department of Posts , the number of 
accounts opened and the amount disbursed by Post Offices under MGNREGA 
during the years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 are as under:- 
Year No. of accounts Amount disbursed 
(in Rs.) 
2008-09 2.92 crores 3,863 crore 
2009-10 4.25 crores 7,900 crore 
2010-11 (upto 31.10.2010) 
 
4.67 crores 7,113 crore 
 
7. The Department of Rural Development  in this regard furnished the different 
data. The data furnished by the Department of Rural Development is as under:- 
Year No. of Post Office 
Accounts* 
Amount disbursed 
(in Rs.) 
2008-09 3.02 crore 4152.94 crore 
2009-10 4.38 crore 8926.25 crore 
2010-11 (upto November, 2010) 
 
4.38 crore 5891.01 crore (Upto 
November, 2010) 
*Both individual and joint accounts.  
8. When asked to explain the contradiction in the above data, the DoP st ated 
that the data available with the Department of Posts has been compiled from 
reports received from all the Postal Circles. Accordingly, the Department of Posts 
has actually disbursed the amount as shown above.  

4 
 
9. On the issue of contradiction in data,  the representative of Posts during the 
course of deliberations submitted as under:- 
“As far as Post Office is concerned, we collect these figures from the 
Post Offices as to how much money they receive from the State 
Government f or the disbursement of the  NREGA wages. The Rural 
Development Ministry depends on its website. As the representative 
of the Rural Development Ministry has mentioned, these figures are 
entered by the concerned State Governments about the money they 
have been disbursing through the b anks and also through the Post 
Offices. There is a time lag between the actual disbursement of the 
wages through Post Offices and banks and the entering of these 
figures in the website. I think, that may be the reason for this. Our 
post offices give these figures as on 31 st October whereas their 
website may be slightly behind to give all the figures on whatever has 
been disbursed.” 
 
10. On the discrepancy in data, the representative of Department of Rural 
Development acknowledged during the course of delibe rations that there is a 
discrepancy in this regard. He further stated as under:- 
“The discrepancies that the Committee has observed cannot be 
eliminated unless we go into online real time entry of both the muster 
and as soon as the work is measured, if it again goes to the web -
based server, then we can reduce the delay. Second part of the delay 
is about the business correspondent model where the labourers can 
get the payment in their own villages. These two things have to be 
synchronized.” 
11. The Operation al Guidelines, 2008 further elaborate provision for Financial 
Audit of the accounts of MGNREGA.  (copy at Appendix-I).  As per the provision, 
Financial Audit is mandatory and must be conducted at the end of the financial year 
by each District.  As per the provision, the Accountant-General will also conduct the 
audit of accounts of MGNREGA in addition to the audit conducted by the Chartered 
Accountant. 
12. The representative of the Department of Rural Development further added 
during the course of deliberations as under:- 
“On the muster roll for each worker, we also mention the account and 
whether it is in the post office or in a bank.  So, it is possible that in 
the muster roll which has about 20 workers, some of them are having 
accounts in the banks and that  gets credited in the bank and the rest 
gets credited into the post offices.  So, what the Ministry is capturing 
is the pay advice, pay order that they have generated and submitted 

5 
 
to the post office.  And what the post offices should be capturing is 
actually the money that has been disbursed by the post offices.  The 
discrepancy actually gets resolves when the audit is done for every 
gram Panchayats.  There is a delay when the accounts are closed.  So, 
in the absence of an online time system, this discrepa ncy is resolved 
only when we do the audit ….xxxx….this (audit) has to be done by the 
State for each Gram Panchayat.  That is why it takes time.” 
13. When enquired about the periodicity of audit by Panchayats, the 
representative further clarified that Pancha yats undertake the annual audit.  When 
further asked about the reason of difference of data in case of the year 2008 -09 
and 2009-10 where the Panchayats audit has already been done, the representative 
of Rural Development responded as under:- 
“Right now I am not able to say that” 
14. The representative of Rural Development further added that:- 
“The payment system is not connected on a real time basis with the 
MGNREGA ICT system.  M GNREGA system itself is not working on a 
real time basis.  So, that is the fi rst deficiency for which the Ministry 
has now initiated action for the whole country that in every location we 
should be able to have an online real time system of capturing the 
attendance of almost five crore workers on a daily basis.  So, the 
timeline for completing this is about 21 months, which is in tune with 
the roll of the National Population Register which the Registrar General 
keeps.”   
  
The overall share of Post Offices in disbursement of  wages to labourers 
under MGNREGA vis-à-vis Banks. 
  
15. When asked about the overall share of Post Offices in disbursement of 
wages to labourers under M GNREGA vis-à-vis Banks, the Department of Posts has 
stated that for the information relating to Banks, Department has been getting the 
data available on Ministry of Rural Development website. This data i.e. available at 
Ministry of Rural Development web site is dynamic as the time taken to complete 
the data entry at various data entry points vary.   In this connection, the 
Department of Rural Development informed th e Committee that in the year 2009 -
10, out of total amount of Rs. 21625.18 crore disbursed as wages to unskilled 
labourers through Post Office/Bank Accounts, an amount of Rs. 8864.98 crore was 
disbursed through Post Offices and Rs. 12760.20 crore was d isbursed through 
Bank accounts which comes to 40.99 per cent. In a later note, the Department of 

6 
 
Posts furnished the percentage share of Posts on the basis of information received 
by them from Ministry of Rural Development. As per the position indicated in the 
replies, the overall share of Posts during 2008-09 was 38 per cent which increased 
to 40 per cent during 2009-10.  
State-wise status of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 
16. So far as the State-wise position is concerned, during the year 2009-10, the 
information furnished  by Department of Rural Development indicates that the 
maximum share of Posts was in Bihar i.e. 86 percent followed by Andhra Pradesh 
i.e. 80 per cent.   
17. The analysis of the data further reveal that in 7 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, M aharashtra and West Bengal, the 
amount of wages disbursed through Post Office accounts is more than wages 
disbursed through Bank accounts. In Mizoram, the share of Posts and Bank s is 50 
per cent each.   In the remaini ng States/UTs, Banks have more share in this 
regard. In some of the States, the share of the Department of Posts is quite 
dismal. In Uttar Pradesh, the share of Posts is just 2 per cent. In Kerala, it is 5 per 
cent and in Tamil Nadu and Goa the share of Po sts is Nil.  In difficult area States, 
the share of Posts is almost negligible.  I n J&K, Posts share is 1 per cent. In 
Meghalaya it is 3 per cent. In Nagaland, Andaman and Nicobar Island, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Puducherry the share of Posts is Nil.  
18. When enquired about the specific reasons for choosing Banks as disbursing 
agency in most of the States/UTs, the Department of Posts in the written note has 
stated that the choice of Banks or the Post Offices as the medium of wage  
payments under M GNREGA in a particular State rests with the concerned State 
Government. The notification for payment through Post Offices w as issued in 
February, 2009. Thus, Banks have been associated with wage payments right from 
the inception of the scheme whereas Post Offices joined later. Apparently, most of 
accounts opened in Banks have continued with them. 
Wages disbursed through cash  
 
19. Payment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS) wages, as per paragraph 31 of th e Schedule-II of MGNREGA,  are to 

7 
 
be made through the individual or joint saving accounts of the MGNREGS workers 
opened in Banks or in Post Offices.  
20. The position of funds release, unskilled wages paid, wages through posts 
and Banks as per the informat ion furnished by the Department of Rural 
Development is as under:- 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Year Funds 
Released 
Unskilled 
wages 
Wages disbursed through 
Posts and Banks 
2008-09 2993960 1820003.13 1083269.72 
2009-10 3350661.09 2557932.28 2215158.07 
2010-11 
(upto November, 2011) 
2434225.95 1326125.88 1389989.97 
 
21. The analysis of the data reveal that the re are gaps between total wages 
disbursed and the total amount disbursed by the Department of Posts/Banks. It is 
noticed that there is a gap of Rs. 7367. 33 crore during the year 2008 -09,           
Rs. 3427.74 crore during the year 2009-10 and Rs. 638.64 crore during the year 
2010-11 up to November, 2010. The aforesaid gaps indicate that disbursement of 
wages by cash is being made which is in violation of the provisions made under the 
Act and Rules , particularly in Tamil Nadu where most of the payment is being 
made by cash.  
22. The overall percentage of disbursement of wages through accounts during 
the year 2008-09 was 59.53 per cent which improved considerably to 8 4 per cent 
during the year 2009 -10 as per the information furnished by the Department of 
Rural Development. The State -wise position with regard to wages disbursed 
through accounts during the year 2009-10 as made available to the Committee by 
the Department  of Rural Development further reveal that in Gujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa 100 per 
cent of the wages are disbursed through accounts.  In Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and Laksh adweep the wages disburse d through 
accounts are less than 50 percent during the year 2009 -10.  In Tamil Nadu only 
0.14 per cent wages are disbursed through accounts. In Lakshadweep although 
158.23 lakhs of unskilled wages have been shown to be disbursed du ring the year 
2009-10, the percentage wage disbursement though accounts is zero.  

8 
 
23. Justifying the disbursement of wages by cash by some of the States/UTs, 
the Department of Rural Development in their written note submitted as under:- 
“As per Paragraph 3 1 of Schedule -II of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, 
2005, the payment of wages shall be made through the individual or 
joint saving accounts of the workers in the banks or post offices 
opened in accordance with the directions of the Central Government. 
Time and a gain States/Union Territories have been reminded about 
these legal provisions and asked to adhere to them. Despite this, 
some States have been disbursing wages in cash in some areas of the 
State due to various possible reasons like inadequate infrastructur e, 
inadequate manpower and limited outreach of banks/post offices.       
Apart from this, in exercise of powers conferred under Section 27(1) 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, Chhattisgarh (Bijapur and Dantewada 
Districts) and Maharashtra (Gadhchiroli, Nandurbar , Thane and 
Amravati (Melghat) Districts) have been given exemption from 
payment of wage through Banks and Post Offices in areas 
experiencing Left-Wing Extremism in its worst form and also where 
banking facilities and Post Offices are also very few in number. Owing 
to this, wage disbursement is becoming difficult. While granting the 
permission the State Government was also advised to explore the 
possibility of making payment of wages through institutional account, 
so that the statutory requirements regarding disbursements of wages 
through Banks and Post Office accounts may be complied with. It may 
be submitted while it is mandatory under MGNREGA to pay wages 
though Bank/Post Office accounts, at the same time cash payment is 
inescapable in case of genuine difficulties lest it will negate the legal 
obligation of the implementing agencies to pay wages for the work 
done by the poorest of the poor workers”. 
 
24. When enquired how Tamil Nadu which is not a naxalite affected area is 
making payment of MGNREGA wages b y cash, the representative of the 
Department of Rural Development during the course of deliberations submitted as 
under:-   
“Tamil Nadu is a case where the payment is being made by 
cash…….xxxx……There is no extremism there. ....xxxx…..The IT 
connectivity is very good there.  I am also  puzzled as to why Tamil 
Nadu is doing like this.” 
 
25. The representative further added as under:- 
 
“Except for the Left Wing Extremist affected districts, the Ministry has 
not authorized to make this payment in cash.  In case o f Tamil Nadu, 
there is no justification for cash payment.”   
 
 

9 
 
Satisfaction level of wage earners under M GNREGA-Performance of Posts 
vis-à-vis Banks 
26. The Secretary, Department of Rural Development during the course of 
deliberations held on 18th August, 2010 referred to a study by Dreze and Khera in 
which they have analyzed in four States the working of Banks and Posts Offices 
and found that payment in Banks was better than Post Offices and the complaints 
of the clients were less. The Secretary also state d that it is an academic article. 
When the comments of the Department of Posts were asked on the said study, the 
Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Rural Development is being 
requested to send to a copy of the said study.  
27. When asked whether any study to find the satisfaction level of labourers was 
undertaken by Posts, the Committee have been apprised that no specific study to 
find out the satisfaction level of labourer s has been done . The Department has 
further stated that they have no plan to undertake such study in the near future.  
28. The Department of Posts in the written note has claimed that the postal 
system of disbursing wages is same across all the States and offers similar 
advantages of an effective and systematic wage disbursa l system alongwith a 
much greater outreach than the Banks. In some States, the State Governments 
have decided to take advantage of this system more than the other State 
Governments.  The Department of Posts has further stated that Postal system is 
same in all the States and in some States the State governments prefer Post 
Offices over banks. When asked about the dismal performance in larger States like 
Uttar Pradesh, the Department has stated that it is not possible to find reasons for 
the lesser share of Posts in Uttar Pradesh. 
29. When asked why the Banks are being preferred over Posts by the State 
Governments, the Department of Rural Development has responded that the 
concerned State Governments have been taking such decisions. There may be 
historical rea sons as well, as the system of payment through Post Offices was 
institutionalized after the Banks were already entrusted with the job by various 
State Governments. 
30. The representative of the Department of Rural De velopment during the 
course of oral evidence while giving a review of the services provided by Posts and 

10 
 
Banks submitted before the Committee that the efficiency of the Banks is certainly 
more than Posts Offices the reason being modernization of Banks and adoption of 
Business Correspondent model by all Banks. 
31. In the written note, the Department of Rural Development further 
elaborated about the reasons for labourers preference of Banks over Post Offices in 
the disbursement of wages under MGNREGA which are given as under:- 
(i) Chances of delayed pa yment are more through Post Offices because 
payment to Post Offices is made through cheque.  On -line transaction is 
possible in Banks through CBS system which is lacking in the Post Offices. 
(ii) Technical knowledge of handling accounts and finance is missing i n most of 
the Post Offices because their mandate is communication rather than 
finance. 
(iii) Better infrastructure in Banks as compared with Post Offices. 
(iv) Postal system is not fully computerized.  It is difficult to integrate with 
Programme Management System which is computer based. 
Delay in payment of wages 
32. Section 3(3) of the MGNREG Act provides for disbursement of daily wages 
on weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which 
the work was done. However, as per Para 7.2 of Ann exure II of MoU, payments 
are to be completed within 3 days from the date of receipt of wage list and 
availability of funds. 
33. The Department of Rural Development has informed that a flow chart with 
time schedule has been suggested to the States to ensur e payment of wages 
within a fortnight. 
34. The time schedule for different activities in the flow chart is as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity Time Schedule 
1. Closing of muster roll 6th Day after start 
of the work. 
2. Brining muster roll measurement book. 8th Day 
3. (i) Entry of muster roll in MIS 
(ii) Generation of Pay Order (Consolidated as well 
individual) 
9th and 10th Day 
4. (i) Submission of pay order at the block post 
office/bank 
11th Day and 12th 
Day 

11 
 
(ii) Generation of information wage slip 
Transfer of pay order at the village post office/bank 
Deposit of wages in the account of wage earners 13th Day 
5. Entry of disbursement of wage into MIS 16th Day 
 
35. As per CAG Performance Audit Report No. 11 of 2008 in 213 GPs in Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisg arh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (17 States), workers were not paid wages 
on time i.e. within a fortnight of the date on  which the work was done. No 
compensation was paid to them. 
36. When asked about the comments of the Departments of Rural Development 
and Posts on the  CAG observation, the Department of Posts has stated that 
disbursement of wages starts on the next day of receipt of wage list and on the 
availability of funds. The Department of Rural Development in this regard has 
stated that measurement of work is a pre-requisite for preparation of bills for wage 
payment. To ensure timely measurement of work, instructions have been issued to 
the States from time to time to deploy sufficient number of technical personnel 
with the implementing authorities.  
37. When asked about the specific cases of delay in disbursement of wages  
year-wise, the Department of Rural Development has responded that the Ministry 
has received 40 complaints relating to delay in payment of wages.   The 
Department of Rural Development has further added in the written note that one 
of the main bottlenecks in timely disbursement of wages is delay in  payment of 
wages under MGNREGA through Post Offices even after timely issuance of payment 
advice to sub Post Offices.    Since implementation of the Act is done by the State 
Governments as per the schemes formulated by them in accordance with the 
provisions of th e Act, all complaints received in the Ministry are forwarded to the 
concerned State government for taking appropriate action.  
38. On the issue of specific complaints by Posts with regard to delay in 
disbursement of wages to M GNREGA labourers, the Departme nt of Posts at one 
place in the replies has stated that as per reports received from the Postal Circles, 
no specific complaint has been received. At another place in the w ritten note, the 

12 
 
Department while acknowledging the delay has stated that there are c ases where 
wage earners could not withdraw the amount within three days. In most of these 
cases, delay in payment is due to non -appearance of wage earner on the dates of 
payment made by Post Offices. 
39. When asked about the initiatives taken by Posts to address the issue of non-
appearance of the wage earners on the dates of payment made by Posts, the 
Committee have been informed that the Department intimates to the mates of 
workers and the Panchayat Office through its delivery staff. Information is also 
displayed on the Post Office notice boards. The delivery staff is also instructed to 
inform the concerned workers about disbursement of wages.  
Average time taken for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 
40. When enquired about the average time taken by Posts  for disbursement of 
wages to labourers, the Department of Posts  has informed that Post Office starts 
disbursement of wages from the next day of the presentation of payment order 
and availability of fund. Average time taken for disbursement of wages to one  
labourer in Post Office is 6 minutes. 
41. The representative of Department of Rural Development during the course 
of deliberations informed the Committee  that the delay with regard to payment of 
wages can be captured through MIS data. The representative a lso assured the 
Committee that the information with regard to average time taken in disbursement 
of wages would be submitted to the Committee. 
42. When the information was specifically sought from the Department of Rural 
Development through a post evidence  question, the Department  responded as 
under:- 
 “Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides that wages must be paid to the 
workers within a fortnigh t from the completion of the work. As per 
data..xxxxx…86 per cent of the wages have been paid within the 
stipulated time. There has been a delay of 15 -30 days in 6 per cent 
cases, delay of 30 -60 days in 4.66 per cent cases, delay of 60 -90 
days in 1.72 per cent cases and delay beyond 90 days in 1.61 per 
cent cases.” 
 
 

13 
 
Payment of compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA 
43. Schedule II, Rule 30 of MGNREGA Act provides as under:- 
“In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified 
under the Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive payment 
of compensation as per the provisio ns of the Payment of Wages Act, 
1936 (4 of 1936).” 
 
44. When asked about the specific cases of compensation, the Department of 
Rural Development has responded as under:- 
“As per available information, compensation paid to the MGNREGA 
workers in case of delay in payment of wages is as under:- 
State Block Number of people Amount paid (in Rs.) 
Jharkhand Khunti 154 308000.00 
Murhu 95 190000.00” 
 
45. When asked why only in one State the compensation was paid, the 
Department of Rural development has stated that the clarification has been sought 
from all States in this regard.  
Corruption and role of middlemen in disbursement of wages 
 
46. When asked about the role of middlemen and the ransom money received 
by officials for disbursement of wages, the Department  of Posts has stated that 
they are not aware of the role of middlemen and ransom money received by 
officials for disbursement of wages. On the issue of labourers getting wages lesser 
than the amount declared, the Department of Post s indicated that they are  not 
aware of such cases. 
 
47. When asked about the B enami wages system prevailing in the country with 
regard to MGNREGA wages, the representative of the Department of Rural 
Development during the course of deliberations stated as under:- 
“……..about the B enami wages system, unless we go into the thumb -
impression based biometric system, we cannot do that, both for 
recording the attendance and for making payment.”  
 
48. About the ransom being taken by the officials, the Secretary, Department of 
Rural Developm ent during the course of deliberations acknowledge d that such 

14 
 
complaints have been received from some of the States where the officials are 
taking ransom.  About the number of corruption cases with regard to the 
disbursement of wages reported so far, the D epartment of Rural Development 
informed as under:- 
“The Ministry has so far received a total of 244 cases relating to 
corruption in disbursement of wages.  These include non -payment of 
wages (106 cases), under payment of wages (59 cases), delayed 
payments (40 cases) and Bank accounts/Post Office related complaints 
(39 cases).  With a view to avoid corruption in disbursement of wages, 
payment of wages to the MGNREGA workers has been made 
mandatory through their accounts in Banks/Post Offices vide 
notification dated 19.2.2009.  To cover the gaps in financial services 
and outreach and also to ensure greater transparency in wage 
disbursement, rural ATM, hand held devices, smart cards and 
biometrics have been initiated.”   
 
49. When enquired about the status of u se of the aforesaid mechanism by 
various States/UTs, the Department of Rural Development in the written note 
submitted as under:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides for payment of wages through 
savings account of the workers in Banks/Post Offices.  However, due to 
non-availability of Banks/Post Offices in some of the remote areas and 
also to ensure greater transparency in wage disbursement, rural ATMs, 
hand held devices (HHD), biometrics etc. are being used.  In one of 
the districts  of Tamil Nadu, rural ATMs ar e being used in some 
villages; Andhra Pradesh is using HHD and the BC model for wage 
disbursements.  Similar initiative at pilot stage is being done by other 
States like Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, kerala, Orissa, Jharkhand. 
 
In order to implement the afores aid mechanism throughout the 
country MoRD is in process of implementing a biometric enabled ICT 
project for capturing all the process of MGNREGA in real time or near 
real-time through the use of ICT devices and biometrics.  The 
Biometric data to be capture d will be UIDAI and core banking 
complaint.” 
  
50. When asked about the number of cases where criminal proceedings under 
IPC and Prevention of Corruption Act have been initiated against the concerned 
officials, the Department of Rural Development has informed that:- 
“As per reports received from the State Governments, FIR s have been 
lodged in 23 cases and in 2 cases, directions have been issued to 
lodge the FIR.  One case has been referred to the Uttar Pradesh State 
Vigilance Establishment for investigation.” 
 
 
 

15 
 
51. When specifically asked about the cases of involvement of officials of Post 
Offices, the Committee have been apprised as below:- 
“There is one case in which involvement of officials of Post Office has 
been reported.  It has been reported by the S tate Government of 
Jharkhand that FIR has been lodged against the Postmaster and 34 
other persons found guilty.” 
 
52. With regard to number of corruption cases , the Department of Posts  
furnished the following information:- 
 
 “In seven cases of loss and fra ud relating to NREGA Accounts, 
involvement of officials of Post Offices has been found.  The details are 
as under:- 
 
(i) Fraud of Rs.18,08,000/- in NREGS accounts at Sankhabaram SO 
in a/c with Samalkot HO committed by Sri A. Satyanarayana 
Murthy SPM and Sri Je tla Naga Siva, a Field Assistant (FA) of 
the NREGS during the period 13.09.2007 to 23.01.2008. 
 
(ii) Fraud of Rs. 3,05,422/ - in NREGS accounts at Godiyada BO in 
account with Pedamajjipalem SO, Vizinagaram Division 
committed by Sri B. Sadhu Maheshwara Rao GDS BPM. 
 
(iii) Fraud of Rs. 4,36,800/ - in NREGS accounts at Shatapur BO in 
a/c with Devaruppula SO, Hanamkonda Division committed by 
Shri Ch. Showri Rajam, GDS BPM, during the period 09.07.2008 
to 28.02.2009. 
 
(iv) Fraud of Rs. 15,80,409/ - committed in NREGS accounts at 
Pamulapadu SO, Kurnool Division committed by Sri A. Sankar, 
PA Kurnool HO while on deputation to Pamulapadu SO during 
the period 22.04.2009 to 01.07.2009. 
 
(v) Fraud of Rs. 2,50,917/ - in NREGS accounts at Velgode SO, 
Kurnool Division committed by Shri A.Sankar,  SPM, during the 
period 23.03.2009 to 16.04.2009. 
 
(vi) Fraud of Rs. 12,55,516/ - in NREGS accounts at Devalampet BO 
in a/c with Kothapalle SO, Chittoor Division committed by 
K.Nagaraja GDS BPM during the period 06.03.2009 to 
19.02.2010. 
 
(vii) Fraud of Rs. 2,16,750/- including temporary misappropriation of 
Rs.48,570/- in office cash and NREGS accounts at Vengalathur 
BO in a/c with Pisattur SO, Tirupati Division committed by Shri 
C.Nagaraju GDS BPM during the period 10.12.2008 to 
10.08.2009. 
 

16 
 
53. The Committee have further been apprised that:- 
  
Departmental investigations in all these cases are on and in respect of 
cases at serial at (i), (ii) (vi) and (vii) police investigations are also 
on.” 
 
54. When enquired about the number of cases where criminal proceedings have  
been initiated, the Department of Posts has further stated that:- 
“In four cases of loss and fraud relating to NREGA Accounts, 
involvement of officials of Post Offices has been found and FIRs have 
been lodged.”  
 
55. The Department has further submitted that four officials of the Post Offices 
have been suspended/put off duty for their involvement in  corruption cases in this 
regard.  
Appointment of Ombudsman  
56. The Department of Rural Development in the written note has stated that an 
Order was issued by the Ministry on 7 th September, 2009 under Section 27(1) of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act regarding the establishment of the Office of 
Ombudsman in districts.  When enquired about the details of the redressal cases 
handled by Ombudsman, t he Department has stated that under the Order issued 
regarding establishment of the office of Ombudsman, it is duty of Ombudsman to 
send a  monthly report to the Chief Secretary and Secretary, State Nodal 
Department recommending appropriate action.  The report shall specially highl ight 
cases where action needs to be taken against erring MGNREGA functionaries for 
their failure to redress the grievance.  The report will be accompanied with primary 
evidence needed to initiate action against the delinquent pers ons.  Hence, the 
details o f the redressal of cases by the Ombudsman are not available with the 
Ministry.   
 
57. As regards, the status of appointment of Ombudsman, the information 
furnished by the Department of Rural Development indicates that barring 5 States 
viz. Punjab, Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram and Himachal Pradesh in all other remaining 
States, Ombudsman has not been appointed in all the Districts.   When enquired 
about the stipulated time frame for appointment  of Ombudsman, the Committee 
have been informed by the Department of R ural Development that the aforesaid 
Order was issued by the Ministry for the establishment of the office of Ombudsman 

17 
 
in districts within three months of the date of the Order. With regard to the 
reasons for not appointing Ombudsman in all districts, non -availability of suitable 
candidates as per the qualifications prescribed in the Order, has been cited as the 
reasons by the Department of Rural Development.    
 
Toll Free Helpline Number for redressal of grievances  
58. As per the information furnished to t he Committee, the Ministry of Rural 
Development has set up a National Toll Free Helpline No. 1800110707 to enable 
any person to submit their complaints and queries.  With regard to the status of 
complaints lodged on the helpline, the Committee have been ap prised that as per 
the reports available on the MGNREGA web site, a total of 708 complaints have so 
far been entered on the National helpline.  Since implementation of the Act is done 
by the State Governments, all complaints are sent to the concerned State  
Governments for taking appropriate action.  The Department of Rural Development 
has further informed that State Governments have been asked to set up similar 
helpline at State and District level.  When enquired about the status of setting up 
of such helpl ine, the Committee have been apprised that 24 States/UTs ha ve set 
up the helpline as reported by the State Governments.   
 
59. On setting up of helpline by the Department of Posts, the Committee have 
been apprised that there is no such plan to establish a helpline.   
 
Monitoring and Vigilance Committees 
60. As per para 10.1.2 of the Operational Guidelines, 2008 of MGNREGA, for 
every work sanctioned, there should be a local Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
(V&MC) composed of members of the locality or vill age where the work is 
undertaken, to monitor the progress and quality of work while it is under progress.  
When enquired about the status of setting up of these Committees, the 
Department of Rural Development has informed that the information is being 
collected from the State Governments.  When asked whether local MLA or Member 
of Parliament is a member of such Vigilance and Monitoring Committee, the 
Committee have been informed by the Department of Rural Development that local 
MLA or Member of Parliament i s not a member of village level Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committees.   

18 
 
61. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed by 
the representative of the Department of Rural Development that State level 
Monitoring Committee meets twice a year and District level Monitoring Committee 
meets on a quarterly basis.  When asked about the Monitoring mechanism with 
regard to holding the meetings by State level and District level Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committees, the representative of the Departm ent of Rural 
Development submitted before the Committee as under:- 
“When the districts come to us for release of funds  out of the check -
list, one of the compliance mechanisms is the conduct of Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committee meetings by the District.  T hat is being 
scrutinized here.  We have again been consistently reminding the 
States and Districts.” 
 
Social Audit 
 
62. Section 17(2) of MGNREG Act provides that the Gram Sabha shall conduct  
regular social audit of all the projects under the scheme taken u p within the Gram 
Panchayat.  Para 13 of Schedule -I of the Act further provide s that every scheme 
shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency and accountability at all 
level of implementation.   
 
63. As informed by the Department of Rural D evelopment, this para has been 
amended vide notification dated 31.12.2008 providing for detailed procedure for 
conducting social audit by the Gram Sabha.  As per the aforesaid notification social 
audit shall be held at least once in every six month.   
64. The Department of Rural Development has furnished a list containing the 
number of social audit undertaken in respective States/UTs .  The analysis of the 
data furnished by the Department reveal that the number of social audit 
undertaken during the year 2009 -10 was 241338 against the total number of 
Panchayats covered to the tune of 181021 which clearly indicates that the 
guideline of holding two sittings in a year is not being complied with.  As regards 
the number of Districts which have not started social a udit so far, the data 
furnished by the Department indicates that in Arunachal Pradesh out of 16 Districts 
only 5 Districts have started social audit.  Besides, in Chandigarh, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and Puducherry none of the Dis tricts 
could start social audit.  There are gaps between the total Districts and the number 

19 
 
of Districts started social audit in Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal.   
65. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been inf ormed by 
the Secretary of Rural Development that some State variations with regard to 
social audit have developed.  State of Andhra Pradesh has set up an independent 
Directorate of Accounts for Social Audit whose effectiveness is more. 
Structured mechanism for inspection by the Senior Officers 
66. When enquired whether the Department of Posts and Rural Development 
has any structured mechanism of inspection by the Senior Officers, the 
Department of Posts has enumerated an elaborated provision as given under:- 
“The Department has prescribed inspections of all the Post Offices at 
regular intervals.  The Head Post Offices are inspected twice in a year, 
while Sub Post Offices and Branch Post Offices are inspected once 
every year.  All the inspecting authorities a re required to submit their 
reports in response to a structured inspection questionnaire.  Thus 
more than 155,000 inspection reports are generated every year.  
There are inspection branches in all the administrative offices that 
ensure the timely carrying out of inspections, receipt of inspection 
reports and compliance to such reports. 
 
In case of Savings Bank transactions, inspecting authorities randomly 
select the accounts to verify their balances with the accountholders.  
They also verify all the high -value transactions taking place in Branch 
Post Offices.  Moreover, if there is some suspicion against the work of 
a Branch Post Master, her/his entire past work is verified.” 
 
Constraints in disbursement of wages through accounts by Post offices     
MoU ente red between the State Government s and the Department of 
Posts 
 
67. The Department of Rural Development has informed that a MoU has been 
entered between the State Governments and the Department of Posts which 
explain in detail the system of disbursement of wages through Post Offices. In 
MoU, the obligation of the Department of Posts and State Governments and 
MGNREGA authority has been explained, the details of which as furnished by the 
Department of Rural Development have been given at Appendix-II. 
68. When enquired how far the Department of Posts has met obligations as 
given in MoU, the Posts has furnished the following information:- 
“Department of Posts has met the obligations as given in MoU in 
respect of training for the staff for acquainting themselves w ith the 

20 
 
operational procedure and the need for dedicated approach to deliver 
the services under the MoU, Department of Posts has also provided 
effective mechanism at all levels for Redressal of grievances and 
disposal o f complaints reliant to wage payments  through post office 
savings banks. Adequate manpower is being provided and appropriate 
cash-flow arrangements have been made for effective implementation 
of the schemes. Nodal Postal Officer also takes expected steps for 
linking of villages with Post Offices, prompt disposal of NREGS cheques 
and disbursal of wages. Postal Officers also attend coordination 
meeting at various levels regularly. As stipulate din MoU, requests are 
made for arranging deposit of rolling fund at Post Offices.” 
69. The Department o f Posts while enumerating the details where State 
Governments and M GNREGA authorities do not comply with their obligations as 
enshrined in MoU submitted as under:- 
“In many cases, State Government has not deposited the amount of 
rolling fund with the Post Offices. The wage lists relating to the works 
performed under the NREGA are not being made available to the Post 
Offices timely. Further, intimation about the requirement of cash is not 
intimated to Post Offices in advance. In case of some States, wage 
lists are deposited at BOs/HOs. These points are brought to the notice 
of State Government authorities in coordination meetings. As per MoU, 
the District Programme Coordinator will assess the probable amount of 
wages to be paid and place an equal amount as de posit with the Head 
Post Office located at the District Headquarters.” 
 
70. The Department of Posts has further stated that in many States the amount 
of wages is not being deposited with the head Post Offices in advance as stipulated 
in MoU.  
71. The Depar tment of Rural Development was asked to indicate about the 
initiatives being taken to address the aforesaid concerns as expressed by the 
Department of Posts. To this, the Department of Rural Development has stated 
that the MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2008 provides that in order to avoid 
delays in clearance of cheques or shortage of staff in Banks/Post Office Branches  
or reluctance of Bankers/Postal Authorities , State Government may discuss the 
matter in the State level Banking Coordination Committee meetings and with Post 
Master General of the State. An Advisory regarding the measures to check delay in 
payments reiterating therein all instructions issued on the subject has been issued 
to States/Union Territories on 29th October, 2010. 

21 
 
72. The Department of Rural Development has indicated some of the 
bottlenecks that have been identified by them regarding disbursement of wages by 
the Department of Posts which includes the following areas:- 
(i) Non-availability of any post office in some Gram Panchayat areas, 
(ii) No proper building for use as post office in many of the interior villages and 
the residential buildings of the Branch Post Master are used as post office in 
which it is not safe to keep wages money, 
(iii) Lack of proper security to keep wages money due to lack of police personnel 
in the State, 
(iv) Covering of more than one District by the Head Office, sometimes resulting 
in delay in cash transfer.   
73. One of the constraints with regard to the disbursement of wages through 
accounts as identified by the Department of Rural Development is limited outreach 
of Posts and Banks.  As per the information furnished by the Department of Rural 
Development there are around 6.5 lakh villages in the country while the number of 
Branches of Banks are 72,165 (Economic Survey, 2007 -08) and 1.55 lakh 
branches of Post Offices (Annual Report 2007 -08 of Department of Posts).  It 
means only 25 per cent of the villages are covered.   
74. When asked about the initiatives taken by the Posts to address the 
constraints as mentioned by the Depart ment of Rural Development, the 
Department of Posts has enumerated the initiatives being taken by them which are 
as under:-  
(i) Post Offices are being opened at the criteria of distance, population and 
income.  While GP village may not have BO, a post office d oes exist in a 
cluster of villages. 
(ii) It is not possible to provide departmental buildings or rent a private building 
for all Branch Post Offices as the responsibility for providing accommodation 
for BO rests with Branch Post Master. 
(iii) Lack of proper security is a concern in most of the States.  All the 
CPMGs/PMGs however are making efforts to coordinate with the Police 

22 
 
Departments of their States to ensure adequate and timely security for 
conveying cash.  Branch Post Master is expected to disburse most of cash  
available at BO and keep balance cash at BO. 
75. When enquired about the plans of Department of Posts to address the issue 
of limited outreach of financial services particularly in the remote areas, the 
Committee have been informed that the Circles have b een instructed to open SB 
account of all the households with the Post Offices and also to make efforts to 
cover them under Rural Postal Life Insurance.  
76. Posts has further stated that there is no area in the country which is not 
covered by the Post Offices and their delivery staff.  Therefore, disbursement of 
wages through the Post Offices is feasible at all places in the country. 
77. Another constraint identified by the Department of Rural Development is the 
limited cash handling limit.  To address the matter, the Department of Posts has 
stated that earlier withdrawals above Rs. 2000 was referred to Sub Post Offices for 
authorizing payment.  Now, this has been enhanced to Rs. 5000.  The cash limit of 
BOs have also been increased on need basis.  Further, BOs can retain cash against 
liability.  Further, directions have been issued for hiring vehicles to transport cash 
and funds have been made available for the purpose.  The Department has 
instructed all Circles to relax line limits for cash conveyance durin g the period 
when MNREGS wages are being disbursed.  Similarly, the cash retention limits at 
Branch Post Offices have also been enhanced for the period when such wages are 
being disbursed.  Further, as mentioned above, directions have been issued for 
hiring vehicles to transport cash and funds have been made available for the 
purpose.   
78. The Department has further added that interventions at the level of 
CPMsG/PMsG are being made to ensure that cash handling capacity is sufficient at 
the level of Branch Post Masters.  Line limit for cash conveyance has been made 
dynamic and funds have been made available for hiring of transport for 
conveyance of cash.   
 
 

23 
 
Technological Intervention    
79. When enquired about the status of computerization of post offices, the 
Secretary, Posts during the course of deliberations submitted before the 
Committee the following information:- 
“As part of the Eleventh Plan, the CCEA has approved the 
computerization of all the post offices, departmental as well as village.  
For the v illage post offices, we are looking for handsets so that the 
Branch Post Masters will find it easy to use without large infrastructure 
of accommodation.” 
80. When enquired about the timeline s for computerization of Post Offices, the 
Secretary added that it would be done within this Plan period.  With regard to the 
status of computerization of Post Offices , the Committee during the course of 
examination of the subject „Modernization of Post Offices‟ have been apprised 
(refer to Para 3 and 4 of Part-II of 15 th Report of the Committee  presented to the 
House on 23.11.2010 ) that as on 31 st March, 2010, there are a total of 12,604 
Departmental Post Offices which have been computerized out of the total 25,538 
Departmental Post Offices , the percentage of achievement  being only 49.35 per 
cent.  A lot of the work of rural Post Offices is carried out by the Extra 
Departmental Post Offices and at present out of total 1,55,035 Post Offices 
1,29,497 are Extra Departmental Post Offices.  If the number of Extra 
Departmental Post Offices is also taken into consideration, the percentage of 
computerization of Post Offices comes to just 8.13 per cent. Out of 12,604 
Departmental Post Offices computerized so far, the broadband/dial-up connectivity 
could be provided to just 9483 Pos t Offices.  The same status  regarding 
computerization of Post Offices has been indicated during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants 2011-12 of the Committee.   
ICT Devices 
81. The Department of Posts has informed that the proposed IT induction plan 
for Rural ICT device s would enable the rural Post Offices to download the data 
regarding payment of wages and also uplink the data on payment details after 
payment to the wage earners which will reduce lot of back office work of manual 
record keeping.   The service of GDS Branch Postmasters will be utilized for 
payment of MGNREGS wages in the rural Post Offices through ICT devices.  Gramin 

24 
 
Dak Sewaks are already being utilized for making payments under the M GNREGA 
Scheme at Branch Post Offices. 
82. The Committee have further been informed that under the IT modernization 
plan of Department of Posts, rural ICT devices are being supplied to 1,30,000 
(approx) Branch Post Offices in rural areas, through which the disbursal of 
MGNREGS wages will be made in add ition to the postal operations. Technological 
intervention will reduce the duplication of procedure and thus the work load on the 
account offices. Moreover, it will strengthen the monitoring mechanism and 
provide more secure operation.  
83. The Department of Rural Development has informed that ICT devices (e.g. 
Computers) are being used in all State/UTs. NREGASoft (MGNREGA MIS) software 
has been formulated and is being used across the country under MGNREGA. Under 
MGNREGA, States have reported that 93 per ce nt of the blocks have computers 
with 51 per cent having internet connectivity.  
Integration of MGNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS 
84. The Committee have been informed that the Department of Posts is 
planning to integrate M GNREGA MIS with its own MIS on  MGNREGA after the 
induction of ICT in all the Branch Post Offices.  It is also planning for such 
integration in case of already computerized post offices.  Data entry for the post 
offices in account jurisdiction of Ajmer HO (Raj asthan), Doranda HO (Jharkh and) 
and Raipur GPO (Chhattisgarh) has been completed on NREGASoft.  The system, 
however, could not be integrated with the system of the State Governments for 
want of submission of wage lists in electronic form from the concerned State 
Government offices. 
85. When enquired whether any deadline with regard to integration of 
MGNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS has been set, the Committee have 
been informed that no deadline can be fixed in this regard as it depends on the 
concerned State Governments to comp uterize their records and supply the wage 
lists and pay orders to the Post Offices in a digital form.   
 
  

25 
 
The procedure with regard to disbursement of wages under MGNREGA  by 
Posts  
86. The procedure with regard to disbursement of wages under MGNREGA as 
furnished by the Department of Posts is as under:- 
(i) The Programme Officer/Additional Programme Officer at the Block 
level prepare the lists of workers in each village and habitation and 
send them to the concerned sub postmaster duly arranging them 
branch post office-wise and sub post office wise.  These lists are used 
for opening of SB account of the workers in their concerned Post 
Offices.  These SB accounts are allotted separate series of account 
numbers and do not require any minimum amount of balance for 
opening as well as for maintaining the accounts. 
(ii) Programme Officer/Additional Programme Officer will assess the wage 
payment requirement for each BO/SO and intimate the same to Nodal 
Postal Programme Officer at least 3 days in advance of actual date of 
issue of wage list.  Thereafter, Programme Officer/Additional 
Programme Officer will generate village wise wage list duly arranging 
them in BO/SO wise and send 5 copies to SO. 
(iii) The Head Post Master/Sub Post Master assess the requirement of 
cash on the day of re ceipt of wage lists for Branch Post Offices 
including their own offices as per the wage lists and take immediate 
action to arrange cash and make  remittance to Branch Post Office 
according to the prescribed procedure. 
(iv) For disbursement of wages, in cases whe re the State Governments 
authorities have not deposited sufficient amount at the Head Post 
Offices, they present cheques of actual amount of wages along with 
the wage lists.  The Head Post Office sends the cheques for clearance 
and on clearance of the cheq ues the wage lists are sent to the 
concerned Post Offices for effecting the payments.  In case where the 
sufficient amount has been deposited by the State Governments the 
wage lists are sent to the concerned Post Offices immediately on 
receipt for disbursing the wages to the workers. 
(v) Payment of withdrawals commence immediately on receipt of wage 
lists and availability of funds.  Entries relating to deposits/withdrawals 
in pass book are made on presentation of pass books by wage 
earners.    
87. When enquired whether the Department of Posts has thought of simplifying 
the procedure whereby on receipt of the wage list by the concerned Post Offices, 
the amount is immediately deposited in the account of the labourers, the 
Committee have been informed that the prop osed ICT induction in rural Post 
Offices would simplify the procedure being followed at Post Offices considerably 

26 
 
and such induction would also obviate the need of duplication of work at Sub Post 
Offices and Head Post offices. 
Linking of MGNREGA with UIDAI 
88. The Secretary, Department of rural Development in the context of providing 
unique identity to MGNREGA workers submitted before the Committee as under: -
  
“…..we have joined hands with UIDAI. Now we are introducing 
biometric signature and a Unique Identity Number will be provided to 
all NREGA workers. The UIDAI has appointed as registrars.” 
Business Correspondent Model 
89. The Department of Rural Depart ment in a written note informed that they 
are envisaging to implement the Business correspondent Model in which 
disbursement of wages is  made through hand held device (Mobile ATM) using the 
biometrics or/and the smart cards.  The representative of the Department of Rural 
Development during the course of deliberations informed the Committee that 
Business Correspondent Model would reduce the distance and the time. 
 
90. While elaborating on this aspect, the representative of the Department of 
Rural Development during the course of deliberations further added as under:- 
 
 “The RBI guideline on the Business Corre spondent Model identifies a 
number of groups or agents who can become agencies. For example, 
self-help groups can become Business Correspondent Model or any 
agent which the bank indicates. They have a certain criteria for 
technical and financial feasibilit y. The bank appoints them. They are 
not independent of the banks. In fact, the Post Offices also can 
become Business Correspondent models for the banks.” 
  
91. On the issue of implementation of Business Correspondent Model, the 
Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed by the 
Department of Rural Development as under:- 
“As far as the business correspondent model is concerned, some 
States are having pilots whether it is Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh or 
Karnataka.  Some States are having thes e business correspondent 
models with the Banks and I think, there is one district where they are 
doing the business correspondent model with the Post Office also.”   
 
  

27 
 
92. When enquire d whether Posts need Banking Correspondent Model , the 
Secretary responded as under:- 
 “…that is not our proposal. We do not need to be banking 
correspondents. More or less, we have got saving banks of our own. 
So, we are really not interested in that.” 
 
Inadequate Manpower 
93. When asked about the number of vacancies at vario us levels including 
Gramin Dak Sewaks, the Department of Posts in their written note has submitted 
the following data:- 
Sl. No. Cadre No. of vacancies 
1 Indian Postal Service Group A 86 
2 Postal Superintendent Service Group B 2404 
3 Group C 29413 
4 Gramin Dak Sevaks  32862 
 
94. One of the constraints in implementing MGNREGA, as pointed out by the 
Department of Rural Development is inadequate manpower.  When asked about the 
strategy of Department of Posts to address the aforesaid constraints, the 
Department has submitted the following information:- 
 
 “The Department of Posts has been improving the infrastructural facilities at 
the branch post offices in a phased manner.  The Department has supplied 
infrastructural equipments worth Rs. 4.39 crore to 8,847  branch post offices 
during the plan period.  The Department is also examining the case to 
accommodate the branch post offices in the panchayat buildings or at Rajeev 
Gandhi Seva Kendras, which will greatly improve the infrastructural facilities 
at the branch post offices. 
 
 There are twenty two Postal Circles in the country covering all the States and 
Union Territories.  India Post has a network of 155035 post offices.  
Sanctioned strength of the Department is 268222 employees.  There are 
different categor ies of post in each group under Group „A‟, „B‟ and „C‟ 
(including multi tasking staff) in the Department of Posts, such as Asst. 
Superintendent of Post Offices, Inspector of Posts, Postal/Sorting Assistance, 
Postmen, Mailmen, peon, Farash etc.  For each ca tegory of Posts there are 
separate notified Recruitment Rules indicating the various modes of 
recruitment such as promotion, direct recruitment etc. 
 
 While there is no ban on recruitment in any grade or post, till recently i.e. up 
to 31.03.2009, filling u p of posts earmarked for direct recruitment quota in 
various grades as per the provisions of the recruitment rules were subject to 

28 
 
the optimization policy of the Government as enunciated by Department of 
Personnel and Training vide OM No. 2/8/2001 -PIC date d 16 th May, 2001.  
According to these instructions, direct recruitment vacancies could be filled 
up to the extent of 1/3 rd of the direct recruitment vacancies arising in the 
year subject to a further ceiling that this does not exceed 1% of the total 
sanctioned strength of the Department.   
 
 The above mentioned restriction has since been lifted.  Hence from 
01.04.2009 onwards all vacancies meant to be filled by direct recruitment 
can be filled up without any restriction.  However, the optimization scheme 
has resulted in slowing down the recruitment process due to a number of 
clearances that were required to be obtained as per the laid down 
procedure. 
 
 The vacancies in the various grades in Gr. „B‟ and „C‟ posts like Postal 
Assistant/Sorting Assistant, Postm an etc. are filled up by the Circles on the 
basis of the provisions contained in the recruitment rules notified by the 
Department.  These are decentralized cadres and appointment authority is in 
the Circles.  Efforts are on to fill up all the vacant posts.   Instructions for 
filling up of vacant posts of Gramin Dak Sevaks have been issued on 
14.7.2009 and reiterated to the Circles.” 
 
95. The Secretary during the course of deliberations further added that: 
“Regarding departmental vacancies, last year alone, w e have filled up 
about 12,000 vacancies.  We have finished the whole recruitment.  
Now the appointees are in the process of being trained and their 
certificates are being authenticated, etc.  So, we have filled up 12,000 
vacancies already and we plan to fi ll up in the current year another 
7000 vacancies.”  
 
Payment of Wages at workplace 
96. On the issue of disbursement of wages to workers at the workplace, the 
Secretary, Department of Posts during the course of deliberation submitted before 
the Committee as under:- 
 
 “It did not seem very feasible. We will examine this. It is because the 
work places of the workers keep on changing; it keeps moving from 
place to place and so it was not feasible at all. Therefore, we did not 
do it.” 
 
97. The Standing Committee  on Information Technology in Fifth Report have 
recommended to make Divisional Superintendent of Postal Department as the 
Nodal Officer for the purpose of disbursement of wages under M GNREGA. When 
enquired whether the local bodies have been requested by th e Department to 

29 
 
display the phone number of the Nodal Officer on the display board erected at the 
work place, the Committee have been informed that the Circles have been asked 
to request the State Governments to arrange for display of the phone numbers of 
the postal nodal officers at the work place for MGNREGA. 
Helping the Labourers in opening of MGNREGA accounts 
98. The Department of Posts has informed that the Post Masters have been 
asked to provide necessary assistance to all the labourers through Gram 
Panchayat/Panchayat Secretary in filling in the required forms while opening their 
accounts in Post Offices. 
 
99. On the issue of involving Self Help Groups, the Department of Posts have 
clarified that there is no plan to involve Self Help Groups in the tas k of 
disbursement of wages under M GNREGA through Posts Offices. The Department 
have further submitted as under:- 
 “The involvement of Gram Rozgar Sevak/Gram Panchayat 
Secretary/Members of the village Organisation/SHGs/NGOs and other 
social workers is limit ed to facilitating the NREGA workers towards 
completing the formalities to open their accounts as well as filling up of 
withdrawal forms etc. Disbursal of wages will, however, remain 
exclusively with the Post Offices.” 
 
Training to employees of Posts in ha ndling the task of disbursement of 
wages under MGNREGA  
 
100. When the Department of Posts  was asked to furnish a detailed note on the 
initiatives made by the Department to train the officers/staff of Posts in handling 
the task of disbursement of wages to labourers under MGNREGA, the Department 
of Posts stated as under:- 
 
 “Training was conducted by National Institute of Rural Development 
(NIRD), Hyderabad during Jan-March 2009 for Senior Officers.  Middle 
level officers were trained in May 2009, while the field level officials 
were trained by NIRD, Hyderabad in Jan 2010.  Moreover, all the 
departmental trainings for the personnel at various levels have a 
component of exposure to the MNREG Act and the system devised by 
the Department of Posts to disburse the wages.” 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
Support for payment of wages to MGNREGA workers through Post Offices 
 
101. On the issue of cost for serving MGNREGA accounts, the Department of Posts 
in the written note has stated as under:- 
 
“Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad has done an assessment of the 
costs incurred in servicing MGNREGS accounts.  Costs for servicing 
MGNREGA accounts are as follows:- 
 
(i) One time cost for opening one MGNREGS account:                   Rs. 73.99 
(ii) Recurring cost per annum for servicing one MGNREGS account:  Rs. 258.31 
In addition to the above, Department has to incur additional expenditure 
to ensure prompt disbursal of wages.  These are on account of 
arrangement for cash conveyance, incentive to staff, arrangement of 
security, training etc.”  
 
102. While examining Demands for Grants (2011 -12), the Department of Posts 
had submitted in their written note that the recurring cost involved in maintaining 
MGNREGA accounts is Rs. 332.30, which has on an average 10 transactions per 
year.   Whereas an ordinary PO SB account has 4 to 5 transactions per year and 
still Ministry of Finance does not remunerate Department of Posts for MGNREGS 
accounts (the rate was 129.49 per SB account for the year 2009-10). 
 
103. The Department of Posts, during the course of examinatio n of DFG 2011 -12 
had also submitted in the written note that in addition to incurring administrative 
expenses and expenses on maintaining MGNREGA accounts, administrative 
expenses are also incurred to meet the legal obligations under MGNREGA for 
making timely payment to wage earners.  Such expenditure include making special 
arrangements for conveyance of cash, security arrangements for cash during its 
conveyance as well as its storage, providing additional manpower to ensure that all 
the procedural requirements are timely met so that the payment to wage earners is 
not delayed.     
 
104. During the year 2008 -09 a plan scheme Support for payment of wages to 
MGNREGA workers through Post Offices was introduced by Planning Commission to 
support Department of Post s.  For the Annual Plan 2008 -09, a support of Rs. 80 
crore was approved by Ministry of Finance.  For the Annual Plan 2009 -10, Ministry 

31 
 
of Finance conveyed the approval of Union Finance Minister on the EFC Memo for 
remuneration of Rs. 100 crore to be paid t o the Department of Posts on account of 
operational and administrative cost for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA.  
However, Ministry of Finance conveyed that this entire fund of Rs. 100 crore would 
come from the administrative expenses part of the budge t of Ministry of Rural 
Development under MGNREGA.  For 2010-11, unlike 2008-09 and 2009-10, no plan 
support has been provided to Department of Posts for carrying out MGNREGA work.  
The matter has been taken up by the Department of Posts with the Ministry o f 
Finance and Ministry of Rural Development.  In this connection, a meeting was held 
in July 2010 under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, which 
was attended by Secretary, Department of Posts, Secretary MoRD and Secretary, 
Department of Expenditure.  During the meeting, it was decided that for payment 
of service charges to post offices, Ministry of Rural Development will send a 
proposal separately to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  However, 
Circles have been allotted funds to the tune of Rs. 100 crore from non-plan head at 
the beginning of this financial year to service MGNREGA accounts.   
 
105. When asked about the decision/direction of Ministry of Finance in this regard, 
the Department of Rural Development has stated as under:- 
 “Financial year 2009 -10, an EFC memo regarding remuneration of Rs. 100 
crore to be paid to the Department of Posts on account of operational and 
Administrative cost for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA has been 
approved by Ministry of Fina nce with the condition that the activity covered 
by the EFC memo falls squarely under the category of administrative 
expenses for MGNREGA and hence should be funded from Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act rather than through a separate 
scheme.  It may be mentioned that in the meeting (minutes enclosed) taken 
by Principal Secretary to Prime Minister on 7 th January 2008, the issue of 
providing financial assistance to the postal system to be able to meet the 
operational/administrative costs involved in transacting a very large number 
of accounts was settled with concurrence of Ministry of Rural Development, 
Department of Post and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  It 
was decided that the cost for handling Mahatma Gandhi NREGA a ccounts 
ought not to be a part of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA budget and instead 
should be a separate budget head under the Department of Post for 
administrative and operational costs for handling Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
accounts. 
 
 It was in pursuance to these decisions that the Department of Post had come 
up with EFC Memo on support of payment of wages to Mahatma Gandhi 

32 
 
NREGA workers through post offices and Ministry of Rural Development had 
supported the EFC Memo of Department of Post. 
 
 The decision communica ted by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance that 6% administrative charge of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA should 
meet the costs incurred by Department of Post on wage disbursement, 
therefore reverses the decision in the meeting held in the PMO, to which 
Department of Expenditure had also concurred. 
 
 The matter has been under discussion at the Prime Minister‟s level and in the 
meeting chaired by Principal Secretary to PM on 22 nd July, 2010 regarding 
payment of service charges to bank/post offices for Maha tma Gandhi NREGA 
wage payments, it was agreed that for payment of service charges to post 
offices, Ministry of Rural Development would send a proposal separately to 
the Department of Expenditure.  The proposal is under process.”   

33 
 
Part-II 
Recommendations/ Observations 
 
 The Committee note that Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) is a landmark legislation whereby 
the guarantee of 100 days of wage employment in a financial year to every 
household has been provided.  As per para 3 1 of Schedule (2) of 
MGNREGA, wages are to be made through the individual or joint accounts 
of the MGNREGA workers  in Banks or in Post Offices.  The Committee in 
this report  have examined the system of disbursement of wages to 
MGNREGA workers through accou nts by Post Offices.  Since the 
Department of Rural Development is the nodal Department with regard to 
implementation of MGNREGA, the Committee besides getting inputs from 
the Department of Posts also procured the feedback from the Department 
of Rural Development through written replies and deliberations on various 
aspects related to examination of the subject.   The 
recommendations/observations that emerged during the course of 
examination/deliberation of the subject have been contained in this part of 
the report.   
 
Contradiction between the data as furnished by the Department of Rural 
Development and the Department of Posts with regard to n umber of 
accounts and amount disbursed under MGNREGA 
  
2. The input provided by both the Departments i.e. Department of Posts 
and Department of Rural Development indicates contradiction on various 
aspects, particularly on the number of accounts and amount disbursed 
through Posts.  During the year 2008 -09 there is a difference of 10 lakh in 
the number of accounts and 289.94 crore in the amount disbursed.  During 
the year 2009 -10 such gap is much wider.  In the number of account s 
there is gap of 13 lak h and in respect of amount disbursed, the gap is Rs. 
1026.25 crore.  During the year 2010-11 although the Department of Rural 
Development has furnished the data one month beyond the data furnished 
by the Department of Posts such gap is 29 lakh in respect of number of 
accounts and 122 1.99 crore in respect of the amount disbursed.  The 
representative of the Department of Rural Dev elopment during the course 

34 
 
of deliberations agreed that there is discrepancy in the data.  However, the 
representative of Posts tried to justify the discrepancy by stating that 
there is a time lag between actual disbursement of wages through Post 
Offices a nd Banks and the loading of the figures on the website.  The 
Committee observe that the aforesaid reasoning of Posts can be accepted 
in case of the year 2010-11.  Such a huge gape in the data furnished by the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts is not understandable in case 
of the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 which have been over long back.   The 
Committee feel that huge gaps in the data of the two Departments raises 
question mark about the system of maintaining as well as monitoring of 
accounts under MGN REGA, one of the biggest centrally sponsored scheme 
of the Union Government.  While expressing strong displeasure over the 
matter, the Committee desire explanation from both the Departments i.e. 
the Department of Rural Development and the Department of Posts.   
3. The Committee  further note that as per the Operational Guidelines 
2008 there is a n elaborate provision for audit  and review of accounts 
maintained under MGNREGA  at various levels by Local Fund Auditors, 
Chartered Accountants, District Programme Coordinator and Gram Sabhas.  
From the discrepancy of the data as mentioned above it seems that all the 
provisions made in the Operational Guidelines are not being strictly 
complied with.  Not only that the representative of the Department of Rural 
Development do not seem to be serious with the discrepancy in the data as 
pointed out during the course of deliberations.  He tried to argue that such 
discrepancy cannot be eliminated unless online real time entry system is 
implemented.  From the status of computer ization and the connectivity 
scenario, the analysis of which has been done in the later part of the 
report, the Committee find that it would take years to have online real time 
entry of the accounts throughout the country.  The Committee observe that 
the country cannot wait  and sit silently till online system is  operational   
particularly when the discrepancy in the data is very large.  The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that there is disconnect between the Department of 
Rural Development and Posts with regard to the maintenance of MGNREGA 
wage accounts.  While expressing unhappiness over the  way the wage 
accounts are being maintained, the Committee strongly recommend that  

35 
 
the audit of accounts as per the prescribed procedure should be 
undertaken at vario us levels. Not only that t he data with regard to the 
wages disbursed under MGNREGA by the Rural Development and Posts 
should be reconcile d by proper coordination between the said two 
Departments and there should be transparency in the system.  All the 
desired initiatives should be taken to address the issue and the Committee 
informed accordingly.   
 
The share of Posts in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 
4. The Committee note that there are around 6.5 lakh villages in the 
country, while the number of Bank Branches is 72165 and the number of 
Post Offices is 1.55 lakh.  The Banks with even half of the Branches of 
Posts are able to capture almost 60 per cent of the MGNREGA accounts in 
the country.  The share of Posts is marginal in some of the  big States.  In 
Uttar Pradesh, the share of Posts is just 2 per cent and in  Kerala it is 5 per 
cent.  The State-wise position further indicates that the share of Posts in 
some of the difficult States is quite dismal, whereas Posts has claimed that 
there is no area in the  country which is not covered by Post Offices and 
their delivery staff.  The aforesaid position clearly indicates that Posts have 
failed to leverage their access to every nook and corner of the country. 
 The Committee further find from the deliberations th at whereas the 
Department of Rural Development has indicated the  specific reasons for 
preference of Banks over Post Offices, the Posts seem contended with the 
prevailing situation and find their system very effective and systematic.  
Even when a study by D reze and Khera undertaken in four States has 
found that payment in Banks was better than Post Offices and the 
complaints of the clients were less , Posts during the course of 
deliberations seemed ignorant of the aforesaid study.  Not only  that Posts 
do not seem interested to undertake a study to find out the satisfaction 
level of labourers in the near future when suggested by the Committee.  
  From the aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude that the 
comparative share of Posts and Banks is the conclusive evidence with 
regard to choice of Banks over Posts by the various State Governments.  As 
such, there is no point in simply arguing that it is the prerogative of State 

36 
 
Governments to choose Banks or Posts for the purpose of disbursement of 
wages.  The State  Governments’ apparent choice for Banks is due to their 
efficiency, better connectivity and their expertise in handling accounts and 
finance as stated by the Department of Rural Development .  The 
Committee strongly emphasize that the Department of Posts ne ed to act 
promptly and take the desired initiatives so as to compete with Banks on 
the issue of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA otherwise it would 
lose its place in the country.  The concrete initiatives in this regard should 
be taken and the Committee  informed accordingly.   Besides a study to 
know the satisfaction level should be undertaken expeditiously by Posts 
which would help to know the ground reality and in addressing the various 
problems.   
 
Wages disbursed through cash 
5. The Committee note that the Payment of wages through accounts is 
the statutory requirement as per MGNREGA.  In spite of that to the surprise 
of the Committee, the wages are being disbursed by cash in some of the 
States.  The Committee further take note of the fact that under Se ction 
27(1) of MGNREGA some of the districts have been given exemption from 
payment of wages through accounts in areas experiencing left extremism 
in its worst form and also where Banking and Postal Branches are very few 
in number.  The districts given exe mption by the Department of Rural 
Development include some of the districts in Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra 
State as indicated by the Department of Rural Development.  The scenario 
of disbursement of wages by cash as emerged during the course of 
deliberations indicates that in other States too, the disbursement of wages 
is being made by cash.  Only in few States 100 per cent of wages are being 
made through accounts.  In Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Lakshadweep the wages disbur sed through accounts 
are less than 50 per cent during the year 2009 -10.  In Lakshadweep, the 
percentage disbursement of wages through accounts is zero.  Worse is the 
situation in Tamil Nadu where  only 0.14 per cent of wages are being 
disbursed through acco unts even when the Department of Rural 
Development has claimed that there is no extremism there and IT 

37 
 
connectivity is very good.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that there 
is much scope of corruption in case the wages are disbursed  by cash.  
Moreover, the State Government s not complying with the statutory 
requirement is not understandable  to the Committee .  The issue needs to 
be taken up on an urgent basis with the respective State Governments at 
the highest level.  The Committee strongly recommend t hat their concern 
in this regard be brought into the knowledge of the Cabinet Secretar y so 
that the issue is taken up urgently at the highest level with the various 
States particularly Tamil Nadu Government.   
 
Delay in payment of wages under MGNREGA 
6. Section 3(3) of the MGNREG Act provides for disbursement of daily 
wages on weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the 
date on which the work was done. Besides, as per Para 7.2 of Annexure II 
of MoU, payments are to be completed within 3  days from the date of 
receipt of wage list and availability of funds.   Besides, the flow chart 
indicating the specific time limit for each of the activity has been 
suggested to the States by the Department of Rural Department to ensure 
payment of wages wi thin a fortnight .   In spite of the statutory 
requirement and the specified time limit at each level as suggested, there 
have been cases of  delay in payment of wages.  Whereas CAG 
Performance Audit Report number 11 of 2008 undertaken in 17 States has 
pointed out delay in payment of wages in 213 GPs , to the surprise of the 
Committee, the Department of Rural Development has received only 40 
complaints in this regard.  Even when as per the  Department of Rural 
Development one of the bottlenecks in timely disbu rsement of wages is 
delay in payment of wages through Post Office even after timely issuance 
of payment advice to sub -Post Office,  the Department of Posts do not 
seem to be serious on the issue  of delay in disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA.  At one point Posts claimed that no specific complaint of delay 
has been received. At another point during the course of examination, the 
Department while acknowledging the delay has stated that there are 
cases where wage earners could not withdraw the amount within th e 
stipulated timeframe of three days.  

38 
 
With regard to the onus of delay, the Department of Posts has tried 
to shift the major burden to the State Governments.  The Committee 
conclude from the aforesaid scenario that efforts are not being made by 
Posts to k now the ground reality with regard to the disbursement of 
wages.  The Committee observe that the ground reality in this regard is 
much worse.  There are cases of delay in payment of wages.  There is an 
urgent need on the part of the Department of Rural Dev elopment and 
Department of Posts to find out the actual scenario and take all the 
desired initiatives so that the labourers who are poorest of the poor in the 
country get timely wages to meet their day to day requirements. 
7. On the issue of wage earners n ot withdrawing wages within the 
stipulated time of three days, the Committee observe that perhaps 
labourers are not being properly informed about the deposit of their 
wages in their Post Office accounts.  The Department of Posts needs to 
review their system and find out some mechanism to inform the labourers 
about depositing of their wages in their accounts on the same day.  The 
display of information with regard to depositing of wages at the 
workplace can be one of the proposed mechanism in this regard.  T he 
Department should take the desired action as suggested and inform  the 
Committee accordingly.   
Average time taken for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA 
8. The Committee note that as per the reply given by the Department of 
Posts, the average time taken in disbursement of wages to one labourer in 
Post Office is six minutes.  When the issue of average time taken for 
disbursement of wages was addressed to the Department of Rural 
Development, the representative during the course of deliberations 
responded that the delay with regard to wages can be captured through 
MIS data and assured the Committee that the status of average time in 
disbursement of wages would be submitted.  When the question was 
specifically raised through post evidence question, the Department instead 
of furnishing the details about the average time  taken in disbursement of 
wages has furnished the status of delay with regard to disbursement of 
wages.  Whereas in the earlier replies furnished by the Department of 

39 
 
Rural Development, it has been stated that 40 complaints relating to delay 
in payment of wages have been received in the Department , t he post 
evidence replies states that in 86 per cent of the cases wages have been 
paid within the stipulated time which means that in 14 per cent case s 
there is delay in disbursement of wages.  Not only that in 1.61 per cent of 
the cases, the delay has been reported to be beyond 90 days.  The sum 
total of number of accounts in Post Offices for the three years i.e. 2008-09,       
2009-10 and 2010 -11 (upt o November) is 11.78 crore as per the data 
furnished by the Department of Rural Development.  Even if the number of 
Bank accounts is not taken into consideration, and it is presumed that in 
one MGNREGA account payment has only been made once in each year, in 
1.6492  crore cases  (14 per cent of the 11.78 crore accounts) there has 
been delay.  The said data clearly indicates that the situation is alarming.  
The ground situation in this regard may be further worse.  What is more 
disappointing to the Committee is the lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Department of Rural Development and Posts .  The Committee at the 
various stages of examination of the subject have been furnished various 
data with regard to delay in disbursement of wages under MGNREGA.  The 
initial information furnished by both the Departments indica ted a very 
satisfactory position.  However, when the issue  was dug further by the 
Committee, the aforesaid data which indicates the delay in as much as 14 
per cent of the cases has been furnished b y the Department of Rural 
Development.  
 
While expressing serious concern over the ground situation in this 
regard, the Committee strongly recommend to identify the districts, blocks, 
villages where the number of delay cases are much more and identify the 
reasons for the delay so that the corrective action can be taken.  The action 
on the suggested line should be taken and the Committee apprised 
accordingly. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Payment of compensation in case of delay in disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA 
9. The information furnished by the Department of Rural Development 
indicates that only in Jharkhand compensation to 249 persons in K hunti 
and Murhu blocks has so far been made whereas the labourers as per the 
Act are entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the  provisions 
made under Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  What is more 
disappointing is the fact that the Department of Rural Development on its 
own has never tried to find out the status of compliance of the aforesaid 
provision by the various State Governments.  It was only when the issue 
was raised by the Standing Committee on Information Technology during 
the course of deliberations that Rural Development Department  agreed to 
seek the clarification from all States in this regard.  The Committee wou ld 
like the Department of Posts to follow the Department of Rural 
Development in this regard and the response received from the State 
Governments should be furnished to the Committee.  Besides, efforts 
should be made to ensure that all the labourers where the delay is there 
are duly compensated as per the provisions made in the Act. 
 
10. The Committee from the status of payment of compensation to 
labourers observe that perhaps labourers are not aware of their statutory 
rights. There is an urgent need to tak e the initiative to make the labourers 
aware of their rights  as envisaged under MGNREGA through various 
mechanisms which may include print and electronic media, Gram Sabha 
meetings, display of information at Panchayat Headquarters etc.  The 
Department of P osts in coordination with the Department of Rural 
Development should take all the initiatives for spread of awareness 
amongst labourers about their rights under MGNREGA so that they can put 
pressure on the Posts and Banks for timely payment of wages.   
 
Corruption and role of middleman in disbursement of wages 
11. The Committee find that as per the records of the Department of 
Rural Development , a total 244 cases relating to corruption in 
disbursement of wages have so far been reported.  With regard to the 

41 
 
number of corruption cases in Posts, as per the Department of Posts,         
7 cases of loss and fraud related to MGNREGA accounts have been found 
and in four such cases FIRs have been lodged.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that  with the aforesaid sp ecific cases of corruption  as 
reported during examination , the Department of Posts when specifically 
asked about the role of middleman, ransom money received by officials 
and the labourers getting wages lesser than the amount declared has 
chosen to be ignorant of the matter.  The Committee are unhappy over the 
way the Department has responded to such a serious question raised by 
the Committee during the course of deliberations.   
The Committee further feel that the number of corruption cases as 
reported is just the tip of iceberg and the real situation in this regard may 
be more serious.  There may be a number of cases of role of middleman, 
ransom money demanded and the labourers getting wages lesser than the 
amount declared.   Besides, Benami wage system is prevailing in the 
country.  The Committee find that some sort of guarantee of employment 
has been envisaged through MGNREGA which if implemented in a proper  
way can help to eradicate poverty in the country.  Moreover, money in the 
hands of the poor persons  can increase their purchasing power which can 
boost the economy of the country. There is an urgent need to pay serious 
attention by all the  stakeholders which include the Ministries concerned, 
State Governments, Bank s, Post Office s and Civil Societies. The 
Department of Posts and Rural Development should take all the desired 
initiatives so that  the guarantee scheme is implemented in a proper way 
thereby benefitting the last person of the society in the country. 
 
Appointment of Ombudsman 
12. The Ministry of Rural Development on 7 th September 2009 issued an 
order under Section 27(1) of MGNREGA regarding the establishment of the 
office of Ombudsman in various districts within three months of the date of 
order.  Even when the stipulated timeline for appointment  of Ombudsman 
was given, t he deliberations held by the Committee reveal that 
Ombudsman has not been appointed so far in all the districts.  From the 
information furnished by the Department, the Committee note that only in 

42 
 
5 States viz. Punjab, Sikkim, Mani pur, Mizoram and Himachal Pradesh 
Ombudsman has been appointed in all the districts.  Non -availability of 
suitable candidates as per the prescribed qualifications in the order has 
been cited as reason by the Department of Rural Development for non -
appointment of Ombudsman in all the districts.  The Committee feel that 
qualification criteria need to be reviewed by the Government so as to 
ensure that the Ombudsman is appointed in all the districts which would 
definitely help in effective implementation of MGNREGA. 
 
13. The Committee further note that guarantee scheme is the flagship 
scheme of the Central Government and all the outlay required for the 
scheme is being provided to the State Governments by the Central 
Government.  Even then the Department of Rural  Development is le ast 
bothered to find out the details of the redressal cases handled by 
Ombudsman.  When specifically asked, the Committee have been apprised 
that Ombudsman  is supposed to send a monthly report to the Chief 
Secretary and Secretary of State  Nodal Department recommending 
appropriate action.  The Committee are of the firm view that the 
Department of Rural Development should monitor the functioning of the 
various mechanisms established under the Central Act i.e. MGNREGA.  The 
Department of Rura l Development cannot be contended with formulating 
the scheme and issuing guidelines.  The concerns of the Committee should 
adequately be conveyed to the Department  of Rural Development so that 
the desired action is taken on their part.    
 
Toll Free Helpline Number for redressal of grievances  
14. The Committee are satisfied to note that National Toll Free Helpline 
Number 1800110707 to enable any person to make the complaint or query 
has been set up by the Ministry of Rural Development and a total of 708 
complaints have so far been entered on the National Helpline.  The 
Committee would like the Department of Rural Development to give 
publicity to the aforesaid helpline so that more and more persons make 
use of the National Helpline, to address their grievances. 
 

43 
 
15. With regard to the Helpline by the State Governments, the 
Committee note that 24 States/UTs have set the Helpline as reported by 
the State Governments.  The Committee emphasize that t he remaining 
States should be further motivated to set up the Helplines.   
 
16. On the issue of setting up of Helpline by the Department of Posts, the 
Committee are unhappy to note the  casual attitude of the Department.  
When the issue was specifically raised, the Department in an uninterested 
way has stated that ther e is no such plan to establish a Helpline.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that on the lines of National Helpline and 
State Helpline, the Department of Posts should immediately set up a 
Helpline at the National level as well as at Circle /local level wher eby the 
labourers can report with regard to their grievance s about the payment of 
wages through Posts accounts, the issue being delay in payment of wages, 
ransom demanded by the officials or any other matter connected with the 
disbursement of wages by Posts.   
 
Monitoring and Vigilance Committees 
17. Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA provides setting up of a Local 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee composing of the members of the 
locality or village where the work is undertaken to monitor  the progress 
and q uality of work while it is under progress.  The Committee observe 
that setting up of Monitoring Committee at the village level is the most 
effective monitoring mechanism.  There is an urgent need to monitor and 
study the working of these Committees. Besides, the Committee during the 
course of deliberations have been informed that State level Monitoring 
Committee meets twice a year and District level Monitoring Committee 
meets on a quarterly basis.   To make the meetings of these Committees 
really effective, the representatives of Posts and Banks and other related 
State Governments and local Government officials along with local MLAs 
and MPs should also be invited at the sittings of the Committees.  The 
desired specific guidelines in this regard should be form ulated and 
circulated to the State Governments for compliance.   Besides, the outcome 
of the sittings of these Committee should be constantly monitored by the 

44 
 
Union Department of Rural Development and the Department of Posts.  The 
structured mechanism to re view the functioning of the various levels of 
monitoring Committees need to be formulated.    
 
18. The Committee note that District and State level Monitoring 
Committees have been set up whereby the local Member of Parliament is 
Chairperson and if there ar e more Members of Parliament they are called 
co-Chairpersons.  The Committee in this regard would like to recommend 
that the similar status of co -Chairperson should be provided to the Rajya 
Sabha M.P. also.  The Department of Posts should follow the Department of 
Rural Development in this regard. 
 
Social Audit 
19. Section 17(2) of MGNREGA provides that the Gram Sabha shall 
conduct regular social audit of all the projects taken up within the Gram 
Panchayat.  As per the notification of the Department of Rural  
Development social audit shall be held at least once in every six months.  
The details of the number of social audits held indicates that the Guideline 
to hold two sittings in a year is not being complied with.  Not only that all 
the districts in various States have not started social audit. The Committee 
observe that the provision of social audit is an important monitoring 
provision which provides the opportunity to the beneficiaries to inspect the 
accounts.  It is a mechanism where all the details of the  projects are 
scrutinized by the assembled public.  Moreover, holding of two sittings in a 
year is the statutory requirement.  As such the State Government s should 
ensure that the stipulated number of social audit s are held in every Gram 
Panchayat.  Besides, the Committee would also like to recommend that the 
officials of the Department of Posts and the Banks which are the wage 
disbursing authority under MGNREGA are also mandated to be present at 
the social audit of MGNREGA so that there is direct interaction between the 
public and the respective officials and the grievances of the public are 
addressed on the spot.  Not only that this mechanism would further help to 
find solutions to the problems being faced in implementation of the 

45 
 
programme and very good s uggestions would emerge for the effective 
implementation of MGNREGA. 
 
20. It has emerged during the deliberations that State of Andhra Pradesh 
has set up an independent Directorate of Accounts for social audit whose 
effectiveness according to the Departmen t of Rural Development is more.  
The Committee feel that there may be variations of conduct of social audit 
in various States which need to be studied and the best of the models to be 
replicated in other States.  The desired action in this regard may be ta ken 
by the Department of Posts and Department of Rural Development. 
 
Structured mechanism for inspection by the Senior Officers 
21. The Committee take note of the structured mechanism for inspection 
by the senior officers of Posts.  In this regard, the Com mittee may like to 
recommend to the Department to have a system of analyzing the 
inspection reports of the officers with regard to disbursement of wages to 
labourers under MGNREGA by Posts .  The suggested system would help 
the Department in analyzing the g round reality with regard to 
disbursement of wages and taking the desired corrective measures for the 
efficient system of disbursement of wages by Posts.  
 
The obligation on the part of State Governments as per MoU entered 
between the State Government and Department of Posts 
 
22. The Committee observe that a  MoU has been entered between State 
Governments and the Department of Posts whereby the obligation of the 
Department of Posts and State Governments and MGNREGA authority has 
been explained. The Departmen t of Posts during the course of 
deliberations has enumerated the details whereby MGNREGA authorities do 
not comply with their obligations as enshrined in MoU which include State 
Governments not depositing the amount of rolling fund with Post Office, 
non-availability of the wage list relating to the works performed under 
MGNREGA, non -intimation of requirement of cash in advance, non -
depositing of the amount with the Head Post Office in advance.  The 
Committee while taking note of the non -compliance of the obl igations on 

46 
 
the part of the State Governments/MGNREGA  authorities would like the 
Department of Rural Development to take up the issue with the various 
State Governments so that the labourers can get the timely wages. 
 
23. The Department of Rural Developmen t on their part have also raised 
some of the bottlenecks identified by them regarding disbursement of 
wages by Posts. During the course of deliberations, one of the concerns 
identified is limited outreach of Posts and Banks.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that when aforesaid constraint was specifically 
brought to the knowledge of  the Department of Posts , they seem 
contended with the existing status of outreach of Post Offices whereby 
Posts has claimed that there is no area in the country which is no t covered 
with the Post Office and their delivery staff.  The Committee again caution 
the Department over their contentment on the various issues.  Providing 
financial services to every nook and corner of the country is the  challenge 
before the country and Posts’ contention that there is no scope for further 
extension of Post Offices is not appreciable particularly when only 25 per 
cent of the villages in the country as per the Government’s own data are 
covered by Banks/Post Offices .  The Committee strongly  recommend that 
the financial services through Posts should be made available to each and 
every person of society by taking the suitable measures.     
 
Technological Interventions , usage of ICT Devices and Integration of 
MGNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS 
24. The Committee during the course of deliberations with the 
representatives of the Department of Posts and Department of Rural 
Development have been apprised that the payment system not connected 
on a real time basis with the MGNREGA ICT system was t he major 
deficiency resulting into discrepancy in the data being maintained by both 
the Departments.  Besides, the Department of Rural Development has 
acknowledged that integration of MGNREGA MIS with the Postal 
Department MIS is proposed for tracking fund  flow and wages crediting 
into accounts of wage beneficiaries.  Not only that computerization and 
the proposed ICT induction in rural Post Offices is considered a panacea to 

47 
 
address the various problems which include limited outreach of financial 
services in the country, complicated and lengthy procedures for 
disbursement of wages and above all delay in disbursement of wages to 
labourers etc.   
Even when such a great importance has been given to the 
computerization of Post Offices, the progress in the task of 
computerization does not seem to be very optimistic.  As per the data 
furnished by Posts out of 25538 Departmental Post Offices, 12604 
Departmental Post Offices could be computerized so far.  What is more 
disappointing is that out of the computerized 12 604 Departmental Post 
Offices 9483 Post Offices could be provided broadband/dial -up 
connectivity.  So far as the issue of computerization of Extra Departmental 
Post Offices is concerned, the Department’s proposal to provide ICT 
device to Gramin Dak Sewaks,  Branch Post Master is still on the proposal 
stage.  Integration of MGNREGA MIS with Postal Department MIS which 
would provid e better coordination between the two Departments and 
address to various issues as highlighted above is possible when all the 
Post Offices are computerized.  The information furnished by Posts 
indicates that data entry for  the Post Offices  in account  jurisdiction of 
Ajmer HO (Rajasthan), Doranda HO (Jharkhand) and Raipur GPO 
(Chhattisgarh) could only be completed on NREGA Soft.  The s ystem in 
these Post Offices could not be integrated with the system of State 
Governments for want of submission of wage list in electronic form from 
the concerned State Government Offices.  The Committee conclude from 
the aforesaid scenario  that computerization of Post Offices  and the 
various technological interventions suggested by both the Departments 
are still on initial stage.  It would take years together when all the Post 
Offices would actually be computerized.  The Committee here may like to 
emphasize to speed up the process of computerization of Post Offices so 
as to make the system of disbursement of wages effective.   
     
 

48 
 
Linking of MGNREGA with UIDAI 
25. The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Rural 
Development has joined hands wi th UIDAI and is introducing biometric 
signature.  As per the plan a Unique Identity Number would be provided to 
all MGNREGA workers , and for this UIDAI has appointed Department of 
Rural Development as registrar. The Committee feel that this is a step in 
the right direction and hence, should be implemented with right earnest . 
The Committee  may be kept apprised about the status of its 
implementation.  
Business Correspondent Model 
26. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been 
informed by the D epartment of Rural Development that in some States 
Business Correspondent Model is being implemented on a pilot basis.  As 
per the RBI guidelines, the Banks appoint agencies like Self -Help Groups 
which can become Business Correspondent for the purpose of 
disbursement of wages under MGNREGA through hand held devices 
(mobile ATM) using biometrics or/and the smart cards.  The Committee 
have also been apprised that Post Offices can also become Business 
Correspondent Models for the Banks.   
So far as the Post Of fice becoming Business Correspondent Model 
for the Banks  is concerned , the Committee again note the contradiction 
between the position explained by the representative s of the Department 
of Rural Development and Posts.  Whereas the Secretary, Posts 
acknowledged that they do not  want to become Business Correspondent,  
the representative of the Department of Rural Development apprised the 
Committee that there is one district where Banks are having the Business 
Correspondent Model for Post Offices.  While appreciating the stand of the 
Department of Posts for not being interested in becoming Business 
Correspondent for Banks, the Committee may like to emphasize to use the 
services of Gramin Dak Sewaks for the purpose of disbursement of wages 
under MGNREGA.  So far  as the contradiction between the stand of the 
Department of Posts and the actual position whereby the representative 
of the Department of Rural Development has stated that in one district 

49 
 
Banks are having Post Offices as Business Correspondent, the Commit tee 
would like the Department of Posts to clarify the position in this regard.  
 
Inadequate Manpower 
27. The Committee note from the information furnished by the 
Department of Posts that 31903 Posts which include  Group ‘A’ service 86 
posts, Postal Superint endent Service Group ‘B’  2404 posts and Group ‘C’ 
29413 posts are lying vacant.  With regard to the vacancies of Gramin Dak 
Sewaks 32862  posts are lying vacant.  The Committee have further been 
apprised during the course of deliberations that the Department was facing 
problems in filling the vacancies due to optimization policy of the 
Government whereby direct recruitment vacancies could be filled up to the 
extent of 1/3 rd of the direct recruitment vacancies arising in the year 
subject to a further ceilin g that does not exceed 1 per cent of the total 
sanctioned strength of the Department.  The aforesaid restriction has been 
lifted w.e.f. 1 April, 2009 and the Department is making effort s to fill up 
the vacancies.  In this direction 12,000  vacancies were filled up during the 
previous year and during the current year another 7,000 vacancies are 
planned to be filled up.  The Committee may like to recommend to the 
Department to take the desired initiatives to fill up the vacancies  in a time 
bound manner  so tha t Posts can further increase their area of activity 
particularly under MGNREGA and the wages to the labourers are disbursed 
effectively. 
   
Payment of Wages at workplace 
 
28. The Committee in the ir various reports have been recommending to 
find out ways to  disburse wages to labourers at the workplace.  The 
aforesaid proposal do not seem to be feasible to the Department, the 
reason being frequent change of workplace.  The Committee may like to 
observe that the aforesaid constraint can be addressed  if the wag es are 
paid in time.  As such, the initiatives may be taken to disburse the wages 
timely and the Committee’s recommendation to make arrangements to 
disburse the wages at workplace may be considered by the Department. 
 

50 
 
29. The Committee in the ir earlier reports have been recommending to 
make Divisional Superintendent of Postal Department as a nodal officer 
for the purpose of disbursement of wages under MGNREGA and display the 
phone number of the nodal officer on the display board erected at the 
workplace.  T he Committee have been apprised that Circles have been 
asked to request the State Governments to arrange for display of the 
phone number of the postal nodal officers at the workplace in MGNREGA.   
The Committee in this regard may like to emphasize that ther e is an 
urgent need to coordinate with the local bodies so that the information 
about the nodal officer for the purpose of disbursement of wages under 
MGNREGA is displayed at the work site.  Besides, as suggested by the 
Committee in this report, the toll f ree number s for grievance redressal 
should be identified and the information displayed at the work site after 
duly coordinating with the local bodies.      
 
Helping the Labourers in opening of MGNREGA accounts 
30. The Committee find that services of Gram R ozgar Sevak/Gram 
Panchayat Secretary/Members of the village Organization/SHGs/NGOs 
and other social workers are being used to help the labourers in 
completing the formalities to open their accounts as well as filling up of 
withdrawal forms etc.  The initiatives are in the right direction and need to 
be continued so that illiterate labourers can be assisted in opening the 
accounts and withdrawing money from their Posts accounts.   
 
Training to employees of Posts in handling the task of disbursement of 
wages under MGNREGA  
 
31. While taking note of the initiatives taken by the Department to train 
the employees of Posts in handling MGNREGA accounts, the Committee 
may here like to emphasize that illiterate labourers need a different 
approach from the respective officers/staff of Posts.  As such, the training 
curriculum should include ways to sensitize the officers/staff of Posts 
about the type of clients they are dealing with while disbursing the wages 
under MGNREGA.  The right approach on the part of the officer s/staff 
would certainly increase the satisfaction level of the labourers and thereby 

51 
 
would help Posts in extending their pla ce under MGNREGA throughout the 
country. 
32. The Committee may further like to emphasize that MGNREGA has 
given lot of opportunities  to Posts to extend their saving account network 
throughout the country.  There is an urgent need to capture the 
opportunity by taking the benefit of vast coverage of Posts throughout the 
country.  The Posts need to act proactively to take benefit of the 
opportunity provided to them.    
 
Support for payment of wages to MGNREGA workers through Post Offices 
 
33. The Committee note that in addition to incurring administrative 
maintenance expenses on MGNREGA accounts, the Department of Posts 
has to also incur a dministrative expenses to meet the legal obligations 
under MGNREGA for making timely payment to wage earners which include 
making special arrangements for conveyance of cash, security 
arrangements for cash during its conveyance as well as its storage, 
providing additional manpower to ensure that all the procedural 
requirements are timely met so that the payment to  wage earners is not 
delayed.  The Committee are perturbed to learn that for the year 2010 -11, 
unlike 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, no plan support has bee n provided to 
Department of Posts for carrying out M GNREGA work. Besides, Ministry of 
Finance who had earlier conveyed the approval of Union Finance Minister 
on the EFC Memo for remuneration of Rs. 100 crore to be paid to the 
Department of Posts on account  of operational and administrative cost for 
disbursement of wages under MGNREGA, has said that this entire fund of 
Rs. 100 crore would come from the administrative expenses part of the 
budget of Ministry of Rural Development under MGNREGA.  
In this connect ion, a meeting was held in July 2010 under the 
Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, and it was decided 
that for payment of service charges to Post Offices , Ministry of Rural 
Development would be sending a proposal separately to the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, which is still under process. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that since the Department has to incur 
additional expenditure for prompt disbursal of wages, apart from the cost 

52 
 
of opening and servicing the MGNR EGS account, the decision on providing 
remuneration to Department of Posts on account of operational and 
administrative costs for disbursement of wages under MGNREGA should be 
positive and be taken immediately.  
 
  
    
   
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH     [ 
23 August, 2011  Chairman 
1 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)         Standing Committee on  
Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 