 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
 
27 


 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-30 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
31-43 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government………………………………………………………………………… 
 
44 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration ……………………… 
 
45-59 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
60 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I.* Pending UCs during the period from 01.04.2001 to 
31.03.2009……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
61-66 
II.* Pending UCs from 01.04.2011 to 31.03.2010…………………………………………………………. 67-73 
III.* Comparison of agencies as on 31.12.2010…………………………………………………………….. 74-75 
IV.* Unspent grants as on 03.10.2011…………………………………………………………………………… 76-92 
V.* Status of submission of UCs by different States…………………………………………………….. 93-98 
VI.* Status of the various projects under DIT………………………………………………………………… 99-101 
VII.* Strengthening of ICT support at grass root level’ in its Twelfth Five Year Plan for 
2012-17…………………………………………………………………………………………........................ 
102-109 
VIII.* Study conducted on e-fraud internationally…………………………………………………………… 110-113 
IX.* Mechanism to deal with e-fraud in other countries……………………………………………….. 114-115 
X.* Insurance mechanism against e-fraud in other countries………………………………………. 116 
XI.* Snapshot of Information in Education Awareness Programme of DIT…………………… 117-118 
XII. * Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held on 20th December, 2011 ……  
XIII. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Twenty -third Report 
(Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
* Matter not appended with the soft copy of the Report updated online. 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
14. Shri  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-seventh 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for 
Grants (2011-12)’ of the Department of Information Technology (Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 4 August , 201 1. The Department of Information Technology  furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-third Report on                       
4 November, 2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
20 December, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee is given at Appendix-XIII. 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
21 December, 2011                                                                               Standing Committee on 
30 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -
third (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Gr ants (2011-12)‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Information Technology). 
 
2. The Twenty -third Report was presented to Lo k Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 4 August, 2010. It contained 27 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Information Technology) and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 18, 20, 21, 23,  25 & 26   
 Total 12 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration: 
 
 Para Nos.:-6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19,  22 & 24  
 Total 14 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the replies 
of the Government are of interim in nature: 
 
 Para No.:-  27  
 Total 01 
 Chapter V 

 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by 
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the 
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to  the Committee with 
reasons for non -implementation. The Committee further desire that 
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in Chapter - I should be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations.  
 
I. OUTSTANDING UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 6 & 7) 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have consistently been exhorting the 
Department to take concre te action to liquidate the pending 
Utilization Certificates/unspent balances with various 
States/implementing agencies.  As indicated in the Outcome 
Budget 2011 -12, total unspent balances with 
States/implementing agencies as on 31 December, 2010 is 
`2534.87 crore and 1000 UCs are pending. In respect of 569 UCs 
amounting to  ` 1840.36 crore, are not due as these would 
become due as on 1 April, 2011 and 1 April, 2012.  Thus, 431 
UCs amounting to `694.51 crore are still pending with the 
States/implementing agen cies.  Now when 1 April, 2011 has 
already passed, the number of UCs due may have increased 
considerably.     
 
Another issue consistently being raised by the Committee in its 
various reports is the fact that some of the implementing 
agencies after taking on e installment are neither furnishing UCs 
nor demanding the next installment.  In this context, as 
informed by the Department, there were 72 such agencies 
during the year 2010-11 and with the consistent efforts made by 
the Department in pursuance of the rec ommendation of the 
Committee, the said number has decreased to 35 UCs 
amounting to ` 32.92 crore.  In this connection, the Committee 
would also like to be informed as to how the issue of non -
furnishing of UCs in respect of the 37 defaulter agencies was 
addressed by the Department.”   
 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 

 
 
 
 
“The Committee note that although there is some progress with 
regard to furnishing of UCs, there is an urgent need to have 
structured mechanism whereby the implementing agencies 
furnish the UCs regula rly.  Stringent guidelines should be 
formulated whereby the accountability for not furnishing the UCs 
is fixed.  The Committee in this regard had strongly 
recommended in their Seventh Report to recover the money 
from such implementing agencies who after ge tting the first 
installment neither demand the next installment nor furnish the 
UCs.  When the recommendation was reiterated in the Action 
Taken Report, the Department do not seem to have 
implemented the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee.  
While reiterating the stand of the Committee in this regard, the 
Department is again exhorted to take stringent action against 
the defaulter agencies and recover the money from these 
implementing agencies.  The concrete action on the suggested 
line should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.”   
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
7. The Department in the Action Taken Note ha s inter-alia stated as 
under:- 
 
"For speedy liquidation of pending UCs, each Group/HODs have 
been requested for early liquidation and submissi on of UCs due 
as well as copies of UCs, which have already been forwarded 
and not yet updated in DIT UC Monitoring System. In 
coordination with PAO every effort has been made for getting 
the UCs updated in the UC Monitoring System. 
 
For o n-going projects, before release of every subsequent 
installment, submission of pending UCs for the grants already 
released to the grantee agencies, even for other projects, are 
insisted upon. 
 
No proposal for release of funds (o n-going/new project) is 
considered in IFD wit hout certification from the concerned 
Programme Division to the effect that the implemen ting 
agency/payee has no UC as due for rendition‟ or that the 
payment has been authorized by D/o Expenditure as per recent 
instruction.  
 
Programme Divisions are also d irected to take into account 
Unspent Balance + interest accrued thereon, while 
recommending/releasing the next installment. 
 
The coordinated effort of PAO, Programme Division and also IFD 
officials has resulted in tracking/obtaining a number of old 
pending UCs from the grantee agencies.  
 
All Group Coordinators were apprised with the observations of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee and were also requested for 
providing details for action taken/proposed to be taken by them 

 
 
relating to the recommendations of the Committee, specifically 
regarding action against defaulter agencies and recovery of 
money from these agencies/fixing of accountability for not 
furnishing the UCs. 
 
All Group Coordinators were also apprised with the provisions of 
GFR 212(1) and GCs were asked to take appropriate action in r/o 
institutions not submitting UCs for more than 3 years and 
immediately in r/o institutions/organizations who have not 
furnished UCs after receiving first installment. Information 
regarding action initiated for fixing  of accountability for not 
furnishing UCs/details of stringent action proposed to be taken 
against such agency for recovery of money, has also been called 
for. 
 
All these efforts have resulted in reducing the number of 
pending Utilization Certificates. 
 
The position of pending UCs (for the sanctions issued upto March 
2009) with regard to the recommendations contained in 23 rd 
Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2010-11) on Demands for Grants (2011-12), is as under:  
 
As on No of pending UCs  
(Due as on 
01.04.2010) 
Amount 
(` in crore) 
31.12.2010 431 694.51 
01.10.2011 326 600.07 
 
It may be seen from the above statement that a total of 105 UCs 
(due as on 01.04.2010) amounting to ` 94.44 Crores have been 
liquidated during a period of approx.9 months.  
 
An updated statement showing pending UCs for the grant -in-aid 
sanctioned during the period from 01.04.2001 to 31.03.2009 is 
enclosed at Annexure I please. 
 
The position of unspent grants (for the sanctions issued upto 
31.12.2010) with rega rd to the recommendations contained in         
23rd Report of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology (2010 -11) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12), is as 
under:  
 
As on Total No. of 
UCs 
Amount  
(` in crore) 
31.12.2010 1000 2534.87 
31.03.2011 1009 2057.14 
 
A statement as on 03.10.2011, showing 553 UCs amounting to             
` 1007.48 Crore (for the sanctions issued from 1.04.2001 to 
31.03.2010) which are pending with implementing Agencies, is 
enclosed at Annexure II.  
 

 
 
 The Parliamentary Standing Committee in its 23rd report on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pointed out that there were 72 
agencies during the year 2010 -11 and with the constant efforts 
of the Department, the number has decreased to 35 UCs 
amounting to ` 32.92 Crore.  
 
As part of the im plementation of recommendations of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee, all the Group Coordinators 
were apprised with the names of the implementing agencies 
which have been sanctioned grants in single installment and no 
Utilization Certificate was received. The coordinated effort of IFD 
and Progamme Divisions resulted in reducing the number of 
such UCs.  
 
A statement showing comparison of such agencies i.e. as on 
31.12.2010 and as on 03.10.2011, is placed at Annexure III 
please.   
 
It may be seen from the stat ement at Annexure III that as on 
03.10.2011, only 34 UCs (single installment) for ` 32.78 crores 
are pending as compared to 72 UCs amounting to ` 46.95 crores 
as on 31.12.2010. It would mean that an amount of ` 14.17 
crore has been liquidated. 
 
The status of unspent grants as on 03.10.2011 for the 
sanctioned issued from 01.04.2010 to 30.09.2011 is given as 
under (Detailed statement is also enclosed at Annexure IV): 
 
Period during which 
sanctions were issued 
Amount 
Unspent 
Balance  
(` in crore) 
Number 
of 
pending 
UCs 
01.04.2001 
 to  
31.03.2010 
 
1007.48 553 
01.04.2010  
to  
31.03.2011* 
 
1102.48 447 
01.04.2011  
to 
 30.09.2011** 
 
394.23 136 
 
Total 
 
2504.19 
 
1136 
 
*   The Utilization Certificate for the sanctions issued during 
the period from 01.04.2010 to 31. 03.2011 would only become 
due on 01.04.2012.  
  
**  The Utilization Certificate for the sanctions issued during 
the period from 01.04.2011 to 30.09.2011 would only become 
due on 01.04.2013.”  
 
(Reply to Recommendation Nos. 6 & 7) 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
8.  Keeping in view the adverse effects of a large number of 
pending Utilization Certificates, the Committee had recommended 
the Department to take concrete action in the direction of liquidation 
of pending UCs/unspent balances with various States/ impleme nting 
agencies and also put in place a structured mechanism whereby the 
implementing agencies furnish the UCs regularly. The Committee 
note that though the Department has taken some initiatives in this 
direction due to which the number of outstanding UCs h ave come 
down considerably, yet these have not been adequate to address the 
issue in its entirety as the number of UCs pending as on 1.10.2011 
still stands very high i.e., 326 UCs involving a staggering amount of ` 
600.07 crore. From this the Committee can not but conclude that the 
Department still needs to augment and step up their efforts to bring 
down the number of pending UCs and amount of unspent balances. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
would like the Department to gear up its machinery and put in place 
a more structured and better streamlined monitoring mechanism 
urgently to deal with the issue of Utilisation Certificates whereby the 
implementing agencies feel morally and legally bound to furnish 
Utilisation Certifi cates regularly , thereby ensuring smooth flow of 
funds and effective implementation of all DIT schemes. 
 
 Further, when the Committee desired to know as to how the 
Department has addressed to the issue of non -furnishing of UCs in 
respect of 37 defaulter agencies to whom single installment had been 
released, the Department has  responded that the information 
regarding action initiated for fixing of accountability for not 

 
 
furnishing UCs/details of stringent action proposed to be taken 
against such agency for r ecovery of money, has also been called for .  
The Committee would like the Department to pursue the issue with 
the implementing agencies/State Governments and apprise the 
Committee about the action taken against the defaulter agencies.  
 
II. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PROGRAMME (NEGP) 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 8, 9, 10 & 11) 
 
9. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had recommended as 
under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that NeGP is one of the flagship 
programmes of the Department for which substantial part o f the 
Plan allocation is being provided.  The analysis of the data 
furnished by the Department in the various documents reveal 
that during the Eleventh Plan ` 4992 crore were provided.  BE 
allocation for the 5 years is ` 4617.31 crore.  RE allocation 
during the said years is ` 2170.88 crore.  The actual expenditure 
met so far during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan is ` 
1794.82 crore which comes to 35.95 per cent of the total 
budgetary allocation approved for the Eleventh Plan.  The under 
utilization of outlay is the persistent problem with the 
Department and the Committee in various reports have been 
highlighting the issue.  The Committee are concerned to note 
that instead of analyzing the reasons for under spending under 
one of the important schemes, the Department has tried to shift 
the responsibility to the State Governments.  One of the reasons 
for low level of utilization of outlay under NeGP as stated by the 
Department is non-release of State share by State Governments.  
In this connection, th e Committee would like to be apprised 
about the name of the States who have not released their 
share.” 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
“The Committee during the course of deliberations have been 
informed that Southern States are very pragmatic and proactive 
in imp lementation of NeGP.  In case of Uttar Pradesh, the 
representative particularly mentioned that the State is not 
pragmatic and the implementation is very slow.  Here the 
Committee may like to emphasize that besides appreciating the 
proactive approach of Sou thern States, there is an urgent need 
of motivating the poor performing States like UP and Bihar which 
are one of the BIMARU status States.  The Union Department 
need to take up the matter at the level of Chief Secretary of the 
States. Besides, there is an  urgent need to replicate the best 
practices initiated by the States where the implementation of 
NeGP is really good.  The Department should analyze the 
implementation of various components of NeGP State/UT wise 

 
 
and take the desired initiatives in this reg ard.  The Committee 
should also be informed about the name of the best performing 
and the poor performing States with regard to NeGP.  The 
concrete initiatives as suggested should be taken and the 
Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
“The Committee have consistently been expressing concern 
over the shifting of deadlines of various components of NeGP 
viz. SWAN, CSCs, SDCs and MMPs.  The latest information 
furnished by the Department indicates that in 26 States/UTs 
SWAN has been rolled ou t.  After continuous change of 
timelines, the latest deadline is to set up SWAN in all States/UTs 
by December, 2011.  Coming to Common Service Centres 
(CSCs), out of the target of 1 lakh CSCs as on 31 March, 2011, 
93163 CSCs have been rolled out that too a fter shifting the 
deadline repetitively.  In respect of State Data Centres (SDCs) 
the deadline has again repetitively been deferred.  Till  31 
March, 2011 only 11 SDCs could be made operational.  Under e -
District (MMPs) as per the projected timeline, the 
implementation of e-District in 14 States was to be completed by 
March, 2011.  However, only in 2 States, the project could be 
sanctioned and implementation has been initiated.  With regard 
to e -Bharat with pursuance of the issue by the Committee in 
their reports, a loan of US $150 million has been agreed to by 
the World Bank during the negotiations with a maturity period of 
18 years including a 5 years grace period.  The Committee 
strongly emphasize that e -Governance is an important 
programme which is expected to change the entire concept and 
governance of the country.  Keeping in view the importance of 
the programme there is an urgent need to address the various 
hindrances encountered in implementation of the programme so 
that various components of NeGP are  rolled out expeditiously.  
In this connection, the Committee would like to emphasize that 
the implementation of various components of NeGP should be 
reviewed individually and all the corrective action should be 
taken after identifying the grey areas in th e implementation of 
the programme.”    
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
“The Committee observe that the Government has approved the 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) Scheme which provide support 
for establishing one lakh Common Service Centres in six lakh 
villages of India.  The Scheme envisions CSCs as the front -end 
delivery points for Government, private and social sector 
services to rural citizens of India in an integrated manner.  
Besides, CSCs would be suitably repositioned to be a network of 
Panchayat level Commo n Service Centres to provide 
Government services to the citizens in rural areas.  CSCs are to 
be leveraged for various services under Bharat Nirman and 
flagship Schemes like NREGA, NRHM and SSA.   
  
As stated above, after repetitive shifting of deadline, o ut of the 
target of establishing one lakh CSCs, so far 93163 CSCs could be 
rolled out.  What is disturbing to the Committee is that out of 

 
 
93163 CSCs set up, 85287 CSCs could be made functional as on 
February, 2011.  As per the information furnished by the  
Department not only that only 68 per cent of the CSCs have 
internet availability as revealed by an independent evaluation of 
CSCs done by M/s IMRB International in November 2009.  The 
study also reveal that only 58 per cent of CSCs were found to be 
fully operational out of a sample size of 1727. Non -availability of 
the G2C services and a reliable broadband connectivity besides 
regular supply of electric power are considered as some of the 
main challenges/problems affecting the CSCs Scheme by the 
aforesaid survey.  The Department‟s own data in respect of only 
20 States/UTs, as furnished to the Committee, further indicates 
that there is no uniformity in the number of services provided by 
CSCs.   
 
The Committee understand that besides roll out of the CSCs it i s 
utmost important that the CSCs are made functional.  Various 
services can be provided to the users only when CSCs have the 
proper internet connectivity.  Regular power supply is another 
issue which need to be addressed to make the CSCs fully 
functional.  In this connection, the possibility of using non -
conventional energy source can be explored. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Department should formulate 
some sort of mechanism to get the regular feedback from the 
State Governments about the func tioning of CSCs.  Periodic 
information with regard to internet availability, service rendered 
through CSCs and the actual users of CSCs should be obtained 
from the various States/UTs.  Besides, all the initiatives should 
be taken so that the real objective  of setting up of CSCs that is, 
as the front -end delivery points for Government, private and 
social sector services to rural citizens of India in an integrated 
manner is really achieved.  The Committee also feel that the 
Department should formulate guideli nes with regard to number 
of services to be provided by CSCs so that some sort of 
uniformity can be maintained.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
10. The Department in the Action Taken repl ies has inter-alia stated as 
under:- 
“It is clarified that under the various schemes, DIT only acts as a 
facilitator and catalyst. The responsibility of implementing the 
projects lies with the State Governments. Revenue support is 
released by DIT to the State Designated Agencies (SDAs). The 
SDA is then responsible for releasing the funds to all the project 
stakeholders (Project Implementing Agencies, Consultant, 
Service Centre Agencies (SCAs), NIC etc.) upon the satisfactory 
performance of the contractual agreements by the various 
stakeholders. The revenue support which also incl udes state‟s 
share (ACA) is being released by the states to the Implementing 
Agencies as and when it is due and eligible and upon submission 
of the Utilization Certificate (UC) by the States. It is also 
submitted that projects like SWAN, CSC etc. are being  
implemented in a Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode and 
funds are released only after the Implementing Agency has met 

 
 
all the Service Level Requirements. Under NeGP project, funds 
released as DIT Grants -in-aid and State share is contributed 
through ACA (MoF). First installment of Grant-in-aid and ACA has 
been released to all States. However, in many States, State 
Governments have not released the funds due to the 
Implementing Agencies as there have been minor shortcomings 
on behalf of the Implementing A gencies. The status of 
submission of UCs by the different States is given at Annexure 
V.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8) 
 
“In order to address uneven progress across States and to 
accelerate adoption of e -Governance in all States, the following 
steps are being taken: 
 
 A programme management structure has been created under 
NeGP. Under this structure, an Apex Committee on NeGP, 
headed by the Cabinet Secretary, oversees the programme 
and provides policy and strategic directions for its 
implementation periodically. 
 
 Under the guidelines for operational model, State Apex 
Committee, headed by the Chief Secretary of the State, are 
established for overall guidance, decision on Policy matter, 
approval of all deliverables by various agencies/ groups and 
financial p owers as per the delegation. At the State level, 
Chief Secretaries are being urged to review the 
implementation of e-Governance projects regularly.  
 
 The progress and status of the various projects (SDC, SWAN, 
CSC, SSDG, e -District) in the States is review ed regularly 
through video conferencing and meetings in Delhi as well as 
State Capitals. 
 
 As far as Uttar Pradesh is concerned, Regional Workshop with 
the State Government was held on 22.10.2010 and 
thereafter regular follow up is being done through video 
conferencing. The State has since selected the Service 
Centre Agencies for the remaining three zones under the CSC 
Scheme. The SDC Scheme is also expected to be launched by 
November, 2011. 
 Adequate capacities in the Government at all levels are being 
created through the State e -Mission Project Teams (SeMTs). 
SeMTs have already been setup in 32 States / UTs. 
 
 In order to train and sensitize Government officials, a wide 
range of training programmes like Leadership Meets, 
Specialized Training for e -Governance  Programme (STeP), 
CIO‟s Programme, Orientation workshops and other training 
modules  have been rolled out to up skill Govt officials at all 
levels. At political level, 78 Leadership Meets have been 
conducted in 18 States so far and other States are in the  
pipeline. Over 700 Govt. Officials have been trained under 
STeP Trainings. 
 

 
 
 DIT has also initiated an initiative for Horizontal Transfer of 
Success e -Governance projects for replication of successful 
projects in other States. 
 
 A CIO plan is also being rolled out to strengthen and create a 
cadre of in-house expert resources to lead and implement e -
Governance in India at all levels of Government. 
 
 DIT is currently hosting 50 seminars on NeGP across the 
country. So far 6 workshops have been hosted in Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Ranchi, Ahmedabad and Srinagar. The 
Chief Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries have 
participated in these workshops. These workshops are being 
used to share best practices and innovative e -Governance 
solutions from States. 
 
 50 case studies in e-Governance, which would be shared with 
all the States, are being prepared. 
 
 DIT is in the process of formulating model RFPs along with 
toolkits, guidelines and framework for preparing them to be 
used by Line Departments and State Governments to procure 
goods, consultancy services, works and managed services for 
e-Governance projects. 
 
State-wise snapshot of the status of the various projects under 
DIT is given at Annexure VI . States which have completed 
SWAN, SDC, CSC projects can be regarded as  better performing 
compared to other States.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 9) 
 
“In order to review the implementation of NeGP, a programme 
management structure has been created which has the following 
key components:- 
 
 Prime Minister‟s Committee on NeGP, headed by the Prime 
Minister, to provide leadership, prescribe deliverables and 
milestones and monitor periodically the implementation of 
NeGP. 
 
 National e -Governance Advisory Group, headed by the 
Minister C & IT, to solicit views of external stakeholders and 
to provide inputs to the CCEA, advise the government on 
policy issues and strategic interventions necessary for 
accelerating introduction of e-Governance across Central and 
State Government Ministries/Departments. 
 
 Apex Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary to oversee 
the programme and to provide policy and strategic directions 
for its implementation. 
 
 Similar structure exists even at the State level. Progress on 
the various components of NeGP is regularly communicated 
in the form of a fortnightly r eport to the PMO and a „Monthly 
Progress Report‟ (MPR) to the Cabinet Secretary.  

 
 
 
 The progress of the various projects (e -District, SWAN, SDC, 
CSC & SSDG) at the States is regularly reviewed through 
Video conferencing and meetings in Delhi as well as Stat e 
Capitals. 
 
 To understand the impact, utility, sustainability, scalability 
and replicability of mature e -Governance projects 
independent assessment studies are also carried out through 
third parties. 
 
In order to address the various hindrances encountered  in the 
implementation of the programme and to rollout e -Governance 
expeditiously, the following steps are being taken:- 
 
 To speed up the process of enabling electronic delivery of 
public services to the citizens and for overcoming issues like 
resistance t o change, systemic inertia, procedural hurdles, 
lack of transparency and legal impediments which hinder 
electronic delivery of services, it is proposed to enact the 
Electronic Delivery of Services (EDS) Act which would 
mandate provisioning of all public se rvices compulsorily 
through electronic means from a specified date. The Draft Bill 
has been finalized and Note for the Cabinet is being finalized 
after getting comments of all the Ministries / Departments 
and State Governments. 
 
 To ensure sharing of inform ation and seamless 
interoperability of data and e -Governance applications under 
NeGP, standards have been released in the areas of Open 
Standards, Biometrics, Metadata & data, Localization and 
Language Technology, Network and Information Security etc. 
 
 Considering the tremendous potential of mobile phones to 
expand the access to and reach of public services in India, an 
initiative has been taken to create a Mobile Service Delivery 
Gateway (MSDG) that will utilize the existing e -Governance 
infrastructure for delivery of services. 
 
 DIT is in the process of formulating model RFPs along with 
toolkits, guidelines and framework for preparing them to be 
used by Line Departments and State Governments to procure 
goods, consultancy services, works and managed services for 
e-Governance projects. 
 
 Adequate capacities in the Government at all levels are being 
created through the State e -Mission Project Teams (SeMTs). 
SeMTs have already been setup in 32 States / UTs. 
 
 In order to train and sensitize Government officials, a  wide 
range of training programmes like Leadership Meets, 
Specialized Training for e -Governance  Programme (STeP), 
CIO‟s Programme, Orientation workshops and other training 
modules  have been rolled out to up skill Govt officials at all 
levels. At politica l level, 78 Leadership Meets have been 
conducted in 18 States so far and other States are in the 

 
 
pipeline. Over 700 Govt. Officials have been trained under 
STeP Trainings. 
 
 A CIO plan is also being rolled out to strengthen and create a 
cadre of in-house expert resources to lead and implement e -
Governance in India at all levels of Government. 
 
 DIT is currently hosting 50 seminars on NeGP across the 
country. So far 6 workshops have been hosted in Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Ranchi, Ahmedabad and Srinagar. The 
Chief Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries have 
participated in these workshops. These workshops are being 
used to share best practices and innovative e -Governance 
solutions from States. 
 
 50 case studies in e-Governance, which would be shared with 
all the States, are being prepared.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 10) 
 
“There are three major challenges in the implementation of the 
CSC Scheme: 
 
1. Connectivity 
 
In order to provide reliable broadband connectivity, DIT has 
sanctioned `880 cr. to BSNL to provid e Wireline and Wi -Max 
based broadband connectivity to all CSCs across the country. 
DIT has been regularly following up with BSNL, including CMD, 
BSNL, to ensure that this connectivity is provided expeditiously. 
As per the revised timelines, BSNL is expecte d to provide 
connectivity to all the CSCs by December 2011. 
 
Additionally, a proposal to connect all the 250,000 Panchayats 
through a National Optic Fibre Network (NOFN) is also underway.  
 
The Department is also trying to provide supplementary 
connectivity modes like the VSATs etc. wherever BSNL 
connectivity is not feasible. 
 
2. Power 
 
To address power related issues, the Department has been 
impressing upon the Service Centre Agencies (SCAs) from time 
to time to cater for Solar Power Backup as this would enha nce 
earning opportunities for the VLEs and bring in viability and 
sustainability. These SCAs who manage CSC scheme in the 
states have been apprised of certain subsidies / incentives being 
offered by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy so that they 
may avail of this opportunity in their business interest.  
 
3. Availability of G2C Services 
 
The State Governments like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have 
issued Government Orders / Notifications to the various 
departmental heads / District Level authorities/ Stakeholders for 
use of CSC to deliver various G2C Services. As the CSCs are 

 
 
functioning in the rural areas of the States, the respective states 
are be ing encouraged to issue necessary guidelines regarding 
the type and number of services to be provided by the CSCs 
based on state‟s e -readiness and digitization / computerization 
of their various departments.  
 
The approval of the National rollout of the e -District MMP has 
been obtained which seeks to deliver high volume citizen centric 
services at district and sub-district level in an electronic mode. It 
is expected that implementation of the Scheme will greatly 
increase the number of services available to the citizens at the 
CSCs. 
 
As has been mentioned earlier, the Department is proposing to 
enact the Electronic Delivery of Services (EDS) Act which would 
mandate provisioning of all public services compulsorily through 
electronic means from a specified date .  Subsequent to 
enactment of the Act; the states would be under statutory 
obligation to make available various G2C services online in a 
time bound manner.  
 
A CSC India Online portal is also being envisaged that will 
increase the availability of services. 
An Online Monitoring Tool has also been designed and 
developed which is generating useful information relating to 
functioning of the CSCs at the ground level.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
11. The Committee in the ir earlier recommendation s had raised 
serious concern over the tardy progress of implementation of various 
components of e-Governance Programme which is one of the flagship 
programmes of the Government.  The action taken replies furnished 
by the Department in this  regard indicates that although some 
initiatives have been taken by the Department , yet they do not 
address to the key concerns of the Committee . The action taken 
notes furnished on the issues raised in the said recommendations 
have been analyzed and the comments thereto are given as under:-  
  
(i) One of the reasons for low level of utilization of outlay 
under NeGP as stated during the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants was non-release of State share by 

 
 
State Governments.  In this connection, the Comm ittee 
had desired to be apprised of the name s of the State s 
who have not released their share.  The Department 
instead of getting the information from the State 
Governments on the release of State share has chosen 
not to respond to the issue.  The Committe e would , 
therefore, like a more categorical response of the 
Department in this regard.   
(ii) The Committee in their earlier recommendation had 
desired to be informed about the name of the best 
performing and poor performing States with regard to 
NeGP.  The Dep artment in their action taken note has 
submitted a State -wise snapshot of status of various 
projects under DIT and stated that States which have 
completed SWAN, SDC, CSC projects can be regarded as 
better performing compared to other States.  The 
Committee fail to understand as to how a State can be 
categorized as better performing or poor performing 
State on the basis of completion of various components of 
NeGP only particularly when as per the information 
furnished by the Department under one of the import ant 
components i.e. CSC s, as many as 9876 CSC s remained 
non-functional.  In order to make the CSCs fully 
functional it is imperative that CSCs are made front end 
delivery points for the Governments.    Similar may be the 
case with other components of NeGP.  The Committee 
note that the Department has not comprehended the 

 
 
thrust of the recommendation and as such would like that 
a study/survey is conducted to ascertain and see 
whether the various components of NeGP completed so 
far are functioning well in all States or not so as to have a 
clear picture of the best performing and poor performing 
States.   
(iii) While taking note of the repetitive shifting of deadline of 
the various component s of Ne GP, the Committee had 
emphasized that the implementation of various 
components of NeGP should be reviewed individually and 
all the corrective action should be taken after identifying 
the grey areas in the implementation of the programme.  
The Department instead of critically analyzing the 
performance of various components ha s enumerated the 
already known details of general initiatives being taken 
for implementation of NeGP as a whole. The Committee 
would like the Department to review the implementation 
of various components of NeGP followed by the corrective 
actions in line with their earlier recommendations. 
 
(iv) On the issue of making CSC s really functional thereby 
achieving the real objective of setting up of CSCs i.e., as 
the front-end delivery points for Government, private and 
social sector services to rural citizens of India i n an 
integrated manner, the Department at one place in the 
action taken note has informed the Committee that it is 
proposed to enact the  Electronic Delivery of Services 
(EDS) Act which would mandate provisioning of all public 

 
 
services compulsorily through  electronic means from a 
specified date.  Sub sequent to enactment of the Act,  the 
States would be under statutory obligation to make 
available various G2C services online in a time bound 
manner. The Committee fail to understand how the States 
can be put un der statutory obligation to make various 
G2C services online without addressing to the issues of 
connectivity and power as raised in the said 
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would 
like the Department to take note of the aforesaid 
observation of the Committee before making it 
mandatory on the part of the State Governments to make 
G2C services online. 
 
 The Committee would like the Department to take the desired 
action on the suggested lines as per their comments given above.   
 
III.  INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
 NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC) 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 13 & 14) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The total budgetary support for the Eleventh Plan to NIC is for 
` 2300 crore.  However, during the 5 years of Eleventh  Plan the 
projections were made by NIC to the tune of ` 3432 crore 
against which allocations at BE stage were made to the tune of  
` 2724 crore.  The RE allocation during each year of the 
Eleventh Plan barring the year 2007 -08 is same as proposed at 
BE sta ge. As regards the expenditure position, the outlay 
earmarked at RE stage has almost been fully utilized by NIC.  
The Committee here would like to strongly recommend that 
adequate allocation as projected by NIC should be provided in 
view of the importance of the mandate given to NIC particularly 
in light of the spectrum of activities it has been carrying out.   
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 

 
 
“The Committee during the course of deliberations have been 
apprised that manpower in NIC has been a big constraint. As 
informed by the Department, NIC has only two persons per 
district and only 15 -20 persons per State.  It has been 
suggested that the existing strength of two persons per district 
should be doubled.  Besides, the Committee have also been 
informed that there is  no support mechanism at block level 
where majority of social sector schemes are being implemented.  
States are asking NIC to set up Centres at blocks to provide 
technical support and build the capacities of staff at grass root 
level so that services can b e provided up to Gram Panchayat 
and Village Level.  The Committee have also been apprised that 
NIC manpower was sanctioned during 1980s as per the IT 
requirement of the States/UTs at that time and it has become 
too difficult to sustain the number of scheme s with the same 
manpower now.   
 
 The Committee totally appreciate the concerns of NIC and 
particularly in the context of the important role NIC is playing in 
providing support mechanism at District, Block and Village 
Panchayat level.  The Committee emphas ize that the gaps 
between the required and the existing strength at various levels 
should be worked out in consultation with the Department of 
Information Technology and placed before Department of 
Personnel and Training and Ministry of Finance for getting  the 
requisite approvals.  The concerns of the Committee in this 
regard may be communicated to the Ministries/Organizations 
who would be clearing their proposals.”   
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
13. The Department in the Action Taken replies has inter-alia stated as 
under:- 
 
“NIC had projected a requirement of ` 800 crore for the year 
2011-12. The Planning Commission has allocated ` 754 crore 
against it. This appears to be adequate.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 13) 
 
“NIC is including a proposal on “Strengthening of ICT support at 
grass-root level” in its 12th Five Year Plan for 2012 -17. A copy 
of the same is at Annexure-VII.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
14. While sharing the concerns of NIC  on the issue of manpower , 
the Commi ttee in their recommendation ha d emphasized that the 
gaps between the required and the existing strength at various levels 

 
 
should be worked out in consultation with the Department of 
Information Technology and placed before the Department of 
Personnel and Training and Ministry of Finance for getting the 
requisite approvals.  The Department has not comprehended the 
recommendation of the Committee in the right perspective as could 
be seen from the action taken note which states that NIC is including 
a proposal on “Strengthening of ICT support at grass -root level” in 
its 12th Five Year Plan for 2012 -17.  The Committee feel that with 
the involvement of NIC in strengthening of ICT support at grass-root 
level, the gaps between the required and the existing manpowe r of 
NIC would be more critical and as such the issue needs to be 
addressed immediately.  While expressing unhappiness over the way 
the Department has responded to the recommendation, the 
Committee would like to reiterate their earlier stand on the issue.  
The matter should be urgently taken up with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments for getting the requisite approvals so that 
NIC is equipped with adequate manpower to sustain the enlarged 
activities particularly under NeGP.     
  
IV. NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE NETWORK (NKN) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The NKN project was approved in 2010 with an outlay of ` 5990 
crore for 10 years. Till March, 2011, `  1912 crore have been 
allocated and ` 1242 crore have been spent b y the Department. 
The Committee learn that during Plan discussion for the year 
2011-12, the Department had made a request for allocation of 
`2300 crore, however, only a sum of `  250 crore has been 
allocated at BE stage. Further, the Committee are concerned  to 
note that this allocation is inadequate to meet the projected 
physical targets set for Financial Year 2011 -12. The analysis of 
the data furnished by the Department further indicates that 
during the year 2010 -11 also the allocation of `100 crore only 
was made against the proposed allocation of `2318 crore.  

 
 
However, the allocation was enhanced at RE stage to ` 1362 
crore and the entire amount was spent.  The Department during 
the year 2011 -12 is also optimistic that the desired allocation 
would be provided at supplementary grant stage. 
 
The Committee find that the National Knowledge Network is a 
backbone for e -Governance.  Under the programme 1500 
premier institutes would get cover across multiple sectors and 
would include 400 universities.  The Committee  disapprove the 
adhocism of the Government with regard to providing 
allocations for such an important programme.  As such, the 
Committee strongly recommend to provide the allocations for 
NKN at the BE stage, so as to avoid uncertainty about the 
allocations of outlay at supplementary grant stage/RE stage.  
Besides, the Committee also emphasize that during the current 
year i.e. 2011 -12 the desired allocations should be made 
available at the supplementary grant stage so that the 
programme do not suffer due to want of resources. However, 
during the year 2012 -13 the adequate allocations should b e 
allocated at BE stage itself.”  
 
16. The Department in the Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as 
under:- 
 
“In March 2010 Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) 
approved the establishment of National Knowledge Network 
(NKN) at an outlay of ` 5990 crore to be implemented by 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) over a period of 10 years.  As 
on date, a total amount of ` 1868 crore has been released under 
NKN project.  T he details of the amount released so far for NKN  
are as follows : 
                 (` in crore)  
FY 2008-09 60   (Initial Phase) 
FY 2009-10 240  (Final Phase) 
FY 2010-11 1362* 
FY 2011-12 206  (Final Phase) 
Total (As on date) 1868      
* ` 1342 crore Final Phase + ` 20 crore for Initial Phase = ` 1362 crore 
 
In the FY 2011 -12 a sum of ` 250 crore has been allocated 
against ` 2300 crore as approved by CCI.  Based on the 
recommendation of 11 th meeting of the High Level Committee 
(HLC) held on 19.07.2011 an installment of ` 206 crore has been 
released (as on date) vide Sanction Order No. 1(1)/2010 -NKN 
dated 27.7.2011.   
 
In the 11 th HLC meeting, NIC was directed to work out realistic 
estimate of proposed expenditure up to December, 2011 and 
also for the pe riod up to March, 2012.  Accordingly, NIC has 
indicated requirement of funds to the tune of ` 1550 crore for 
the FY 2011 -12.  In this connection, a proposal for requirement 
of additional funds of ` 1300 crore for NKN has been submitted 
to the Planning Comm ission/Ministry of Finance for 
supplementary grants/Revised Estimates. 
 

 
 
Ministry of Finance after examining the additional requirement 
of funds for NKN Programme informed: “It would not be possible 
to give such a huge additionality during middle of the fin ancial 
year. However, looking at the pace of Plan expenditure, DIT may 
like to identify likely savings within the grant for giving 
additional funds to NKN.” Accordingly, a proposal is being 
submitted to MoF for enhancement of allocation in respect of 
NKN t hrough the 2 nd Batch of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
17. The Committee express  their unhappiness over the way their 
recommendation relating to providing allocations for National 
Knowledge Network at the Budget Estimate stag e itself has been 
addressed by the Department.  Instead of ending the adhocism in 
allocating outlay for such an important programme, the Ministry of 
Finance   on the issue of additional requirement of funds for NKN has 
requested DIT to identify  likely savings within the grant for giving 
additional funds to NKN.  The Committee observe  that the approach 
of the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission do es not seem to 
give importance to the programme  rather it indicates more adhocism 
on the issue of providing allocations.  The Committee may again like 
to emphasize that the National Knowledge Network is a backbone for 
e-Governance and the issue of providing adequate resources should 
be addressed urgently.  Besides, as suggested by the Committee, the 
specific allocation should be earmarked at the Budget Estimate stage 
itself so as to have certainty of allocations which is utmost necessary 
for the effective implementation of NKN programme.  

 
 
V. SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY   PARK    OF   INDIA (STPI)/ 
ELECTRONICS HARDWARE TECHNOLOGY PARKS (EHTP) 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 16 & 17) 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee have repetitively been recommending to 
further extend the tax holiday made available to STPI units. In 
spite of Department of Informatio n Technology taking the issue 
of providing the physical benefit to the IT units under STPI 
scheme at par with the units under the SEZ scheme with the 
Ministry of Finance, the tax holiday has been withdrawn from 1 
April, 2011.  The Department has acknowledg ed the adverse 
impact on ending tax holiday available to STPI units.  Not only 
that, the Department has stated that an increase in Minimum 
Alternate Tax (MAT) would adversely affect small and medium 
size players.  With regard to the strategy of the Departm ent to 
tackle the situation, the Committee have been informed that a 
non-profit link incentive scheme for STPI registered units is 
being prepared.  Besides, the present induction programme of 
STPI units would be further strengthened for business incubation 
and entrepreneurial development for start up units.  Besides, 
STPI is working with DIT for establishment of a National 
Productivity Network.  The Committee understand that all these 
initiatives are in the right direction and need to be continued. “ 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
“The Committee further observe that STPI was established on 5 
June, 1991 for promotion of exports and providing facility to 
Indian small and medium organizations for participation in 
export promotion events in the software and electroni c sector.  
Today, the exports by STPI registered units are more than 90 per 
cent of the total software exports from the country from a 
meagre less than 8 per cent when it started in 1991.  STPI has 
been set up in 52 centres spread across the country out of which 
45 centres are in Tier -II and Tier -III locations. During the year 
2010-11 for the period April to December for which the data has 
been made available by the Department, the declining impact 
on exports seems to be more visible.  Against the export of  ` 
205505 crore during the year 2009 -10, the export performance 
is reduced to ` 144157 crore, during the year 2010 -11.  More 
adverse impact seems to be on new STPI units registration.  The 
number of registration were 521 during 2009 -10 which declined 
to just 253 during the year 2010-11 up to December.  Now when 
the tax holiday has been withdrawn w.e.f. 1 April, 2011 and MAT 
has been increased the decline in performance of STPI units may 
further be more visible.  The Committee as such strongly 
recommend the Department to keep a vigilant watch on the 
performance of STPI units.  All the proposed initiatives visualized 
by the Department to fill the gap should be taken expeditiously.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 

 
 
19. The Department in the Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as 
under:- 
 
“Action is being taken by this Department for preparation of 
proposed non-profit linked incentive scheme especially for Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).”  
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 16) 
 
“The export figure of ` 144157 crore s, as mentioned above, is 
for the period April 2010 to December, 2010.  However, the total 
exports by STP units for the Financial Year 2010 -2011 (April, 
2010 to March, 2011) is ` 207376 crores, as compared to ` 
205505 crores for the Financial Year 2009-2010.  Thus, there is a 
marginal increase in the export by STP units.  The performance 
of STP units is being reviewed too.  The proposed initiatives as 
mentioned in the Recommendation No. 16 are expected to 
improve the competitive edge of STP units especially  SMEs and 
increase the export performance.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
20. With regard to the st rategy of the Department to tackle the 
situation emerging out of withdrawal of t ax holiday from STPI from  
1 April, 2011  and increase in M inimum Alternate Tax (MAT) , the 
Committee during the course of deliberations on Demands for Grants 
had been informed about the following three proposed initiatives :- 
(i) Preparation of non-profit link incentive scheme for STPI 
registered uni ts  (ii) Strengthening of the present induction 
programme of STPI units for business incubation and entrepreneurial 
development for startup units, and (iii) Establishment of a National 
Productivity Network by STPI in association with DIT. The Committee 
as such had emphasized to take the aforesaid initiative s 
expeditiously. 
It seems from the analysis of the action taken notes that the 
Department is taking up the issue as given at (i) above.  In respect of 
action taken on the remaining two proposals the action taken note is 

 
 
completely silent, although in response to another recommen dation 
made in Twenty -third R eport it has been acknowledged that the 
proposed initiatives are expected to improve the competitive edge of 
STP units, especially SMEs and increase the export performance.  The 
Committee would again like to emphasize that the adverse effect s of 
the withdrawal of tax holiday for STPI and increase in MAT need to 
be kept a vigilant watch.  Besides, certain initiatives need to be taken 
to counter the aforesa id adverse effects on STPI.  Keeping in view 
the urgency of the situation , the Department should ensure that the 
aforesaid three proposed  initiatives are given utmost importan ce.  
The concrete initiatives taken in this regard should be apprised to the 
Committee. 
VI. CYBER SECURITY (INCLUDING CERT-IN, IT ACT, CCA)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee  have been informed that a total of 106, 201 and 
315 Government websites were hacked during the years 20 08, 
2009 and 2010 respectively and these attacks were directed from 
the countries like USA, UK, Mexico, Spain, Brazil, Turkey, Iran, 
Pakistan, China, Lebanon, Peru, Morocco, Japan, Korea, Saudi 
Arabia, Algeria, Nigeria etc. Further, with regard to the cyber crime 
cases registered, the Committee have been provided information, 
analysing which it is found that in States like Haryana, Bihar, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, D&N Haveli, Daman & 
Diu, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, there are no cyber crimes 
registered.  The analysis of the data further reveal that in 
Karnataka that too only in Bangaluru highest number of cases of 
hacking during 2009 were registered.  The Committee have further 
noted that the Department of National Crime Records Bureau is not 
maintaining data regarding disposal status of the registered cyber 
crime cases.  The data State/UT wise with regard to hacking in the 
country during the year 2009 as provided by the Department do  
not seem to be realistic.  The Committee feel that either the 
attacks on the sites are not being reported or the system with 
regard to reporting of the cases is not user friendly.  There is an 
urgent need to make the people aware of the system of reportin g 
of cyber attacks.  Besides, equally important is to maintain the 
data with regard to disposal status of the registered cyber crime 

 
 
cases.  The Department should take the desired initiatives and the 
Committee apprised accordingly.”   
 
22. The Department in the Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The system of reporting the cyber attacks involves reporting of 
cyber attacks as cyber incidents and reporting of cyber attacks as 
cyber crime.  As far as reporting of cyber attacks as cyber incide nt, 
it is facilitated by CERT -In through its 24.x7 help desk mechanism 
involving toll free telephone and fax Nos. as well as e -mail.  In 
addition, detailed information regarding the format for reporting the 
incident is also available to the public.  This a spect has been 
described in sufficient detail on CERT -in website at www.cert -
in.org.in.  Besides this, the system of reporting cyber incident is 
also informed to the users during all trainings/seminars/workshops 
and other mass contact programmes conducted by CERT -In.  
Further, the Crisis Management Programme published by DIT 
identifies the nature of incidents that need to be reported to CERT -
In along with the necessary format and procedures.” 
 
With regard to reporting of cyber attacks as cyber crimes, the 
present system involves reporting with the cyber crime cells of law 
enforcement agencies across the country.  In this connection, DIT 
has written to MHA requesting them to take some urgent steps to 
increase the awareness among people regarding the mechanism  of 
reporting cyber crime cases with the cyber crime cells of law 
enforcement agencies.  In addition, MHA has also been requested 
to advise the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) to maintain 
data with regard to disposal status of registered cyber crime 
cases.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
23. The Department in the action taken note has not addressed to 
the part recommendation of the Committee whereby the Department 
was exhorted to maintain the data with regard to disposal status of 
the registered cyber cri me cases.  The Committee may again like to 
emphasize that besides maintaining State/UT wise data with regard 
to registering of cyber crime cases , it is utmost necessary to 
maintain the status of their disposal so as to understand the efficacy 
of the adjudication process.  While reiterating the earlier 
recommendation, the Committee would like the Department to 
instruct the concerned authorities/State Governments to maintain 
the data in this regard.  Besides, the data should also be periodically 
updated.  The  requisite information in this regard should be 

 
 
monitored by the Union Department of Information Technology and 
the Committee be kept apprised. 
VII. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT (INCL. SKILL DEVELOPMENT IN IT) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that the Department has proposed a new 
Scheme called Skill Development in IT for the year 2010 -11. The 
National Skill Development Policy has set a target of providing 
skill development i n IT to 500 million persons by 2022. In this 
regard, DIT has been given a target of skill development of 10 
million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT.  During the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous 
year, the Committee had been informed that the Department 
has initiated action to work out detailed project report covering 
various implementation aspects, inputs required to seek an 
approval of the competent authority.  Since the preliminary 
exercise of approval of the scheme was goi ng on, during the 
year 2010 -11, a token provision of  `1 crore was made for the 
aforesaid programme.  The Committee find from the information 
furnished by the Department that after passage of one year 
there is not much progress.  The Scheme has not been for mally 
launched and again in the year 2011 -12, a token provision of  `1 
crore has been made available for the scheme.  As regard the 
status of the scheme, the draft detailed project reports along 
with draft EFC Note has been circulated to the 
Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments.  After 
obtaining the recommendation of EFC, the proposal would be 
submitted to the Cabinet for obtaining approval for 
implementation of the programme. The Committee express 
serious concern over the tardy progress of ge tting approval for 
such an important scheme.  The Committee fail to understand 
how the allocation of `460 crore during the year 2010 -11 and of 
`717.75 crore for the year 2011 -12 was proposed by the 
Department even when the scheme is in the process of 
formulation.  More over the Committee wonder how the 
Department would meet the target of Skill Development of 10 
million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT with the aforesaid 
status of the scheme.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
all the consultations should be completed and the process of 
approval of the scheme expedited so that the scheme is 
implemented during the year 2011-12.  The required allocations 
when the approvals are in place may be provided at the RE 
stage/Supplementary Grant stage. The Comm ittee further 
observe that capacity building of SC/ST and women so as to 
enable them to compete in this competitive environment is the 
biggest challenge.  In view of this, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that while finalizing the modalities of the pr ogramme 
it should be ensured that SC/ST and women are adequately 
benefitted by the programme.” 

 
 
25. The Department in the Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“To meet the target of 10 million people to be trained in IT 
sector by 2022, the Department has prepared the draft Detailed 
Project Reports  (DPRs)/EFC Memo entitled “DIT‟s initiatives for 
Skill Development in IECT Sector”. The proposal has the 
following three components: 
 
(a) To train about one crore people in various IECT areas at 
different levels  ranging from foundation level to PG level 
courses in different verticals  by DOEACC Society. 
 
 
(b) To train about 7 lakh people in high -end niche areas of 
IECT by CDAC Society. 
 
 
(c) Setting up of an ICT academy in each State/Union 
Territory across the  country on PPP mode. These IT 
Academies along with the respective  State Governments 
and industry associations would upgrade the  faculty in 
the colleges of tier-II/tier-II cities in various niche areas of IECT 
Sector. The trained faculty would in turn help  towards 
enhancing  the quality of the students graduating from various 
colleges. 
 
Under the above mentioned proposal, it is envisaged that up to 
50% of the total target to be skilled through internal capacities 
of DOEACC and CDAC would comprise of the dis advantaged 
segment of the population which inter -alia includes Scheduled 
Caste, Scheduled Tribes and women.  
 
The draft EFC memo along with DPRs were circulated to various 
Ministries/Departments concerned for their 
comments/suggestions. Comments have been received from 
some Ministries. Further, detailed presentations were made to 
the Member Secretary, Planning Commission and Hon‟ble , MoS 
(Planning). The formal comments of the Planning Commission on 
the draft EFC Memo are awaited.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
26. Expressing their displeasure over the tardy progress in 
launching of the Scheme of „Skill Development in I T‟, the Committee 
had recommended t o complete all consultation s and the approval 
process so that the scheme is ready for implementation during 2011-
12. The Department, in this regard, has informed the Committee that 
formal comments of the Planning Commission on the draft EFC Memo 
are awaited. Keeping in view the fact that IT is an emerging sector 
and skill development in IT needs to be given urg ent attention, the 

 
 
Committee strongly recommend to fast track the process of 
consultations and approvals so that the Scheme is finally launched 
expeditiously. Besides the Committee would also like the Department 
to assess the require ment of fund for the pr oject and take up the 
issue of adequate allocation with the Ministry of Finance before the 
launch of the project so that there is no delay in implementation of 
the Scheme once it is launched. 
 
VIII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
CENTRE FOR DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCED COMPUTING               
(C-DAC) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“C-DAC, a premier R&D organisation in IT, Electronics and 
associated areas, has been witnessing attrition of manpower for 
the past few years. T he Committee while examining DFG (2009 -
10) had learnt that the issue of performance incentive was taken 
up by the Department with the Ministry of Finance to check the 
attrition rate. However, when asked about  the progress made in 
Performance Incentive Issu e, the Committee learnt that t he 
proposal for service conditions including various beneficial 
schemes, which may be applicable to all the Societies under 
administrative control of DIT including C -DAC, is under active 
consideration. The Committee exhort DIT  to pursue the issue 
with the Ministry of Finance and take the decision expeditiously.  
 
28. The Department in the Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“A proposal on the subject was referred to Ministry of Finance 
way back in 2002. Ministry  of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure had informed “(i) The need for incentive may be 
considered only in case of those societies which are functioning 
in a highly competitive environment and which are sustaining 
their operations exclusively on their own s urpluses without any 
Government grant whatsoever either for capital expenditure or 
for day to day revenue expenditure including salary 
expenditure. The surplus in these cases may be worked out after 
making provisions for dividend/interest payment to the GOI, as a 
promoter of these organizations and having provided for initial 
corpus. (ii) In rest of the Societies, no incentive may be paid and 
the question of ex-gratia to employees equivalent to Group „A‟ & 
„B‟ gazetted officers of the GOI would not arise an d question of 
ex-gratia for employees equivalent to Group „B‟ non -gazetted 
and Group „C‟ and „D‟  of the Central Government may be 
separately taken up with this Ministry. (iii) The Department of 
Information Technology are advised to ascertain the position in 
case of similarly placed scientific autonomous institutions under 

 
 
the CSIR, ICAR, Department of Education (IIT, IIM), etc as to 
whether any incentive payment is admissible in these 
autonomous organizations. (iv) The result of review of these 14 
autonomous bodies on the basis of the recommendations of the 
ERC may also be indicated. (v) While following the advice of this 
Department, the Department of Information Technology are 
requested to consult FA(DIT) also.” 
 
In view of the above instructions of the Mi nistry of Finance, a 
fresh proposal is being prepared by C -DAC and on the receipt of 
the same, the matter would be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure, once again.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
29. The Committee note from the action taken note that a proposal 
on the issue of performance incentive to the employees of C-DAC was 
referred to the Ministry of Finance way back in 2002.  The Ministry of 
Finance, Department of expenditure  had raised certain 
queries/clarifications and the Department of Information Technology 
was requested to consult FA (DIT) also.  When the issue was raised 
during the course of examination of Demands for Grants, the 
Committee had been apprised that the proposal for service 
conditions including various beneficia l schemes, which may be 
applicable to all the Societies under administrative control of DIT 
including C-DAC, is under active consideration.  Now, after passage 
of more than three months, the Committee through the action taken 
note of the Department have been apprised that a fresh proposal in 
this regard is being prepared by C -DAC.  The Committee have 
consistently been exhorting the Department to address the issue of 
attrition of manpower in C -DAC in their reports.  In spite of that the 
aforesaid position as informed by the Department indicates that 
urgency has not so far been accorded to the issue.  While expressing 
serious concern over the way such an important issue concerning  
the performance of the R&D organizations has been addressed by the 

 
 
Department, the Committee strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and exhort the Department to finalize the scheme 
of incentives in consultation with the Ministry of Finance at the 
earliest so that attrition rate in C-DAC is checked.   
***** 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Information, Communication Technology and Electronics (ICTE), the world‟s 
largest and fastest growing industry is increasingly finding applications in al l sectors of 
the economy and is a key growth driver for the Indian economy. As a part of the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, the Department of Information 
Technology (DIT) is responsible for formulation and implementation of national  policies 
in the Information Technology sector. The domain of the Department includes all 
matters relating to silicon facility, computer based information technology and 
processing including hardware and software, standardisation of procedures and matters 
relating to international bodies, promotion of knowledge based enterprises, internet, e -
commerce and information technology education and development of electronics and 
coordination amongst their various users are also addressed by the Department. In 
order to operationalise all the policies and objectives of the Department various 
Schemes are formulated and implemented either directly by the Department or through 
the organizations/institutions under its jurisdiction. Myriad aspects of the policies/plan 
schemes and issues related to the allocation and utilisation of fund allocated to the 
Department have been dealt upon in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Esteemed views of the Committee have been noted please. 
 
(Ministry of Communica tions & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
Statement of the Minister under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker 
 
 The Seventh Rep ort of the Committee, on „Demands for Grants (2010 -11)‟, was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21 and 22 April, 2010 
respectively. Under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister 
concerned shall make once in six months a statement in the House regarding the status 
of implementation of recommendations contained in the Report of Departmentally 
Related Standing Committees with regard to his Ministry.  In the present case, the 
Minister has not made a statement alt hough more than one year has passed since the 
report was presented to the House.  The Committee strongly recommend that the 
statement in this regard should be made expeditiously to the House in pursuance of the 
aforesaid Direction.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The statements could not be made by the Minister in the Winter Session 2010 
and Budget Session 2011 due to early sine -die/adjournment of these Sessions of the 
Parliament. An O.M. dated 19.07.2011 stating the reasons for delay in making the 
statement in the Parliament had also been forwarded to the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
(Standing Committee on Information Technology Branch). However, MOS(P) has made 
the desired statements in the Rajya Sabha on 26.08.2011 and in the Lok Sabha on 
06.09.2011. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
DIT Budget 
Eleventh Plan Outlay and Utilisation 
 
 The data furnished by the De partment indicates that out of the proposed 
allocation of ` 21835.89 crore, the budgetary support provided to the Department for 
the Eleventh Plan period was for ` 12496 crore.  The allocations under Budget Estimate 
Stage during the five years of Plan Period have been made for ` 11370 crore which were 
reduced to ` 8018.40 crore at Revised Estimate stage.  The actual expenditure up to 31 
March, 2011 i.e. during the first four years of Eleventh Plan is ` 7462.07 crore which 
comes to 59.71 per cent of the tota l allocation of the Department for the Eleventh Plan. 
If the level of expenditure during the first four years of Eleventh Plan is compared to the 
total proposed allocation of the Department it comes to just 34.17 per cent.   
  
During the year 2010-11, the allocation made at Budget Estimate stage was for ` 
2660 crore which was enhanced to ` 3468.40 crore at RE stage.  The Department could 
spend only ` 3024.01 crore.  Thus, the underspending is to the tune of ` 444.39 crore.  
While justifying the gaps between  the proposed outlay and allocations approved, the 
Department has stated that such gaps are due to less allocations for the schemes viz. 
National Knowledge Network (NKN), Skill Development in IT, Promotion of Electronics/IT 
Hardware Manufacturing and e-Governance.  
  
The Committee note that the Department itself is responsible for cut in allocation 
at RE stage during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan for various schemes.  The 
allocations made at BE stage were not fully utilized resulting into cut a t RE stage.  The 
Department itself has acknowledged that the Ministry of Finance decides the RE 
provision with reference to the expenditure met during first two quarters of the 
corresponding financial year.  During the year 2010-11 even when the allocations made 
available at BE stage were enhanced at RE stage, the Department do not seem to have 
spent the allocations fully resulting into under spending to the tune of ` 444.39 crore as 
stated above.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department need t o gear 
up its machinery to implement the various programmes effectively with effective 
monitoring mechanism.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The allocations in BE 2010 -11 have been enhanced at RE stage, due to 
augmentation of the provision of NKN Prog ramme. The total allocation for NKN 
programme including the additional allocation has been spent during 2010 -11. 
However, the under spending of about `450 crore was due to non -release of grants 
under various programmes, especially e -Governance Programme in view of non-receipt 
of utilization certificates, non -release of State share, etc. The following steps are being 
taken for effective monitoring of implementation of various schemes/programmes: 
 
 The Department of Information Technology (DIT) being a Scienti fic Dept and 
mandated for development and promotion of information technology throughout 
the country, it undertakes a large number of R&D projects and provides financial 
support to various implementing agencies viz. autonomous societies/R&D 
institutions/universities etc. for implementation of the projects, and to ensure 
that the projects/programmes become “outcome oriented” the EFC/SFC formats 
include the “outcome para” in the memorandum.   
 The projects, which are funded by this Department, are first consid ered in terms 
of its relevance by the Working Group which is composed of national level 
experts in the different areas.  Once it is recommended by the Working Group, 
the same is considered for appraisal through the Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC)/Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) route.    
 To ensure that the programmes are implemented in right direction Project 
Review & Steering Group (PRSG) is constituted for each of the project to review 

 
 
the progress and utilization of funds released.  The PRSG examines the utilization 
of funds released for the intended purpose with the desired outcomes to the 
project, utilization of physical assets and manpower and suggests to improve 
project management and programme implementation.  On reviewing the 
progress/achievements of the project the PRSG recommends for the next 
installment of grant. The second and the subsequent installments of grant is 
released by the Department only after obtaining the utilization certificate of 
earlier release. This mechanism is working well and is putting emphasis on 
“outcome”.  
 
Besides the above, zero-based budgeting is being stringently followed and review 
of all the programmes being undertaken for the 12th Five-Year Plan. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department o f Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Department has enumerated various reasons for the under spending during 
first three years of the Eleventh Plan which include non -release of State share by the 
State Governments, obtaining approvals of the competent authority for NKN programme 
and non -receipt of utilization certificates from State/implementing agencies.  With 
regard to non -release of State share by the State Governments un der e -Governance 
programme, the Department need to take proactive action and coordinate with the 
State Governments.  In respect of obtaining approval of the competent authority for 
implementation of NKN Programme, again there seems to be procedural hurdles  for 
which the Department itself is responsible. The issue of non -receipt of utilization 
certificates from State implementing agencies is continuously being highlighted in the 
various reports of the Committee.  The Committee may like to stress here that IT  is an 
emerging sector and very important schemes are being visualized/implemented.  As 
such, there is an urgent need to address to the various bottlenecks being faced in 
implementation of various schemes.  The Committee recommend that a review of all 
the schemes/projects should be taken well before finalization of priorities and objectives 
of the forthcoming Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Committee hope that zero based 
budgeting would be stringently followed which would help in making realistic projections 
and ensuring proper utilization of funds. The concrete action on the suggested lines 
should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 During the formulation of 12 th Five-Year Plan, review/justification of all Plan  
schemes of DIT will be undertaken and zero -based budgeting would be stringently 
followed. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget (Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Position of IEBR of the societies/offices under the jurisdiction of DIT 
 
 Apart from the Plan Outlay of ` 3000 crore, the Department has shown a sum of ` 
619.07 crore as IEBR to be generated by the societies/offices under them through th eir 
R&D programmes/activities during the year 2011 -12. The Committee note that, barring 
the year 2008-09 and 2009-10, the actual IEBR is found to be lesser than the approved. 
Hence, the Committee recommend the Department to stick to their targets of IEBR 
generation.  
 

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
  
DIT is hopeful that the targets of IEBR generation for the year 2011 -12 would be 
achieved. All the Societies under the Department in respect of which IEBR targets are 
fixed have been requested to generate IEBR by sticking to the targets for that purpose. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Department has informe d that impact assessment of e -Governance project 
both at State as well as national level is undertaken.  The Department in the written 
replies has furnished a comparative chart of States having impact of various services 
made available through e-Governance. The important parameter of its impact has been 
given as „percentage users paying bribes‟.  It has been shown that the bribe has 
declined from average of 39 per cent to 23 per cent under Land Records (issue of RoR, 
mutation).  Under Property Registration,  it has been mentioned that 23 per cent of all 
transactions in 11 States reported payment of bribe.  Under Transport it has been 
mentioned that only 1 State reported significant impact on bribe.  In the Commercial 
Taxes, it has been mentioned that the brib e has significantly been lesser. Not only that 
the aforesaid data indicates that there has been considerable reduction in the average 
number of trips for availing services, average waiting time and total elapsed time in 
availing services.  The aforesaid fi ndings clearly indicates the usefulness of National e -
Governance Programme for the masses.  More so, recent series of scams reported 
under different fields further highlight the importance of National e -Governance 
Programme which would make the various ser vices of Government more transparent 
and accountable.  As such there is an urgent need to make the various components of 
e-Governance Programme functional by addressing the various issues as indicated 
above.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The recommendations made by the Committee are noted. The Department would 
like to highlight the steps which are being taken to make the various components of e -
Governance Programme functional:- 
 
 To speed up the process of enabling electronic delivery of public servic es to 
the citizens and for overcoming issues like resistance to change, systemic 
inertia, procedural hurdles, lack of transparency and legal impediments which 
hinder electronic delivery of services, it is proposed to enact the Electronic 
Delivery of Services (EDS) Act which would mandate provisioning of all public 
services compulsorily through electronic means from a specified date. The 
Draft Bill has been finalized and Note for the Cabinet is being finalized after 
getting comments of all the Ministries / Departments and State Governments. 
 To ensure sharing of information and seamless interoperability of data and e -
Governance applications under NeGP, standards have been released in the 
areas of Open Standards, Biometrics, Metadata & data, Localization and 
Language Technology, Network and Information Security etc. 
 Considering the tremendous potential of mobile phones to expand the access 
to and reach of public services in India, an initiative has been taken to create 
a Mobile Service Delivery Gateway (MSDG) th at will utilize the existing e -
Governance infrastructure for delivery of services. 
 DIT is in the process of formulating model RFPs along with toolkits, guidelines 
and framework for preparing them to be used by Line Departments and State 
Governments to proc ure goods, consultancy services, works and managed 
services for e-Governance projects. 
 
 

 
 
 
 Adequate capacities in the Government at all levels are being created 
through the State e-Mission Project Teams (SeMTs). SeMTs have already been 
setup in 32 States / UTs. 
 
 
 In order to train and sensitize Government officials, a wide range of training 
programmes like Leadership Meets, Specialized Training for e -Governance  
Programme (STeP), CIO‟s Programme, Orientation workshops and other 
training modules  have been rolled out to up skill Govt officials at all levels. At 
political level, 78 Leadership Meets have been conducted in 18 States so far 
and other States are in the pipeline. Over 700 Govt. Officials have been 
trained under STeP Trainings. 
 
 
 A CIO plan is also b eing rolled out to strengthen and create a cadre of in -
house expert resources to lead and implement e -Governance in India at all 
levels of Government. 
 
 
 DIT is currently hosting 50 seminars on NeGP across the country. So far 6 
workshops have been hosted in  Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, Ranchi, 
Ahmedabad and Srinagar. The Chief Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries 
have participated in these workshops. These workshops are being used to 
share best practices and innovative e-Governance solutions from States. 
 
 
 50 case studies in e -Governance, which would be shared with all the States, 
are being prepared. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 

 
 
(Promotion of Electronics/IT hardware manufacturing 
 
  The Committee note with concern that, though Information Comm unication 
Technology and Electronics (ICTE) is increasingly finding applications in all sectors of 
the economy, yet Indian electronics hardware production hovers around 1.3 per cent of 
global electronics production. It is also disturbing to learn that the demand of 
electronics hardware in the country during 2009 -10 was ` 2,18,031 crore, out of which  
` 1,10,720 crore worth of demand was met by indigenous production and  ` 1,07,311 
crore was met by imports.  The analysis of the budgetary allocations made for  the 
sector indicates that allocation of ` 1100 crore was made for the promotion of 
electronics/IT hardware manufacturing during Eleventh Plan.  Against the allocation of ` 
1100 crore, the expenditure met so far is just ` 2.66 crore.  As per the Department , the 
allocations were made particularly for improving the capital subsidy requirement under 
Special Incentive Package Scheme (SIPS), and due to global economic slow down many 
of the potential investors deferred their investment decisions. The Committee al so note 
that it is due to  very high capital intensive nature of the project and closely -held 
technology, no company has come forward to set up a „fab‟ in India.  
  
The Committee have repetitively been emphasizing to have the concrete 
strategy for promotion of electronics and IT hardware manufacturing sector.  Inspite of 
the fact that more than 50 per cent of our hardware requirement are dependent upon 
imports, nothing concrete was done in this regard.  Not only that, the decisions on as 
many as 198 recommendations made by the Task Force were being delayed particularly 
when report was submitted on    11 December, 2009.  The Committee have been 
apprised during deliberations that at last some action is being taken on 5 high priority 
areas viz. fab, modified ch ips, preferential market access to domestically produced 
goods, research and development and setting up of National Electronics Mission.  The 
Secretary of the Department during the course of deliberations, held on 20 April, 2011, 
informed that the proposal  to set up an empowered group is going before the Cabinet 
that day i.e. on 20 April, 2011.  The Committee hope that the aforesaid proposal would 
have been cleared by now and the empowered group would be constituted 
expeditiously followed by concrete initia tives on the desired lines at last in respect of 
five identified high priority areas. Keeping in view the fact that importing chips and 
electronic equipments pose security threat, the Committee emphasize to take all the 
desired initiatives to attain the le vel of self -sufficiency in respect of electronics and IT 
hardware equipments.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
With reference to observation of the Committee that concrete strategy should be made 
for promotion of Electronics and IT hardware manufacturin g sector, a high level 
Committee comprising inter -alia Chairman, National Manufacturing Competitiveness 
Council (NMCC) and Adviser to Prime Minister on Public Information Infrastructure & 
Innovation and others deliberated on the issues relating to manufact ure of electronic 
hardware including telecom equipment. This Committee has made 5 key 
recommendations for promotion of electronics hardware manufacturing sector, which 
are under implementation. The present status of implementation is given below:   
 
S.No. Initiative Achievement 
1. To set up a 
National 
Electronics 
Mission (NEM) 
Draft Cabinet Note has been prepared 
and sent for Inter -Ministerial 
consultations. 

 
 
S.No. Initiative Achievement 
2. To set up two 
Semiconductor 
Wafer Fabs 
Empowered Committee (EC) has been 
set up for identifying  technology and 
investors for setting up two 
Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication 
(Fab) Manufacturing facilities after 
obtaining approval of Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 20.4.2011. An 
Expression of Interest (EOI) was 
published in national/international 
magazines / newspapers and 
websites. Leading companies were 
addressed. Indian embassies abroad 
have also been requested to follow up 
with potential investors. Some 
responses have been received and 
the same are being evaluated.  
3. To introduce 
Modified 
Special 
Incentive 
Package 
Scheme and 
setting up of 
Electronics 
Manufacturing 
Clusters 
-  Draft Cabinet Note has been 
prepared for introduction of Modified 
Special Incentive Package Scheme 
(M-SIPS). Action for Inter -Ministerial 
consultations is underway.  
 -  Draft Cabinet Note has been 
prepared for Electronics 
Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) 
Scheme. Action for Inter -Ministerial 
consultations is underway. 
4. To set up an 
Electronics 
Development 
Fund (EDF) to 
promote 
innovation, 
R&D, Indian IP 
and 
development 
of Indian  
Microprocessor 
Draft Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for setting up of Electronics 
Development Fund (EDF) is under 
finalization. 
5. To provide 
preferential 
access to 
domestically 
produced 
electronics 
products for 
government 
procurements 
(excluding 
defence) and 
procurement 
by Government 
Licensees, 
PSUs etc.  
Proposal was considered by the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) in its 
meeting held on 7.2.2011.  
As per COS decision, draft Cabinet 
Note has been prepared and Inter -
Ministerial consultations are at final 
stage. 
 

 
 
Additionally, following initiatives have also been taken for 
promotion of the sector: 
 
(i) Collaborating with State Governments: To engage the State 
Governments to proactively encourage investment in the sector, 
a meeting with Chief Ministers / Minist ers of States was held on 
29.8.2011. Twenty (20) State level Workshops have been 
proposed in partnership with Industry, States and other 
stakeholders.   
 
(ii)    With the objective to control the quality of electronics goods 
being manufactured in the count ry and restrict import of sub -
standard electronics goods, a draft Order proposing mandatory 
compliance of safety standards for 16 numbers of electronic 
items has been sent to Bureau of Indian Standards / Department 
of Consumer Affairs for approval. 
 
(iii) Communications and Brand Building Campaign with the 
objective to build “Made in India” as leading global brand in 
Electronics Systems Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) and 
increasing awareness regarding initiatives taken by Government 
to promote investments in ESDM sector has been launched. As 
part of this effort a LED Forum was jointly organized by DIT and 
LED Products Manufacturers‟ Association (LEDMA) in September 
2011 wherein efforts to encourage LED sector investments were 
made. State level Workshops are  also being carried out in 20 
States. College level Workshops in about 120 different colleges 
are proposed with the objective of encouraging young engineers 
to know about potential in ESDM sector and related career 
opportunities. A Communication Needs Asse ssment study 
through a professional agency is also proposed. 
 
(iv) Amendment of the Defence Offset Policy for enhancing its scope 
to include electronics products for meeting the offset obligation 
is also being pursued with the objective to promote electronics 
hardware manufacturing. 
(v) A roadmap to enable semiconductor design and services 
industry to move up the value chain and maintain growth rate of 
revenue of over 17% p.a. has been prepared. 
 
(vi) Preparation of roadmap to promote growth of electronics 
components industry. “ 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 With regard to e -fraud cases, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has reported online banking fraud worth ` 590.49 lakh in the year 2009 and 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has registered 6 cyber crime cases in which frauds 
have been committed causing financial loss of ` 2,70,650 to the Government/private 
persons. The Committee note that     e -fraud is an emerging field and with more and 
more private persons and Government Departments mak ing online transactions the 
scenario of e-fraud would become more challenging.  The Committee‟s examination has 
revealed that at present there is no mechanism to ensure against financial loss through 
e-fraud.  The Committee would like the Department to stu dy the e -fraud scenario 
internationally.  The data of e -fraud should be collected and furnished to the 
Committee.  Besides, the mechanism to deal with e -fraud in other countries should also 

 
 
be analyzed.  The Department should find out the insurance mechanism against e-fraud 
in other countries so that some mechanism in our country can be evolved.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
  Based on the preliminary study conducted by DIT, following is the synopsis of: 
a)  Study conducted on e-fraud internationally are at Annexure-VIII 
b)  Mechanism to deal with e-fraud in other countries is given at Annexure-IX 
c)  Insurance mechanism against e-fraud in other countries is given in Annexure-X 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee note that CERT -In has empanelled 51 IT auditors in the country 
through a stringent testing mechanism. The Committee further note that the 
Department has mandated for all critical sectors/organizations to implement 
Information Security best practices as per ISO 27001 and has advised to audit the 
system at least once in a year.  In this regard, the Committee would like to know 
whether these best security practices are being implemented and are sufficient enough 
to check cyber threats in all critical sectors.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised about the adequacy of 51 auditors in such a large country. Further, with regard 
to the practical  constraint and lacuna witnessed in the IT Act and about the sections 
which attracts most of the cases, the Department has stated that the IT Act is 
technology intensive and application motivated legislation and with the changing 
technologies they are faci ng several challenges such as collection of digital evidence, 
attribution of attacks to particular systems, anonymous and borderless nature of cyber 
space etc. To meet these challenges the Department is providing training on Cyber 
Security, Best Practices, Cyber Forensics to people at different levels, i.e. general public, 
law enforcement agencies and judicial officers. In this context, the Committee feel that 
besides emphasis on training to law enforcement agencies and judicial officers, 
attention need to be provided to other categories of officers too.  There is an urgent 
need to increase the training infrastructure and the number of trainers in the country so 
that sufficient awareness about cyber security is generated which would be definitely 
helpful in preventing the cyber attacks on our websites.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Critical sectors/organizations are making efforts to implement information 
security best practices as per ISO 27001 standard. Implementation of security best 
practices provides a good base line for effective security and vigilant mechanism to deal 
with the security issues proactively.  Specific implementation of security best practices 
enables the following:- 
 
a) Interoperability: Systems from diverse parties are more likely to f it 
together if they follow a common guideline 
b) Assurance: Management can be assured of the quality of a system, 
business unit, or other entity, if a recognized framework or approach is 
followed. 
c) Due Diligence: Compliance with, or certification against inter national 
standard is often used by management to demonstrate due diligence. 
d) Bench Marking: Organisations often use a standard as a measure of their 
status within their peer community.  It can be used as a bench mark for 
current position and progress. 
e) Awareness: Implementation of a standard such as ISO 27001 results in 
greater security awareness within an organization. 
 

 
 
Empanelment of auditors by CERT -In is an open process available to all 
competent and qualified auditors in the country.  Auditing is a comme rcial activity and 
as such the empanelment of auditors gets determined by the demand for audits as well 
as the ability of auditors to qualify through the CERT -In‟s empanelment process.  With 
the mandate of security best practices in place for critical sect or organizations, it is 
expected that more number of auditors will seek empanelment and also the existing 
auditors would seek to expand their auditing strength to cater to the growing needs. 
 
The information security assurance project being implemented by DIT focuses on 
creation of master trainers, establishment of training infrastructure and facilities as well 
as the training of other officers of Govt. besides enhancing the cyber security education 
and awareness among general users in the country through f ormal and informal 
educational programmes as well as promotional material.  A snap shot of programme is 
enclosed at Annexure XI. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
Department of Electronics Accreditation for Computer Courses (DOEACC) 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that inspite of receiving the proposed 
allocation and utilizing the entire amount, DOEACC so ciety has fallen short in all the 
targets for the year 2010 -11 except for the formal sector long term courses. The 
Committee have been informed that the targets in case of non -formal and short -term 
courses could not be achieved as it depends on the growth of the industry and the 
market requirements.  While appreciating the aforesaid reason which may have resulted 
in under -achievement of the physical target, the Committee fail to understand the 
mismatch between the financial and physical achievements. The Co mmittee would like 
the Department to furnish the reasons for the aforesaid mismatch.  Besides, when the 
economy now is coming out of the recent slow down, the Committee hope that more 
and more students and trainees may be benefited by the DOEACC programme.   
Moreover, the Committee understand that DOEACC is playing an important role in 
implementation of one of the important programmes of the Department i.e. Skill 
Development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT.  The Committee 
recommend that a ll the initiatives should be taken by DOEACC for the successful 
implementation of the aforesaid programme so that the targets set under the 
programme are fully achieved. The Committee would also like to recommend the 
Department to ensure that SC/ST and wom en are adequately benefitted by DOEACC 
courses which would definitely help them to compete in the highly competitive job 
market. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
DOEACC Society conducts its O/A/B/C level examinations twice a year in the 
month of July & Jan uary.  During 2010-11, a total of 43,369 candidates have registered 
for the O/A/B/C level examinations. A total of 11,238 candidates have fully qualified in 
the O/A/B/C level Examination during the financial year 2010-11. 
 
The proposed allocation of funds and subsequent utilisation was mainly meant 
for augmentation/ renewal and replacement of the equipments and facilities at DOEACC 
Centres for offering long term formal courses, where the target has been achieved.   
 
DOEACC Society is already providing follo wing special benefits to SC/ST & 
Women candidates to attract them to undergo DOEACC courses so as improve their 
skills and employability. 
 

 
 
 No tuition fee/exam fee is being charged from the SC/ST candidates in 
DOEACC Society‟s own Centres across the country. During 2010-11, a total 
of 1811 students have been benefitted under this scheme. 
 
 DOEACC provides scholarships to meritorious SC/ST/Women and Physically 
Handicapped students of O/A/B/C level. During 2010 -11, a total of 626 
students were provided scholarship under this scheme.  
 
 DOEACC provides full refund of examination fee to the SC/ST candidates 
after qualifying all the papers of a particular level of DOEACC O/A/B/C 
scheme.   
 
 To increase the turn -out of students in DOEACC O/A/B/C level & other 
courses, especially of candidates belonging to SC/ST category, an 
advertisement was published during June, 2011 highlighting special 
benefits to SC/ST candidates.  From time to time, DOEACC Centres also 
publish advertisements highlighting the benefits offered to S C/ST/Women 
candidates.  
 
To achieve the targets set under the Skill Development initiatives in IECT Sector, 
an integrated approach is proposed to be adopted by setting up more DOEACC Centres, 
increasing the number of accredited institutes and exploring various delivery models so 
as to provide training at various locations across the country.   It is also envisaged to 
train up to 50% of the internal capacity from the disadvantaged section of the society 
which inter -alia includes candidates belonging to SC/ST  and Women, on free of cost 
basis. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 25 & 26) 
 
IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) 
 
 The Committee note that ` 156 crore were allocated for the entire Eleventh Five 
Year Plan under one of the important scheme of the Department i.e. IT for masses 
(Gender, SC/ST) meant for the capacity building of women and SC/ST through 
infrastructure development, training of target groups in different States/UTs.  From the 
data made available by the Department, the Committee note that during first four years 
of Eleventh Plan only ` 41.46 crore could be spent which is only 26.57 per cent of the 
entire allocation of the scheme.  As regards the physical target, the Committee have 
been informed that 2.5 lakh women and 30 thousand SCs/STs are being benefited under 
the programme.  The Committee during the course of deliberations have further been 
informed that the scheme was being implemented on a pilot basis in 10 different States 
selected randomly where the States have shown interest. The Committee note that the 
scheme has been launched with the laudable objectives.  However, the implementation 
of the programme  is very slow.  The beneficiaries under the Scheme that is 2.5 lakh 
women and 30 thousand SCs/STs is too low keeping in view the large number of SCs/STs 
and women in the country.  Not only that during the first four years of the plan, the 
scheme has been i mplemented only on pilot basis with very low utilization of outlay.  
The Committee strongly emphasize to extend the scheme throughout the country.  
Besides, more stress should be given to the backward States. 
 
 The Committee would like to emphasize that besides the aforesaid programme IT 
for masses (Gender, SC/ST), there is a need for a focused attention in other Schemes of 
the Department too, which include Centre for Development and Advanced Computing 
(C-DAC), Department of Electronics Accreditation for Co mputer Courses (DOEACC), 
National Knowledge Network (NKN), National Informatics Centre (NIC), Promotion of 

 
 
Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing (M.Fab), Cyber Security (including CERT -In, IT 
Act, CCA), Manpower Development (incl. Skill Development in IT) and National     e -
Governance Programme (NeGP) so as to provide adequate benefit to SC/ST and women.  
 
 The Committee further note that the Department has enumerated various 
challenges faced in implementation of the aforesaid scheme which include Low 
enrollment rate/High drop -out rate, Connectivity issues, Naxalite problem, Project 
Sustainability after completion and scaling down of the project due to financial 
constraints. The Committee fail to understand the need of the Department to scale 
down the project even when they could not utilize the allocation provided during various 
years.  During the year 2007 -08 RE allocation was made for ` 17 crore which could not 
be fully utilised. Although during the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 the allocations made 
available at RE stage were fully utilized, during the year 2010 -11, the allocation made 
for ` 14 crore was reduced at RE stage to ` 10.67 crore and actual expenditure as 
reported is just ` 2.77 crore.  More so for the Eleventh Plan ` 156 crore allocation was 
approved and only a fraction of the allocation could be utilised during the first five years 
as explained above. The Committee desire the Department to apprise the Committee on 
the reasons for scaling down the project due to financial constraints in the aforesaid  
scheme.  On the issue of low enrollment rate/high drop out rate, the Department need 
to take up the issue with HRD Ministry/State Governments to address the problem.  On 
project sustainability after completion, the Committee feel that the Department need to 
coordinate with the local bodies i.e. Panchayats/Municipalities.  On connectivity issues, 
the Department need to take up the issue with BSNL.  The Committee emphasize the 
Department to take all the desired initiatives to address the various challenges i n 
consultation with the State Governments and the other related agencies so that more 
women and SCs/STs masses are benefited by the programme.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
During the first four years of Eleventh Five Year Plan, the total Plan Allocat ion 
(GBS approved) for the scheme IT for Masses  is ` 39.00 Crore (BE) and ` 43.67 Crore 
(RE).  As against this, the actual expenditure is estimated to be ` 37.75 Crore, which 
amounts to 96.8% of Plan Allocation under BE and 86.4% of the Plan provision under RE 
for the Plan Scheme „IT for Masses‟.    
 
As regards physical progress under this Scheme, 51 projects have been initiated 
and implemented in 25 States/UTs. These projects have benefitted directly about 2.5 
lakh women and 30000 SC/ST.  Many women, SC/ST  have also benefited indirectly for 
these projects.  Projects have also been implemented in backward Districts/Areas.   
 
The suggestion of the Hon‟ble Committee is being noted to extend this scheme 
throughout the country to cover all the States/UTs and mor e thrust to be given to 
backward Districts/Areas.    
 
Besides the programme relating to IT for Masses, there are other schemes of DIT, 
which provide benefits to SC/ST and Women.   The names of these schemes are – 
 
- Electronic Governance 
- Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
- Department of Electronics Accreditation for Computer Courses (DOEACC) 
- National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
- Cyber Security (including CERT-IN, IT Act) 
- National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
- Manpower Development  
- Technology Development for Indian Languages (TDIL) 
 
As regards the challenges facing the project implementing agencies in various 
States/ UTs, the issues relating to low enrollment rate/High drop -out rate, poor 
connectivity and Naxalite problem have been adequately addressed b y implementing 

 
 
agencies in States/UTs. Wherever the issue of connectivity persists, Department will 
take up the matter with BSNL along with the implementing agencies.   
 
As regards project sustainability after project completion and its scale of 
operation, the project sponsoring/implementing authorities have always tried to 
optimize the project scale and outlay in consultation with the stakeholders.  Impact 
Evaluation Studies have also been carried out by third party on completion of the 
project inter-alia to assess the project sustainability and its impact.  The issues relating 
to financial constraints of projects have also been suitably addressed by the respective 
Project Review Steering Groups (PRSG) for the projects. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Inform ation Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6 & 7) 
 
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates 
 
 The Comm ittee have consistently been exhorting the Department to take 
concrete action to liquidate the pending Utilization Certificates/unspent balances with 
various States/implementing agencies.  As indicated in the Outcome Budget 2011 -12, 
total unspent balances with States/implementing agencies as on 31 December, 2010 is 
` 2534.87 crore and 1000 UCs are pending.  In respect of 569 UCs amounting to ` 
1840.36 crore, are not due as these would become due as on 1 April, 2011 and 1 April, 
2012.  Thus, 431 UCs amountin g to ` 694.51 crore are still pending with the 
States/implementing agencies.  Now when 1 April, 2011 has already passed, the 
number of UCs due may have increased considerably.     
 
 Another issue consistently being raised by the Committee in its various reports is 
the fact that some of the implementing agencies after taking one installment are 
neither furnishing UCs nor demanding the next installment.  In this context, as informed 
by the Department, there were 72 such agencies during the year 2010 -11 and with the 
consistent efforts made by the Department in pursuance of the recommendation of the 
Committee, the said number has decreased to 35 UCs amounting to ` 32.92 crore.  In 
this connection, the Committee would also like to be informed as to how the issue of 
non-furnishing of UCs in respect of the 37 defaulter agencies was addressed by the 
Department.   
 
 The Committee note that although there is some progress with regard to 
furnishing of UCs, there is an urgent need to have structured mechanism whereby the  
implementing agencies furnish the UCs regularly.  Stringent guidelines should be 
formulated whereby the accountability for not furnishing the UCs is fixed.  The 
Committee in this regard had strongly recommended in their Seventh Report to recover 
the money  from such implementing agencies who after getting the first installment 
neither demand the next installment nor furnish the UCs.  When the recommendation 
was reiterated in the Action Taken Report, the Department do not seem to have 
implemented the aforesa id recommendation of the Committee.  While reiterating the 
stand of the Committee in this regard, the Department is again exhorted to take 
stringent action against the defaulter agencies and recover the money from these 
implementing agencies.  The concrete action on the suggested line should be taken and 
the Committee informed accordingly.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The action taken by the Department are as given below:  
 
1. For speedy liquidation of pending UCs, each Group/HODs have been 
requested for  early liquidation and submission of UCs due as well as 
copies of UCs, which have already been forwarded and not yet updated in 
DIT UC Monitoring System. In coordination with PAO every effort has been 
made for getting the UCs updated in the UC Monitoring System.  
2. For On -going projects, before release of every subsequent installment, 
submission of pending UCs for the grants already released to the grantee 
agencies, even for other projects, are insisted upon. 
3. No proposal for release of funds (On going/n ew project) is considered in 
IFD without certification from the concerned Programme Division to the 

 
 
effect that the implementing agency/payee has no UC as `due for 
rendition‟ or that the payment has been authorized by D/o Expenditure as 
per recent instruction.  
4. Programme Divisions are also directed to take into account Unspent 
Balance + interest accrued thereon, while recommending/releasing the 
next installment. 
5. The coordinated effort of PAO, Programme Division and also IFD officials 
has resulted in t racking/obtaining a number of old pending UCs from the 
grantee agencies.  
6. All Group Coordinators were apprised with the observations of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee and were also requested for providing 
details for action taken/proposed to be taken by them relating to the 
recommendations of the Committee, specifically regarding action against 
defaulter agencies and recovery of money from these agencies/fixing of 
accountability for not furnishing the UCs. 
6.1 All Group Coordinators were also apprised with the provisions of GFR 
212(1) and GCs were asked to take appropriate action in r/o institutions 
not submitting UCs for more than 3 years and immediately in r/o 
institutions/organizations who have not furnished UCs after receiving first 
installment. Inf ormation regarding action initiated for fixing of 
accountability for not furnishing UCs/details of stringent action proposed 
to be taken against such agency for recovery of money, has also been 
called for. 
7. All these efforts have resulted in reducing the  number of pending 
Utilization Certificates. 
7.1 The position of pending UCs (for the sanctions issued upto March 2009) 
with regard to the recommendations contained in 23 rd Report of the 
Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) on Demand s 
for Grants (2011-12), is as under:  
 
As on No of pending UCs (Due 
as on 01.04.2010) 
Amount 
(` in crore) 
31.12.2010 431 694.51 
01.10.2011 326 600.07 
 
It may be seen from the above statement that a total of 105 UCs (due as 
on 01.04.2010) amounting to ` 94.44 Crores have been liquidated during a 
period of approximately 9 months.  
 
An updated statement showing pending UCs for the grant -in-aid 
sanctioned during the period from 01.04.2001 to 31.03.2009 is enclosed 
at Annexure I please. 
 
7.2. The position of unsp ent grants (for the sanctions issued upto 31.12.2010) 
with regard to the recommendations contained in 23 rd Report of the 
Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) on Demand s 
for Grants (2011-12), is as under:  
 
As on Total No. of UCs Amount  (` in crore) 
31.12.2010 1000 2534.87 
31.03.2011 1009 2057.14 
   
 
7.3 A statement as on 03.10.2011, showing 553 UCs amounting to ` 1007.48 
Crore (for the sanctions issued from 1.04.2001 to 31.03.2010) which are 
pending with implementing Agencies, is enclosed at Annexure II.  
 
8.  The Parliamentary Standing Committee in its 23 rd report on Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) pointed out that there were 72 agencies during the year 

 
 
2010-11 and with the constant efforts of the Department, the number has 
decreased to 35 UCs amounting to ` 32.92 Crore.  
 
8.1 As part of the implementation of recommendations of Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, all the Group Coordinators were apprised with the 
names of the implementing agencies which have been sanctioned grants 
in single ins tallment and no Utilization Certificate was received. The 
coordinated effort of IFD and Progamme Divisions resulted in reducing the 
number of such UCs.  
8.2 A statement showing comparison of such agencies i.e. as on 31.12.2010 
and as on 03.10.2011, is placed at Annexure III please.   
 
8.3      It may be seen from the statement at Annexure III that as on 03.10.2011,  
only 34 UCs (single installment) for ` 32.78 crores are pending as 
compared to 72 UCs amounting to ` 46.95 crores as on 31.12.2010. It 
would mean that an amount of ` 14.17 crore has been liquidated. 
 
9. The status of unspent grants as on 03.10.2011 for the sanctioned issued 
from 01.04.2010 to 30.09.2011 is given as under (Detailed statement is 
also enclosed at  Annexure IV): 
 
Period during which sanctions 
were issued 
Amount Unspent 
Balance (` in crore) 
Number of 
pending UCs 
01.04.2001 to 31.03.2010 1007.48 553 
01.04.2010 to 31.03.2011* 1102.48 447 
01.04.2011 to 30.09.2011** 394.23 136 
Total 2504.19 1136 
 
*   The Utilization Certificate for th e  sanctions issued during the period from 
01.04.2010 to 31.03.2011 would only become due on 01.04.2012.   
**   The Utilization Certificate for the  sanctions issued during the period from 
01.04.2011 to 30.09.2011 would only become due  on 01.04.2013.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
National e-Governance Programme (NEGP) 
 
 The Committee observe that NeGP is one of the flagship programme of the 
Department for which substantial part of the Plan allocation is being provided.  The 
analysis of the data furnished by the Department in the various docu ments reveal that 
during the Eleventh Plan ` 4992 crore were provided.  BE allocation for the 5 years is ` 
4617.31 crore.  RE allocation during the said years is ` 2170.88 crore.  The actual 
expenditure met so far during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan is ` 1794.82 crore 
which comes to 35.95 per cent of the total budgetary allocation approved for the 
Eleventh Plan.  The under utilization of outlay is the persistent problem with the 
Department and the Committee in various reports have been highligh ting the issue.  
The Committee are concerned to note that instead of analyzing the reasons for under 
spending under one of the important schemes, the Department has tried to shift the 
responsibility to the State Governments.  One of the reasons for low lev el of utilization 
of outlay under NeGP as stated by the Department is non -release of State share by 
State Governments.  In this connection, the Committee would like to be apprised about 
the name of the States who have not released their share.   

 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
It is clarified that under the various schemes, DIT only acts as a facilitator and 
catalyst. The responsibility of implementing the projects lies with the State 
Governments. Revenue support is released by DIT to the State Designated Agencies 
(SDAs). The SDA is then responsible for releasing the funds to all the project 
stakeholders (Project Implementing Agencies, Consultant, Service Centre Agencies 
(SCAs), NIC etc.) upon the satisfactory performance of the contractual agreements by 
the various stakeholders. The revenue support which also includes state‟s share (ACA) is 
being released by the states to the Implementing Agencies as and when it is due and 
eligible and upon submission of the Utilization Certificate (UC) by the States. It is  also 
submitted that projects like SWAN, CSC etc. are being implemented in a Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode and funds are released only after the Implementing Agency has 
met all the Service Level Requirements.Under NeGP project, funds released as DI T 
Grants-in-aid and State share is contributed through ACA (MoF). First installment of 
Grant-in-aid and ACA has been released to all States. However, in many States, State 
Governments have not released the funds due to the Implementing Agencies as there 
have been minor shortcomings on behalf of the Implementing Agencies. The status of 
submission of UCs by the different States is given at Annexure V. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed that 
Southern States are very pragmatic and pro active in implementation of NeGP.  In case 
of Uttar Pradesh, the representative particularly mentioned that the State is not 
pragmatic and the implementation is very slow.  Here the Committee may like to 
emphasize that besides appreciating the proactive approach of Southern States, there is 
an urgent need of motivating the poor performing States like UP and Bihar which are 
one of the BIMARU status States.  The Union Department need to take up the matter at 
the level of Chief Secretary of the States. Besides , there is an urgent need to replicate 
the best practices initiated by the States where the implementation of NeGP is really 
good.  The Department should analyze the implementation of various components of 
NeGP State/UT wise and take the desired initiative s in this regard.  The Committee 
should also be informed about the name of the best performing and the poor 
performing States with regard to NeGP.  The concrete initiatives as suggested should be 
taken and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In order to address uneven progress across States and to accelerate adoption of 
e-Governance in all States, the following steps are being taken: 
 
 A programme management structure has been created under NeGP. 
Under this structure, an Apex Committee on NeGP, headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary, oversees the programme and provides policy and strategic 
directions for its implementation periodically. 
 Under the guidelines for operational model, State Apex Committee, 
headed by the Chief Secretary of  the State, are established for overall 
guidance, decision on Policy matter, approval of all deliverables by various 
agencies/ groups and financial powers as per the delegation. At the State 

 
 
level, Chief Secretaries are being urged to review the implementation of e-
Governance projects regularly.  
 The progress and status of the various projects (SDC, SWAN, CSC, SSDG, 
e-District) in the States is reviewed regularly through video conferencing 
and meetings in Delhi as well as State Capitals. 
 As far as Uttar Pra desh is concerned, Regional Workshop with the State 
Government was held on 22.10.2010 and thereafter regular follow up is 
being done through video conferencing. The State has since selected the 
Service Centre Agencies for the remaining three zones under th e CSC 
Scheme. The SDC Scheme is also expected to be launched by November, 
2011. 
 Adequate capacities in the Government at all levels are being created 
through the State e -Mission Project Teams (SeMTs). SeMTs have already 
been setup in 32 States / UTs. 
 In or der to train and sensitize Government officials, a wide range of 
training programmes like Leadership Meets, Specialized Training for e -
Governance  Programme (STeP), CIO‟s Programme, Orientation workshops 
and other training modules  have been rolled out to up skill Govt officials 
at all levels. At political level, 78 Leadership Meets have been conducted 
in 18 States so far and other States are in the pipeline. Over 700 Govt. 
Officials have been trained under STeP Trainings. 
 DIT has also initiated an initiati ve for Horizontal Transfer of Success e -
Governance projects for replication of successful projects in other States. 
 A CIO plan is also being rolled out to strengthen and create a cadre of in -
house expert resources to lead and implement e-Governance in India at all 
levels of Government. 
 DIT is currently hosting 50 seminars on NeGP across the country. So far 6 
workshops have been hosted in Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, Ranchi, 
Ahmedabad and Srinagar. The Chief Secretaries/Additional Chief 
Secretaries have partic ipated in these workshops. These workshops are 
being used to share best practices and innovative e -Governance solutions 
from States. 
 50 case studies in e -Governance, which would be shared with all the 
States, are being prepared. 
 DIT is in the process of fo rmulating model RFPs along with toolkits, 
guidelines and framework for preparing them to be used by Line 
Departments and State Governments to procure goods, consultancy 
services, works and managed services for e-Governance projects. 
 
State-wise snapshot of  the status of the various projects under DIT is given at 
Annexure VI. States which have completed SWAN, SDC, CSC projects can be regarded 
as better performing compared to other States. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of I nformation 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 The Committee have consistently been expressing concern over the shifting o f 
deadlines of various components of NeGP viz. SWAN, CSCs, SDCs and MMPs.  The latest 
information furnished by the Department indicates that in 26 States/UTs SWAN has 
been rolled out.  After continuous change of timelines, the latest deadline is to set up 
SWAN in all States/UTs by December, 2011.  Coming to Common Service Centres 
(CSCs), out of the target of 1 lakh CSCs as on 31 March, 2011, 93163 CSCs have been 
rolled out that too after shifting the deadline repetitively.  In respect of State Data 

 
 
Centres (SDCs) the deadline has again repetitively been deferred.  Till  31 March, 2011 
only 11 SDCs could be made operational.  Under e -District (MMPs) as per the projected 
timeline, the implementation of e -District in 14 States was to be completed by March, 
2011.  However, only in 2 States, the project could be sanctioned and implementation 
has been initiated.  With regard to e -Bharat with pursuance of the issue by the 
Committee in their reports, a loan of US $150 million has been agreed to by the World 
Bank duri ng the negotiations with a maturity period of 18 years including a 5 years 
grace period.  The Committee strongly emphasize that e -Governance is an important 
programme which is expected to change the entire concept and governance of the 
country.  Keeping in view the importance of the programme there is an urgent need to 
address the various hindrances encountered in implementation of the programme so 
that various components of NeGP are rolled out expeditiously.  In this connection, the 
Committee would like to  emphasize that the implementation of various components of 
NeGP should be reviewed individually and all the corrective action should be taken after 
identifying the grey areas in the implementation of the programme.    
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In order to review the implementation of NeGP, a programme management 
structure has been created which has the following key components:- 
 
 Prime Minister‟s Committee on NeGP, headed by the Prime Minister, to 
provide leadership, prescribe deliverables and mile stones and monitor 
periodically the implementation of NeGP. 
 National e-Governance Advisory Group, headed by the Minister C & IT, to 
solicit views of external stakeholders and to provide inputs to the CCEA, 
advise the government on policy issues and strateg ic interventions 
necessary for accelerating introduction of e -Governance across Central 
and State Government Ministries/Departments. 
 Apex Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary to oversee the 
programme and to provide policy and strategic directions for its 
implementation. 
 Similar structure exists even at the State level. Progress on the various 
components of NeGP is regularly communicated in the form of a 
fortnightly report to the PMO and a „Monthly Progress Report‟ (MPR) to the 
Cabinet Secretary.  
 The progress of the various projects (e -District, SWAN, SDC, CSC & SSDG) 
at the States is regularly reviewed through Video conferencing and 
meetings in Delhi as well as State Capitals. 
 To understand the impact, utility, sustainability, scalability and 
replicability of mature e -Governance projects independent assessment 
studies are also carried out through third parties. 
 
In order to address the various hindrances encountered in the implementation of 
the programme and to rollout e-Governance expeditiously, the following steps are being 
taken:- 
 
 To speed up the process of enabling electronic delivery of public services 
to the citizens and for overcoming issues like resistance to change, 
systemic inertia, procedural hurdles, lack of transparency and legal 
impediments which hinder electronic delivery of services, it is proposed to 
enact the Electronic Delivery of Services (EDS) Act which would mandate 
provisioning of all public services compulsorily through electronic means 
from a specified date. The Draft Bill has be en finalized and Note for the 
Cabinet is being finalized after getting comments of all the Ministries / 
Departments and State Governments. 
 To ensure sharing of information and seamless interoperability of data and 
e-Governance applications under NeGP, stan dards have been released in 

 
 
the areas of Open Standards, Biometrics, Metadata & data, Localization 
and Language Technology, Network and Information Security etc. 
 Considering the tremendous potential of mobile phones to expand the 
access to and reach of public services in India, an initiative has been taken 
to create a Mobile Service Delivery Gateway (MSDG) that will utilize the 
existing e-Governance infrastructure for delivery of services. 
 DIT is in the process of formulating model RFPs along with toolkits,  
guidelines and framework for preparing them to be used by Line 
Departments and State Governments to procure goods, consultancy 
services, works and managed services for e-Governance projects. 
 Adequate capacities in the Government at all levels are being cr eated 
through the State e -Mission Project Teams (SeMTs). SeMTs have already 
been setup in 32 States / UTs. 
 In order to train and sensitize Government officials, a wide range of 
training programmes like Leadership Meets, Specialized Training for e -
Governance  Programme (STeP), CIO‟s Programme, Orientation workshops 
and other training modules  have been rolled out to up skill Govt officials 
at all levels. At political level, 78 Leadership Meets have been conducted 
in 18 States so far and other States are in t he pipeline. Over 700 Govt. 
Officials have been trained under STeP Trainings. 
 A CIO plan is also being rolled out to strengthen and create a cadre of in -
house expert resources to lead and implement e-Governance in India at all 
levels of Government. 
 DIT is currently hosting 50 seminars on NeGP across the country. So far 6 
workshops have been hosted in Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, Ranchi, 
Ahmedabad and Srinagar. The Chief Secretaries/Additional Chief 
Secretaries have participated in these workshops. These works hops are 
being used to share best practices and innovative e -Governance solutions 
from States. 
 50 case studies in e -Governance, which would be shared with all the 
States, are being prepared. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department  of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee observe that the Government has approved the Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) Scheme which provide support for establishing one lakh Common 
Service Centres in six lakh villages of India.  The Scheme envisions CSCs as the front -
end delivery points for Government, private and social sector services to rural citizens 
of India in an integrated manner.  Besides, CSCs would be suitably repositioned to be a 
network of Panchayat level Common Service Centres to provide Government services to 
the citizens in rural areas.  CSCs are to be leveraged for various services under Bh arat 
Nirman and flagship Schemes like NREGA, NRHM and SSA.   
  
 As stated above, after repetitive shifting of deadline, out of the target of 
establishing one lakh CSCs, so far 93163 CSCs could be rolled out.  What is disturbing to 
the Committee is that out  of 93163 CSCs set up, 85287 CSCs could be made functional 
as on February, 2011.  As per the information furnished by the Department not only that 
only 68 per cent of the CSCs have internet availability as revealed by an independent 
evaluation of CSCs done  by M/s IMRB International in November 2009.  The study also 
reveal that only 58 per cent of CSCs were found to be fully operational out of a sample 
size of 1727. Non-availability of the G2C services and a reliable broadband connectivity 
besides regular su pply of electric power are considered as some of the main 

 
 
challenges/problems affecting the CSCs Scheme by the aforesaid survey.  The 
Department‟s own data in respect of only 20 States/UTs, as furnished to the Committee, 
further indicates that there is no uniformity in the number of services provided by CSCs.   
 
 The Committee understand that besides roll out of the CSCs it is utmost 
important that the CSCs are made functional.  Various services can be provided to the 
users only when CSCs have the proper in ternet connectivity.  Regular power supply is 
another issue which need to be addressed to make the CSCs fully functional.  In this 
connection, the possibility of using non -conventional energy source can be explored. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should formulate some sort of 
mechanism to get the regular feedback from the State Governments about the 
functioning of CSCs.  Periodic information with regard to internet availability, service 
rendered through CSCs and the actual users of CSC s should be obtained from the 
various States/UTs.  Besides, all the initiatives should be taken so that the real objective 
of setting up of CSCs that is, as the front -end delivery points for Government, private 
and social sector services to rural citizens of India in an integrated manner is really 
achieved.  The Committee also feel that the Department should formulate guidelines 
with regard to number of services to be provided by CSCs so that some sort of 
uniformity can be maintained.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
There are three major challenges in the implementation of the CSC Scheme:- 
 
4. Connectivity 
 
In order to provide reliable broadband connectivity, DIT has sanctioned ` 880 cr. 
to BSNL to provide Wireline and Wi-Max based broadband connectivity to all CSCs 
across the country. DIT has been regularly following up with BSNL, including 
CMD, BSNL, to ensure that this connectivity is provided expeditiously. As per the 
revised timelines, BSNL is expected to provide connectivity to all the CSCs by 
December 2011. 
 
Additionally, a proposal to connect all the 250,000 Panchayats through a National 
Optic Fibre Network (NOFN) is also underway.  
 
The Department is also trying to provide supplementary connectivity modes like 
the VSATs etc. wherever BSNL connectivity is not feasible. 
 
5. Power 
 
To address power related issues, the Department has been impressing upon the 
Service Centre Agencies (SCAs) from time to time to cater for Solar Power Backup 
as this would enhance earning opportunities for the VLEs and bring in viab ility 
and sustainability. These SCAs who manage CSC scheme in the states have been 
apprised of certain subsidies / incentives being offered by Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy so that they may avail of this opportunity in their business 
interest.  
 
6. Availability of G2C Services 
 
The State Governments like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal have issued Government Orders / Notifications to the various 
departmental heads / District Level authorities/ Stakeholders for use of CSC to 
deliver various G2C Services. As the CSCs are functioning in the rural areas of the 
States, the respective states are being encouraged to issue necessary guidelines 
regarding the type and number of services to be provided by the CSCs based on 
state‟s e -readiness and digitization / computerization of their various 
departments.  

 
 
 
The approval of the National rollout of the e -District MMP has been obtained 
which seeks to deliver hi gh volume citizen centric services at district and sub -
district level in an electronic mode. It is expected that implementation of the 
Scheme will greatly increase the number of services available to the citizens at 
the CSCs. 
 
As has been mentioned earlier , the Department is proposing to enact the 
Electronic Delivery of Services (EDS) Act which would mandate provisioning of all 
public services compulsorily through electronic means from a specified date.  
Subsequent to enactment of the Act; the states would be under statutory 
obligation to make available various G2C services online in a time bound manner.  
 
A CSC India Online portal is also being envisaged that will increase the 
availability of services. 
 
An Online Monitoring Tool has also been designed and d eveloped which is 
generating useful information relating to functioning of the CSCs at the ground 
level. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 
Infrastructure Development 
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
 The total budgetary support for the Eleventh Plan to NIC is for ` 2300 crore.  
However, during the 5 years of Eleventh Plan the projections were made by NIC to 
the tune of ` 3432 crore against which allocations at BE stage were made to the 
tune of ` 2724 crore.  The RE allocation during each year of the Eleventh Plan 
barring the year 2007 -08 is sa me as proposed at BE stage. As regards the 
expenditure position, the outlay earmarked at RE stage has almost been fully 
utilized by NIC.  The Committee here would like to strongly recommend that 
adequate allocation as projected by NIC should be provided in  view of the 
importance of the mandate given to NIC particularly in light of the spectrum of 
activities it has been carrying out.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 NIC had projected a requirement of ` 800 crore for the year 2011 -12. The 
Planning Commissi on has allocated ` 754 crore against it. This appears to be 
adequate. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee during the course of deliberations have been apprised that 
manpower in NIC has been a big constraint. As informed by the Department, NIC 
has only two persons per district and o nly 15 -20 persons per State.  It has been 
suggested that the existing strength of two persons per district should be doubled.  
Besides, the Committee have also been informed that there is no support 
mechanism at block level where majority of social sector schemes are being 
implemented.  States are asking NIC to set up Centres at blocks to provide technical 
support and build the capacities of staff at grass root level so that services can be 
provided up to Gram Panchayat and Village Level.  The Committee hav e also been 
apprised that NIC manpower was sanctioned during 1980s as per the IT requirement 
of the States/UTs at that time and it has become too difficult to sustain the number 
of schemes with the same manpower now.   
 
 The Committee totally appreciate th e concerns of NIC and particularly in the 
context of the important role NIC is playing in providing support mechanism at 
District, Block and Village Panchayat level.  The Committee emphasize that the gaps 
between the required and the existing strength at v arious levels should be worked 
out in consultation with the Department of Information Technology and placed 
before Department of Personnel and Training and Ministry of Finance for getting the 
requisite approvals.  The concerns of the Committee in this rega rd may be 
communicated to the Ministries/Organizations who would be clearing their 
proposals.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
NIC is including a proposal on “Strengthening of ICT support at grass -root level” in 
its 12th Five Year Plan for 2012-17. A copy of the same is at Annexure-VII. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 
 The NKN project was approved in 2010 with an outlay of ` 5990 crore for 10 
years. Till March, 2011, ` 1912 crore have been allocated and  ` 1242 crore have been 
spent by the Department. The Committee learn that during Plan discussion for the year 
2011-12, the Department had made a request for allocation of ` 2300 crore, however, 
only a sum of ` 250 crore has been allocated at BE stage. Further, the Committee are 
concerned to note that this alloc ation is inadequate to meet the projected physical 
targets set for Financial Year 2011 -12. The analysis of the data furnished by the 
Department further indicates that during the year 2010 -11 also the allocation of ` 100 
crore only was made against the prop osed allocation of ` 2318 crore.  However, the 
allocation was enhanced at RE stage to ` 1362 crore and the entire amount was spent.  
The Department during the year 2011 -12 is also optimistic that the desired allocation 
would be provided at supplementary grant stage. 
 
 The Committee find that the National Knowledge Network is a backbone for e -
Governance.  Under the programme 1500 premier institutes would get cover across 
multiple sectors and would include 400 universities.  The Committee disapprove the 

 
 
adhocism of the Government with regard to providing allocations for such an important 
programme.  As such, the Committee strongly recommend to provide the allocations for 
NKN at the BE stage, so as to avoid uncertainty about the allocations of outlay at 
supplementary grant stage/RE stage.  Besides, the Committee also emphasize that 
during the current year i.e. 2011-12 the desired allocations should be made available at 
the supplementary grant stage so that the programme do not suffer due to want of 
resources. Ho wever, during the year 2012 -13 the adequate allocations should be 
allocated at BE stage itself.   
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
  
In March 2010 Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) approved the 
establishment of National Knowledge Network (NKN) at a n outlay of ` 5990 crore to be 
implemented by National Informatics Centre (NIC) over a period of 10 years.  As on 
date, a total amount of ` 1868 crore has been released under NKN project.  The details 
of the amount released so far for NKN  are as follows : 
       (` in crore)  
FY 2008-09 60   (Initial Phase) 
FY 2009-10 240  (Final Phase) 
FY 2010-11 1362* 
FY 2011-12 206  (Final Phase) 
Total (As on date) 1868 
     
*` 1342 crore Final Phase + ` 20 crore for Initial Phase = ` 1362 crore 
 
In the FY 2011 -12 a sum of ` 250 crore has been allocated against ` 2300 crore  
as approved by CCI.  Based on the recommendation of 11 th meeting of the High Level 
Committee (HLC) held on 19.07.2011 an installment of ` 206 crore has been released 
(as on date) vide Sanction Order No. 1(1)/2010-NKN dated 27.7.2011.   
 
In the 11 th HLC meeting, NIC was directed to work out realistic estimate of 
proposed expenditure up to December, 2011 and also for the period up to March, 2012.  
Accordingly, NIC has indicated requirement of funds  to the tune of ` 1550 crore for the 
FY 2011-12.  In this connection, a proposal for requirement of additional funds of ` 1300 
crore for NKN has been submitted to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for 
supplementary grants/Revised Estimates. 
 
Ministry of Finance after examining the additional requirement of funds for NKN 
Programme informed: “It would not be possible to give such a huge additionality during 
middle of the financial year. However, looking at the pace of Plan expenditure, DIT may 
like to identify likely savings within the grant for giving additional funds to NKN.” 
Accordingly, a proposal is being submitted to MoF for enhancement of allocation in 
respect of NKN through the 2nd Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants. 
 
(Ministry of Comm unications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
Software Technology Park of India (STPI)/Electronics Hardware Technology 
Parks (EHTP) 
 
16. The Committee have repetitively been recommending to further extend the tax 
holiday made available to STPI units. In spite of Department of Information Technology 
taking the issue of providing the physical benefit to the IT units under STPI scheme at 
par with the units under the SEZ scheme with the Ministry of Finance, the tax holiday 
has been withdrawn from 1 April, 2011.  The Department has acknowledged the 
adverse impact on ending t ax holiday available to STPI units.  Not only that, the 
Department has stated that an increase in Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) would 
adversely affect small and medium size players.  With regard to the strategy of the 
Department to tackle the situation, the Committee have been informed that a non-profit 
link incentive scheme for STPI registered units is being prepared.  Besides, the present 
induction programme of STPI units would be further strengthened for business 
incubation and entrepreneurial development for start up units.  Besides, STPI is working 
with DIT for establishment of a National Productivity Network.  The Committee 
understand that all these initiatives are in the right direction and need to be continued.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Action is being taken by this Department for preparation of proposed non -profit 
linked incentive scheme especially for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee further observe that STPI was established on 5 June, 1991 for 
promotion of exports and providing facility to Indian small and medium organizations for 
participation in export promotion events in the software and electronic sector.  Today, 
the exports by STPI registered units are more than 90 per cent of the total software 
exports from the country fr om a meagre less than 8 per cent when it started in 1991.  
STPI has been set up in 52 centres spread across the country out of which 45 centres 
are in Tier -II and Tier -III locations. During the year 2010 -11 for the period April to 
December for which the data has been made available by the Department, the declining 
impact on exports seems to be more visible.  Against the export of ` 205505 crore 
during the year 2009 -10, the export performance is reduced to ` 144157 crore, during 
the year 2010 -11.  More adver se impact seems to be on new STPI units registration.  
The number of registration were 521 during 2009 -10 which declined to just 253 during 
the year 2010 -11 up to December.  Now when the tax holiday has been withdrawn 
w.e.f. 1 April, 2011 and MAT has been increased the decline in performance of STPI 
units may further be more visible.  The Committee as such strongly recommend the 
Department to keep a vigilant watch on the performance of STPI units.  All the proposed 
initiatives visualized by the Department to fill the gap should be taken expeditiously.     
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The export figure of ` 144157 crores, as mentioned above, is for the period April 
2010 to December, 2010.  However, the total exports by STP units for the Financial Year 
2010-2011 (April, 2010 to March, 2011) is ` 207376 crores, as compared to ` 205505 
crores for the Financial Year 2009 -2010.  Thus, there is a marginal increase in the 
export by STP units.  The performance of STP units is being reviewed too.  The proposed 

 
 
initiatives as mentioned in the Recommendation No. 16 are expected to improve the 
competitive edge of STP units especially SMEs and increase the export performance. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
Cyber Security (including CERT-In, IT Act, CCA)  
 
 The Committee  have been informed that a total of 106, 201 and 315 
Government websites were hacked during the years 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively 
and these attacks were directed from the countries like USA, UK, Mexico, Spain, Brazil, 
Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, China, Lebanon, Peru, Morocco, Japan, Korea, Saudi Arabia, 
Algeria, Nigeria etc. Further, with regard to the cyber crime cases registered, the 
Committee have been provided information, analysing which it is found that in States 
like Haryana, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Naga land, 
Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep 
and Puducherry, there are no cyber crimes registered.  The analysis of the data further 
reveal that in Karnataka that too only in Bangaluru highest number of cases of ha cking 
during 2009 were registered.  The Committee have further noted that the Department 
of National Crime Records Bureau is not maintaining data regarding disposal status of 
the registered cyber crime cases.  The data State/UT wise with regard to hacking in the 
country during the year 2009 as provided by the Department do not seem to be 
realistic.  The Committee feel that either the attacks on the sites are not being reported 
or the system with regard to reporting of the cases is not user friendly.  There is an 
urgent need to make the people aware of the system of reporting of cyber attacks.  
Besides, equally important is to maintain the data with regard to disposal status of the 
registered cyber crime cases.  The Department should take the desired initiati ves and 
the Committee apprised accordingly.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The system of reporting the cyber attacks involves reporting of cyber attacks as 
cyber incidents and reporting of cyber attacks as cyber crime.  As far as reporting of 
cyber attacks as cyber incident, it is facilitated by CERT -In through its 24.x7 help desk 
mechanism involving toll free telephone and fax Nos. as well as e -mail.  In addition, 
detailed information regarding the format for reporting the incident is also available to  
the public.  This aspect has been described in sufficient detail on CERT -in website at 
www.cert-in.org.in.  Besides this, the system of reporting cyber incident is also informed 
to the users during all trainings/ seminars/workshops and other mass contact 
programmes conducted by CERT -In.  Further, the Crisis Management Programme 
published by DIT identifies the nature of incidents that need to be reported to CERT -In 
along with the necessary format and procedures. 
 
With regard to reporting of cyber attacks as cyber crimes, the present system involves 
reporting with the cyber crime cells of law enforcement agencies across the country.  In 
this connection, DIT has written to MHA requesting them to take some urgent steps to 
increase the awareness among people regarding the mechanism of reporting cyber 
crime cases with the cyber crime cells of law enforcement agencies.  In addition, MHA 
has also been requested to advise the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) to 
maintain data with regard to disposal status of registered cyber crime cases. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I) 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
Human Resource Development 
Man power development (incl. Skill development in IT) 
 
 The Committee find that the Department has proposed a new Scheme called Skill 
Development in IT for the year 2010-11. The National Skill Development Policy has set a 
target of providing skill development in IT to 500 million persons by 2022. In this regard, 
DIT has been given a target of skill development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the 
domain of IECT.  During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the 
previous year, the Committee had been informed that the Department has initiated 
action to work out  detailed project report covering various implementation aspects, 
inputs required to seek an approval of the competent authority.  Since the preliminary 
exercise of approval of the scheme was going on, during the year 2010 -11, a token 
provision of  ` 1 cro re was made for the aforesaid programme.  The Committee find 
from the information furnished by the Department that after passage of one year there 
is not much progress.  The Scheme has not been formally launched and again in the 
year 2011-12, a token provi sion of ` 1 crore has been made available for the scheme.  
As regard the status of the scheme, the draft detailed project reports along with draft 
EFC Note has been circulated to the Ministries/Departments concerned for their 
comments.  After obtaining the  recommendation of EFC, the proposal would be 
submitted to the Cabinet for obtaining approval for implementation of the programme. 
The Committee express serious concern over the tardy progress of getting approval for 
such an important scheme.  The Committe e fail to understand how the allocation of ` 
460 crore during the year 2010 -11 and of ` 717.75 crore for the year 2011 -12 was 
proposed by the Department even when the scheme is in the process of formulation.  
More over the Committee wonder how the Departme nt would meet the target of Skill 
Development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT with the aforesaid 
status of the scheme.  The Committee strongly recommend that all the consultations 
should be completed and the process of approval of the s cheme expedited so that the 
scheme is implemented during the year     2011 -12.  The required allocations when the 
approvals are in place may be provided at the RE stage/Supplementary Grant stage. 
The Committee further observe that capacity building of SC/S T and women so as to 
enable them to compete in this competitive environment is the biggest challenge.  In 
view of this, the Committee would like to emphasize that while finalizing the modalities 
of the programme it should be ensured that SC/ST and women ar e adequately 
benefitted by the programme. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
To meet the target of 10 million people to be trained in IT sector by 2022, the 
Department has prepared the draft Detailed Project Reports(DPRs)/EFC Memo entitled 
“DIT‟s initiatives for Skill Development in IECT Sector”. The proposal has the following 
three components: 
 
(d) To train about one crore people in various IECT areas at different levels 
ranging from foundation level to PG level courses in different verticals by 
DOEACC Society. 
(e) To train about 7 lakh people in high-end niche areas of IECT by CDAC Society. 
 
(f) Setting up of an ICT academy in each State/Union Territory across the country 
on PPP mode. These IT Academies along with the respective State 
Governments and industry associatio ns would upgrade the faculty in the 
colleges of tier-II/tier-II cities in various niche areas of IECT Sector. The trained 
faculty would in turn help towards enhancing the quality of the students 
graduating from various colleges. 
 
Under the above mentioned proposal, it is envisaged that up to 50% of the total 
target to be skilled through internal capacities of DOEACC and CDAC would comprise of 

 
 
the disadvantaged segment of the population which inter-alia includes Scheduled Caste, 
Scheduled Tribes and women.  
 
The draft EFC memo along with DPRs were circulated to various 
Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments/suggestions. Comments have 
been received from some Ministries. Further, detailed presentations were made to the 
Member Secretary, Planning Co mmission and Hon‟ble MoS(Planning). The formal 
comments of the Planning Commission on the draft EFC Memo are awaited. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
(i) Centre for Development and Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
 C-DAC, a premier R&D organisation in IT, Electronics and a ssociated areas, has 
been witnessing attrition of manpower for the past few years. The Committee while 
examining DFG (2009-10) had learnt that the issue of performance incentive was taken 
up by the Department with the Ministry of Finance to check the attri tion rate. However, 
when asked about the progress made in Performance Incentive Issue, the Committee 
learnt that the proposal for service conditions including various beneficial schemes, 
which may be applicable to all the Societies under administrative con trol of DIT 
including C-DAC, is under active consideration. The Committee exhort DIT to pursue the 
issue with the Ministry of Finance and take the decision expeditiously.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 A proposal on the subject was referred to Ministry  of Finance way back in 2002. 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure had informed “(i) The need for incentive 
may be considered only in case of those societies which are functioning in a highly 
competitive environment and which are sustaining their  operations exclusively on their 
own surpluses without any Government grant whatsoever either for capital expenditure 
or for day to day revenue expenditure including salary expenditure. The surplus in these 
cases may be worked out after making provisions f or dividend/interest payment to the 
GOI, as a promoter of these organizations and having provided for initial corpus. (ii) In 
rest of the Societies, no incentive may be paid and the question of ex -gratia to 
employees equivalent to Group „A‟ & „B‟ gazetted officers of the GOI would not arise and 
question of ex-gratia for employees equivalent to Group „B‟ non -gazetted and Group „C‟ 
and „D‟  of the Central Government may be separately taken up with this Ministry. (iii) 
The Department of Information Technology are advised to ascertain the position in case 
of similarly placed scientific autonomous institutions under the CSIR, ICAR, Department 
of Education (IIT, IIM), etc as to whether any incentive payment is admissible in these 
autonomous organizations. (iv) The  result of review of these 14 autonomous bodies on 
the basis of the recommendations of the ERC may also be indicated. (v) While following 
the advice of this Department, the Department of Information Technology are requested 
to consult FA(DIT) also.” 
 
 In view of the above instructions of the Ministry of Finance, a fresh proposal is 
being prepared by C-DAC and on the receipt of the same, the matter would be taken up 
with Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, once again. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I) 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 27)  
 
Emerging Issues 
 
Cloud Computing 
 
 The Committee note that  „Cloud Computing‟ is an emer ging concept and 
National e-Governance Division (NeGD) is planning to implement this concept of „shared 
Platform‟ for roll out of citizen centric e-Governance Services.  The Committee note that 
the Department has not conducted any study to assess the suita bility of the concept of 
„Cloud computing‟ although they are planning to implement it to one of the most 
important project of DIT that is National e -Governance Programme. The Department 
themselves, in the written note, have highlighted some of the technolo gical and legal 
apprehensions associated with the concept of „shared platform‟. The apprehensions are 
Technology obsolescence; Security issues; Contract and SLA Management; Vendor Lock-
in; Data security; Retention and recovery of data in case of disaster; Exit options 
available to the organization; data retention or transfer by the provider; and Intellectual 
property issues. The Committee strongly recommend that all the apprehensions 
expressed above should be addressed before the concept of „Cloud computing ‟ is 
implemented for roll out of citizen centric e -Governance Services. The Committee also 
recommend the Department to conduct a study/survey to find out the existing scenario 
nationally and internationally. The findings of the study should be furnished to  the 
Committee. Besides, the Department should also be prepared with a mechanism to deal 
with the risks associated with the usage of Cloud computing and be vigilant about such 
emerging technologies. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The recommendations made  by the Committee are noted. DIT engages and 
solicits views of the various stakeholders including Central and State Government and 
Private entities. Also, before making any Policy level decision, widespread stakeholder 
consultation is held and comments and  feedback from the Public are sought by making 
available the necessary documents on the Departments‟ website (www.mit.gov.in).  
 
DIT will setup a working group comprising of people from different domains. The 
group will assess the suitability of cloud computing to enable e-Governance services. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Information 
Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2011-Budget(Vol.II) dated  4th November, 2011) 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
     December, 2011                                                                               Standing Committee on 
     Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

 
 
 
APPENDIX-XIII 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-THIRD 
REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25 & 26  
 Total 12 
 Percentage 44.45 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:- 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19,  22 & 24  
 Total 14 
 Percentage 51.85 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  27  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 3.70 
 
 
 
 