 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
38 


 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-19 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
20-39 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
40 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
41-52 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
53-60 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held on 7th December, 2012………. 
 
61-62 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in their Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………… 
63 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
  
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal - Additional Director 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
10. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
11. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
12. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
13. Shri Tapas Paul 
14. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (201 2-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-eighth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok S abha) on ‘ Demands for Grants 
(2012-13)’ of the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Thirty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on              
2 May, 201 2. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-third Report on 9 August, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
7 December, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                     Chairman, 
12  December, 2012                                                                               Standing Committee on 
21  Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty-third (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Gra nts (2012 -13)‟  
of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Thirty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 2 May, 2012. It contained 33 
Recommendations/Observations.  
 
3. Action Taken N otes in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have been 
received from the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Posts) and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which h ave been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 Recommendation Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 17, 19, 20, 24, 25, 27 & 31 
 
 Total 18 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government 
 
 Recommendation Sl. No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Recommendation Sl. Nos .:-13, 16 , 18, 23, 26, 28 & 
32 
 
 Total 07 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government are of interim in 
nature 
 
 Recommendation Sl. Nos.:-  4, 14, 15, 21, 22, 29, 30 
& 33 
 
 Total 08 
 Chapter V 
 
 
 

 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter - I and Final  
Action Taken Replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations.  
 
A. STATUS OF GRAMIN DAK SEWAKS EMPLOYEES 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that GDS employees are governed 
by Gramin Dak Sevaks (Conduct & Engagement) Rules, 
2011 which are non -statutory in nature.  The Committee 
also o bserve that the issue of conferment of status of 
regular departmental employees to the Gramin Dak Sevaks 
with 8 hours duty was examined by the Group of Ministers 
in the year 1998 following the recommendation made by 
the Justice Talwar Committee but the same was not agreed 
to. The Committee feel that the Gramin Dak Sevaks are the 
back bone of the Department for running the rural network 
of Post Offices and their welfare plans should be accorded 
due priority.  In order to improve the postal operations in 
rural areas, the Committee feel that they should be 
granted Departmental employees status and their working 
hours may be extended by utilizing their services in other 
activities of the Department.  In this regard, the Committee 
understand that to deal with MGN REGA wages, the 
Department have been hiring the temporary staff to help 
the existing workforce to manage the large number of 
accounts. The Committee are therefore of the view that the 
services of GDS may also be utilized in this area. This 
would definitely  lead to better services to the people in 
rural areas by experienced personnel.  The Committee are 
also of the view that the recommendations made by the 
Justice Talwar Committee need to be seriously re -
considered by the Department which would greatly help 
the Department in improving the Postal Services in the 
rural areas.  They also urge the Department that the other 
demands of GDSs employees regarding raising bonus and 
stopping reduction of TRCA in cases of reduction of 
workload should also given due consi deration and the 
matters may be taken up with the concerned 

 
 
Ministry/Department for settling the issues.  The details of 
action taken by the Department on the aforesaid issues 
may also be communicated to the Committee at the 
earliest.” 
 
7. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
(A) “CONFERMENT OF STATUS OF DEPARTMENTAL 
EMPLOYEES TO  GRAMIN DAK SEVAKS 
 
1. Gramin Dak Sevaks and their working conditions are 
governed by Gramin Dak Sevaks (Conduct & Engagement) 
Rules, 2011. T he GDS (Conduct & Engagement) Rules are 
non-statutory in nature. Gramin Dak Sevaks are engaged 
on terms and conditions which are significantly different 
from those of regular employees. The job profile, working 
hours, working conditions, applicability of r ules for the 
regular Departmental employees and that of the Gramin 
Dak Sevaks are all together different.  Gramin Dak Sevaks 
are only entitled to protection under Article 311(2) of the 
Constitution of India as held by the Apex Court and not in 
other matter s.  While the regular Govt. employee 
superannuate on completion of age of 60 years, Gramin 
Dak Sevaks can enter the service on attaining age of 18 
years & remain in engagement up to 65 years.  Further, 
the essential qualifications for all the categories of  Gramin 
Dak Sevaks other than Branch Post Masters is 8 th and in 
case of Branch Post Masters it is matriculation whereas the 
essential qualification of erstwhile Group D now designated 
as MTS Group C & Postman is Matriculation & that of Postal 
Assistant is 10+2. Thus, the regular Govt. employees and 
Gramin Dak Sevaks are two separate and distinct 
categories.  The Gramin Dak Sevaks before engagement 
are required to give a certificate that they have other 
sources of income besides the allowances paid or to be 
paid by the Government for adequate means of livelihood 
for themselves and their families.  They work for a 
minimum of 3 hours and for a maximum of 5 hours per 
day. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
Superintendent of Post Offices vs. PK R ajamma (1977) (3) 
SCC has held that GDS are holders of the civil post outside 
the regular civil services.  
 
2. Extra Departmental system in vogue since 1866 -67 
provides for engagement of Gramin Dak Sevaks for a 
minimum of 3 hours and up to a maximum of 5 h ours in a 
day. Rule 3-A (i) of GDS (Conduct and Engagement) Rules, 
2011 provides in clearest term that “a sevak shall not be 
required to perform duty beyond a maximum of 5 hours in 
a day”. The issue of conferment of status of regular 
departmental employees to the Gramin Dak Sevaks with 8 
hours duty was examined by the Group of Ministers in the 

 
 
year 1998 following recommendation made by Justice 
Talwar Committee but the same was not agreed to.  
Gramin Dak Sevaks are paid Time Related Continuity 
Allowance on a  pro-rata basis as approved by Cabinet. 
They are also paid discharge benefits like ex-gratia gratuity 
& severance amount at the time of discharge. The 
Government has introduced a Service Discharge Benefit 
Scheme effective from 01.04.2011 for the benefit of  
Gramin Dak Sevaks working in the Department of Posts on 
monthly contribution basis (from Department‟s side only) 
devised on the basis of New Pension Scheme (NPS) -Lite 
scheme launched by the Pension Fund Regulatory & 
Development Authority (PFRDA). This Sch eme has been 
offered in lieu of the existing Severance Amount Scheme 
on an optional basis for the existing Gramin Dak Sevaks 
while new Gramin Dak Sevaks entering into service with 
effect from 01.01.2011 have been mandatorily covered by 
the Scheme. Their Ti me Related Continuity Allowance 
(TRCA), Other Allowances, Group Insurance and Service 
Discharge benefits have already been revised following 
implementation of recommendations of Shri RS Nataraja 
Murti Committee after being approved by Cabinet. Women 
Gramin Dak Sevak are now made entitled to maternity 
grant equivalent to 3 months Time Related Continuity 
Allowance(TRCA) for each child up to the birth of maximum 
of two children limited to a maximum of two confinements 
resulting into birth of first two children  only during the 
entire engagement period out of welfare grant. Women 
GDS can now be granted maternity leave not exceeding six 
months covering the pre and post confinement period & 
they are paid maternity grant for three months and leave 
for another three months without allowances and these 
provisions have already been made effective from 09 Oct 
2009.  
 
3. As per table 4.2.12 of survey carried out by National 
Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) vide report of October 
2008, 41.7% of Gramin Dak Sevaks had worki ng hours up 
to 3 hours, 17.1% had working hours from 3 -4 hours and 
36.2% had working hours from 4 -5 hours. As per table 
4.3.1 of the said survey, 5% of GDS had workload for less 
than or equal to 50 Points, 12.3% had workload for 51 -75 
Points, 13.7% had wor kload for 76 -100 Points, 19.8% had 
workload for 101 -150 Points, 12.4% had workload for 151 -
200 Points, 16% had workload for 201 -300 Points and 
20.9% had the workload exceeding 300 Points based on 
pre-revised norms. GDS Committee observed in Para 9.7 of 
its report that the point system for determining Branch 
Postmaster‟s workload with minor changes continues to be 
adopted for the last 51 years especially the cash handling. 
On estimation it was revealed that 64.87% to 86% of the 
workload was mainly on account of cash handling. The said 
norm had not undergone a review in the last 50 years. 

 
 
Keeping in view the increase in cost index by 31.49 times 
and revision of treasury norms downwards by 22.5 times, 
the Committee recommended credit of one point for every 
` 20 000/- cash handled per month. The norms   for   
assessment of work load of Branch Postmasters based on 
point system were   prevailing from 1932. As per Rajan 
committee report, the point system was evolved   and 
communicated on 20 -3-1932. The standard was f or stamp 
sale   and cash handled.  This  was  subsequently  refined  
by  Rajan  committee  in 1958  and  introduced   point  
system  for  various  other  items  of  works  also.   They 
continued   till recently.  One -man  committee  headed  by  
Shri R.S.Na taraja  Murti   recommended  to  the  
department  for conducting  a study  for revision  of  cash  
handling  norm.  The  Integrated Finance Wing further    
wanted  that,  a  comprehensive  study  be conducted  for  
providing  norms  for  all   works  performed  by  the  BPMs.  
The Department after getting conducted a scientific study 
through SIU, revised the norms of workload assessment of 
GDS BPM under No. 5 -1/2007-WS-1(PT.) dated 16.12.2010.  
1 Point of workload denotes a workload of 60 minutes a 
month and 2.4 minutes of workload in a day.  As per norms 
on the subject, a Branch Post Office qualifies for 
upgradation to departmental post office in case its 
workload exceeds 5 hours. 
 
4. Financial parameters prescribed for opening and 
retention of the Branch P ost Offices in 
Tribal/Hilly/Backward areas is that they should derive 
income to cover at least 15% of the cost and the Branch 
Post Offices in respect of normal areas the BO‟s are 
expected to generate an income of 33.33% of their cost. 
The one man Committee  conducted a survey and as per 
the result of the survey reflected in Para 8.22.5, 83.15% of 
BOs in normal areas were found not generating even the 
expected percentage of income of their cost. 16.86% of 
BOs were found deriving income more than the prescribe d 
norm while a meager 1.79% of the BOs were found self 
supporting and remunerative. In regard to 
backward/hilly/tribal areas, about 66.75% were found not 
generating the minimum percentage of income of 15% of 
the cost and 33.26% were generating income of mo re than 
15% and only 0.96% were found self supporting and 
remunerative. Under MNREGA, GDSBPM is being allowed 
incentive @ 0.35 per new account and Rs. 1.50 per 
MNREGA payment in excess of 20 MNREGA payments daily 
while the other categories of GDS are paid incentive @ 
0.20 per MNREGA payments in excess of 20 MNREGA 
payments daily as prescribed in this Directorate letter No. 
01-14/2009-RB dated 18.01.2010 and the MNREGA work is 
not prescribed to be reckoned for the calculation of 
workload of the GDSBPM. 
 

 
 
5. Apart from the above, the issue of allowing the same 
benefits as available to regular departmental employees in 
the capacity of holders of civil post is already subjudice as 
three Writ Petitions (Civil) No. 17/2009 in the matter of 
Vinod Kumar Saxena & ors vs. UOI, WP (civil) No. 468/2009 
in the matter of Murari Lal Sharma & ors vs. UOI & Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 37/2011 in the matter of Buta Ram & ors 
vs. UOI (clubbed together) are pending consideration of the 
Apex Court.  
 
In the light of the aforesaid an d in particular keeping in 
view the viability of the Extra Departmental Post Offices & 
workload, there is no justification for conferment of status 
of regular departmental employees to the Gramin Dak 
Sevaks. Furthermore, the issue is already subjudice befo re 
Apex Court. 
 
 
(B) STATUS ON DEMANDS OF GDS WORKERS REGARDING 
RAISING BONUS AND STOPPING REDUCTION IN TRCA IN 
CASE OF REDUCTION OF WORKLOAD 
 
1. Productivity Linked Bonus (PLB) for P&T employees 
was introduced in the year 1980 after an agreement was 
reached between the Department and Staff Side of the 
Department Council of JCM. When the scheme of PLB for 
Departmental employees was introduced in the year 1980, 
the issue of extending the payment of similar incentive to 
ED employees now called as Gramin Dak S evaks was 
examined and the bonus payable to GDS was termed as 
ex-gratia payment. Currently the monthly ceiling 
applicable to the reg ular departmental employees is          
` 3500 for the purpose of product ivity linked bonus while it 
is ` 2500 for the purpo se of ex -gratia payment to the 
Gramin Dak Sevaks. The issue of increase in ceiling from     
` 2500 to ` 3500 for the purpose of ex -gratia payment to 
Gramin Dak Sevaks was taken up only recently but the 
proposal has been rejected by the Ministry of Finance,  
Department of Expenditure. 
 
2. The issue of protection of TRCA in case of reduction 
of workload was recently examined by a Committee 
constituted for the purpose by the Department. The report 
of the Committee has since been received and the 
recommendations made are under consideration. The 
Integrated Finance Wing has sought impact of the proposal 
and resultant to the observation, the issue will be further 
considered on analyzing details as may be received in due 
course from the Circles.” 
 
8. The Committee n ote that the matter regarding conferment of 
status of Departmental employees to Gramin Dak S evaks is already 
subjudice before the Apex Court. The y  are, however, not satisfied 

 
 
with the reply furnished by the Department in regard to other issues 
related to  bonus and TRCA  for the Gramin Dak Sevaks  .  The 
Committee  reiterate that Gramin Dak Sevaks are the back bone of 
the Department for running their rural network of Post Offices and 
their welfare plans need due consideration by the Department which 
has a di rect bearing on the performance of the Department. The 
Committee do not see any justification in denying the increase in  the 
productivity linked bonus to Gramin Dak Sevaks at par with the 
regular employees of the Department  when they also contribute 
equally and have been successfully running the rural network of the 
Department. Their output and contribution should not be undermined 
in any manner . Moreover, an increase of Rs. 1000/ - of ex -gratia 
payment per GDS is not a substantial amount and rather would 
induce them to perform better . The Committee , therefore , strongly 
recommend that the matter should again be taken up by the 
Department with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level with a 
positive nod from their side.  
 
The Committee also desire that th e issue regarding protection 
of TRCA in case of reduction of workload should be considered  
favourably by the Department . The Committee do not see any reason 
for the reduction of workload when the Department is engaged in so 
many activities and proposed ne w ventures  and   desire that 
possibilities may be explored to utilize the   services of GDS in other 
areas also.  
 
B. MAIL OPERATIONS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“With regard to stopping of Certificate of Posti ng, the 
Secretary during the course of oral evidence admitted that 
lately due to many court cases where the Department has 
to suffer a lot, the Department has stopped certificate of 
Posting. The Committee do not find this a plausible reason 
for stopping th e Certificate of Posting which provided an 
assured service to a customer at affordable cost besides 
being a revenue drivers for the Department. They feel that 
the reasons cited by the Department for stopping this 
service could have been dealt with by them in a more 

 
 
vigilant and effective manner. The Committee therefore 
would like to know the circumstances under which this 
service was stopped and would recommend to review their 
decision  and apprise them accordingly.  
 
10. The Department in their Action Take n Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“The decision to discontinue the „Certificate of Posting‟ has 
been reviewed.  The objective of „Certificate of Posting‟ 
was to afford the public an assurance that letters and other 
articles for which no receipts are granted by the Post Office 
and entrusted to servants or messengers for posting have 
actually been posted.   
  
Articles posted under ‟Certificate of Posting‟ are ordinary 
Postal articles which are treated exactly in the same 
manner as posted in letter box and no documentation is 
kept in Post -Office at any stage.  The services like 
registration for which receipts are granted by Post Offices 
are entirely different services provided by the Department 
and documentation of article is kept from posting to 
delivery stage.  This limits the chances of loss of an article 
and delay in delivery as the responsibility can be fixed. 
 
The „Certificate of Posting‟ does not confer any proof of 
article that has been delivered.  Sometimes, agents obtain 
this certificate of post ing fraudulently without actually 
posting the articles, as a result of which department gets 
involved in litigation. 
 
The proposal for discontinuation of „Certificate of Posting 
was approved by Hon‟ble MOC&IT. 
 
The Gazzette notification GSR -58(E) dated 31 -01-2011 
deleting the Rule 195 on „Certificate of Posting‟ has been 
laid on tables of both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
Therefore, there seems to be no justification to reintroduce 
the facility of „Certificate of Posting‟.” 
 
11. The Committee note from the re ply that the  objective of 
„Certificate of Posting‟ was to afford the public an assurance that 
letters and other articles for which no receipts are granted by the 
Post Office and entrusted to servants or messengers for posting have 
actually been posted.   They are however, not satisfied with the 
reasons advanced by the Department for stopping this service. The 
Committee feel that „Certificate of Posting‟ was an assured service 
with an affordability element for the common user  and was a mark 

 
 
of assurance th at letters or articles given to employees of 
Department of Posts have actually been posted .  Moreover, as  no 
compensation was being paid on the basis of the certificate , the 
service was financially viable for the Department . The Committee 
strongly emphasi ze that the Department should reconsider their 
decision to re-start this service again. The Committee also feel that 
computerization of Post Offices and switching over to electronic 
mode  would certainly provide a solution to check    fraudulent use of 
certificates by  agents and the Department should explore the same.   
 
C. AUTOMATED MAIL PROCESSING CENTRES 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that the Department had 
proposed to set up AMPCs in D elhi, Kolkata, Chennai, 
Hyderabad and Bangalore during the Eleventh Plan and the 
Plan Scheme for setting up of AMPC was approved by the 
Finance Minister on 19 January, 2010.  However, AMPCs 
could be set up only in Delhi and Kolkata during the 
Eleventh Plan  and AMPC in remaining cities could not be 
set up due to building related issues.  Now that 11643 sq. 
meters. of land has been approved in Chennai, the 
Committee would like the Department to take speedy 
action for setting up of new AMPC in Chennai.  Necess ary 
steps should also be taken up by the Department with 
Mumbai International Airport Limited for early settlement 
of site for AMPC. The Committee also observe that  during 
the Twelfth Plan, in addition to the Eleventh Plan proposal, 
the Department propose s to set up AMPCs at Ahmedabad, 
Jaipur, Kochi, Patna, Lucknow, Bhubaneshwar, Ludhiana 
and Vashi (Navi Mumbai). The Committee are of the view 
that setting up of AMPCs would have tremendous impact 
on the mail delivery and revenue generation of the 
Department. The Committee are not happy with the 
reasons cited by the Department for not setting up AMPCs 
in other cities as  alternative sites  in those cities could 
have been explored. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the building related issues for settin g up 
AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad may 
be sorted out at the earliest in consultation with the 
respective States lest alternative options should be 
explored by them. Initiatives taken for setting up of AMPCs 
during the Twelfth Plan may a lso be completed in a time 
bound manner and Committee be informed  accordingly” 
 

 
 
13. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“Department submits that 11,643 Sq. mtrs. of land has 
been approved for locating AMPC/APSO at C hennai.  
However, in spite of our taking up the matter with Ministry 
of Civil Aviation/AAI, possession of the land has not yet 
been given to the Department of Posts.  Here it would be 
pertinent to mention that this Department did take 
minimum time in assessing and conveying the suitability of 
the land for the purpose of setting up AMPC/APSO.  Further, 
action for relocation of AMPC/APSO at the new land may be 
possible only after the Department has been handed over 
its possession.   
 
Settlement of site with Mumbai International Airport Limited 
 
The issue of identification of alternate site for location of 
AMPC/APSO at Mumbai still remains unresolved.  A meeting 
in this regard was scheduled to be taken by Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 15-06-2012 but was postponed.  
However, the Department is in touch with the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and Airport Authority of India with a view to 
find an early solution to the issues being faced at Mumbai 
and Chennai with respect to setting up of AMPCs. The 
Department will make all efforts to expedite the process of 
setting up of AMPCs in other cities during the XII Plan.”  
 
 
14. The Committee are dismayed to note  that out of 5 AMPCs 
approved by the Finance Minister on 19 January, 2010 for Delhi, 
Kolkata, Chennai , Hy derabad and Bangalore , only two AMPCs could 
be set up by the Department in Delhi and Kolkata and the matter is 
still languishing in respect of AMPCs in other cities.  Besides, there 
was a proposal to set up AMPCs at Ahemadabad, Jaipur, Kochi, Patna, 
Lucknow, Bhubneshwar, Ludhiana and Vashi (navi Mumbai) also. The 
reply of the Department though  indicates  some action on their part 
for settlement of  the issues being faced at Mumbai and Chennai 
Airports, the reply is however, silent about the reasons for dela y in  
setting up of AMPCs at other places already identified during 
Eleventh and proposed for Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of status update regarding setting up of AMPCs at these 
places. Besides, the Committee while reiterating the ir earlier 
recommendation would like to emphasize that all efforts should be 
made by the Department to settle the issues with concerned 
authorities/Departments with regard to setting up  of AMPCs at 

 
 
Mumbai and Chennai followed by opening of AMPCs at other places in 
a time bound manner so that AMPCs at the identified locations are 
set up expeditiously which would enable the Department to 
consolidate the mail operations and deriving maximum advantage in 
the area of quality control. 
 
D. ESTATES MANAGEMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Department has decided to 
enter into a PPP to develop Estates in the Commercial 
locations for revenue generation and an Inter -Ministerial 
Group has been form ed for the purpose. They further note 
that the Inter Ministerial Group has pointed out 
deficiencies/discrepancies in the Model Concession 
Agreement and a decision has been taken to hire the 
services of a Consultant and for the purpose an EoI is 
under issue. The Committee are dismayed to observe the 
slow pace of work of the Department for entering into a 
Public Private Partnership to develop Estates in the 
commercial locations for revenue generation. They regret 
to note that even the Expression of Interest f or engaging 
the service of the Consultant to draft a Model Concession 
Agreement is still yet to be issued by the Department and 
are  of the view that with this slow pace it will take years to 
develop Estates in the commercial locations, as a number 
of form alities would be required to be completed even 
thereafter. They feel that since, the Department has 
already done a study to ascertain the potential of revenue 
earnings through commercial utilization of land by taking 
into account four sample of plots, the Department should 
issue EoI for engaging the Consultant at the earliest so that 
a Model Concession Agreement may be finalized. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of all the efforts made 
by the Department in this regard.” 
 
16. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“Expression of Interest(EOI) drafted for engaging the 
Consultant has been got vetted by Internal Finance Wing 
and will be sent to DAVP shortly for its publication in one of 
the leading newspaper,  It may, however, be submitted for 
the information of Standing Committee on Information 
(2011-12) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) that the 
subject is highly technical and the stakes are very high in 
the form of precious lands.  As per existing instructions, 
each ca se of alienation/long term lease of land requires 

 
 
approval of the Cabinet, until a policy is formulated and 
approved by the Cabinet.  In the light of the above 
background, every step in the entire exercise of Public 
Private Partnership(PPP) is taking long time.” 
 
17. The Committee note from the reply that Expression of Interest 
(EoI) drafted for engaging the Consultant for developing Estates in 
the commercial locations has been got vetted by Internal Finance 
Wing and will be sent to DAVP for its publication . They however, 
regret to note  the slow pace with which the Department moves with 
such activities which entails revenue generation for them.  They feel 
that timely action by the Department in finalizing these codal 
formalities would have enabled them to f inalise Model Concession 
Agreement by now. They are not convinced with the assertion of the 
Department about   technicalities involved in the matter and  want 
the Department to study  the models adopted by the other 
Ministries/Departments like Railways who have effectively dealt with 
such matters and replicate the best of the practices adopted by them 
with regard to Estates Management. They would like the Department 
to expedite the finalization of matte r  and also to be  apprised of 
further progress made in this regard.  
 
E. IT INDUCTION – POSTAL OPERATIONS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 26) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe poor utilization of funds under the 
scheme IT Induction-Post Operations during the year 2011 -
12  where an amount of Rs. 676.50 crore was allocated at 
BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 142.36  crore at RE 
stage. The actual utilizati on upto January, 2012 was only 
Rs. 50.61 crore which is just 7.48 percent of the BE Outlay. 
The Committee note that delay in finali zation of RFPs was  
mainly due to review of the entire project to ensure that 
procurement exercise conform to procedure of public 
procurements, meeting of the RFP Management Committee 
consisting of members from DIT/NIC and experienced 
eminent resource from  various IITs/IIITs, queries and 
clarification to bidders due to complex nature of RFPs etc.  
The Committee note that now 8 RFPs have been floated 
and are at various stages of finalization. The Committee 
feel that the Department has somewhat been negligent  in 
attaching due importance to this important component of 
Postal  industry which would have boosted the 

 
 
performance of Department considerably. In this regard 
the Committee feel that  plans of the Department relating 
to mail operations, Core Banking Solu tions, setting up of 
Post Bank of India, PLI software, provision of toll free 
number for MGNREGA for grievance redressal, operating of 
call centre for DoP, net working of Post Offices and various 
other activities are dependent on the success of the 
implementation of the scheme IT -Induction in Postal 
Operations. The Committee recommend that necessary 
steps may be taken for the early finalization of 8 RFPs  so 
that various activities of the Department under this 
scheme may be initiated during the current Fina ncial Year. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of an updated 
status in this regard.” 
 
19. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“Department has taken and adopted the below mentioned 
steps to comply with the observ ations of the Standing 
Committee: 
 
The delay in finalization of RFPs was mainly due to review 
of the entire project to ensure that procurement exercise 
conform to procedure of public procurements etc. The 
Department is trying hard to expedite the procureme nt 
process and start the entire work so that the benefits can 
accrue from the integrated IT Project. 
 
Out of eight RFPs floated, five have been finalized and 
Letters of Intent (LOIs) issued. Among them, contract has 
been signed in three RFPs. 
In case of two other RFPs, the advice has been sought from 
Ministry of Law. The Department has pursued with Ministry 
of Law for expeditious advice so that the RFPs can be 
carried forward. 
 
In the case of the remaining RFP, the RFP was cancelled 
and fresh bids are being called for through re-tendering. 
 
 
RFP Name Status Project 
Start Date 
Tentative 
Pilot 
Completion 
Date 
Tentative 
Implementatio
n Completion 
date 
Data 
Centre 
(DCF)* 
Contract 
Signed  
June 2012   2013-14 
Network 
Integratio
n ( NI)** 
Contract 
Signed  
June 2012 Jan 2013 2013-14 
Change 
Managem
Contract 
signed  
June 2012  May 2014 

 
 
ent (CM) 
Financial 
Services 
(FSI)*** 
LoI Issued. 
Finalisation 
of the 
contract is 
under 
process. 
 
June 2012 March 2013 May 2014 
Rural 
System 
Integrator            
(RSI)**** 
LoI Issued. 
Finalisation 
of the 
contract is 
under 
process. 
June 2012   
Core 
System 
Integrator 
(CSI) 
Evaluation of 
financial bids 
to be 
finalized 
Advice from Ministry of Law is awaited. 
Rural 
Hardware 
(RH) 
Evaluation of 
financial bids 
is under 
process. 
 Advice from Ministry of Law is awaited. 
Mail 
Operation
s 
Hardware 
(MOH) 
RFP 
Cancelled on 
2.5.2012 
after 
obtaining 
approval of 
the Steering 
Committee in 
the meeting  
held on 
17.4.2012 
(vide minutes 
dated 
24.4.2012)  
RFP to be issued for receipt of fresh bids by  
MOH RFP Management Committee. 
  
 
In brief, five out of eight RFPs are awaiting start of work and 
two  RFPs are awaiting response from Ministry of Law. One 
RFP is awaiting re -tendering. Upon signing of the contract 
with the vendors, it is expected that the implementation will 
begin soon.  The Project is expected to be rolled out by 
2014.”  
 
 
20. The Committee   feel that IT induction which is a PAN India 
project is not being accorded  due importance  by the Department 
without which the Department would not be able to improve the ir  
service levels to customers and increase the productivity of 
employee and  revenue of the Department.  The Committee note with 
regret the slow pace of work in respect of  the 8 RFPs which had 
already been floated and were at the various s tages of finalization. 

 
 
They further note that five out of eight RFPs are still awaiting start of 
work and two RFPs are awaiting response from the Ministry of Law. 
One RFP is awaiting re -tendering.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised whether the work i n respect of the three  RFPs   namely; 
Data Centre, Network Integration, Change Management for which 
contracts have already been signed has commenced  in the scheduled 
time which was  June, 2012 . They wonder if the work i n respect of 
two RFPs  namely; Financial Services (FSI) and  Rural System  
Integrator ( RSI)   for which finalization of contracts are still under 
process as stated by the Department, would have commenced by the 
scheduled time i.e. June, 2012.   Further, in regard to two RFPs i.e. 
Core Syste m Integrator (CSI)  and Rural Hardware  (RH) which are 
awaiting response from the Ministry of Law, the Committee would 
like to know the period since when the  proposals are pending with 
the Ministry  and  desire to get the advice of the Ministry expedited 
so as to ensure  early execution  of these t wo RFPs as well. The y  
also desire that the retendering of RFP in respect of Mai l Operations 
Hardware (MOH)  may also be expedited and all requisite exercise be 
done at the earliest.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
status update in respect of  all the 8 RFPs.  
 
F. STATUS OF BROADBAND CONNECTIVITY 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 28) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“On the status of broadband connectivity, the Department 
has informed that the proposals of providing broadband 
connectivity in 8270 Departmental Post Offices have been 
submitted to the Steering Committee for approval and if 
the same is approved, 8270 Departmental Post Offices will 
be provided with Broadband by 30 th April, 2012. The 
Committee are however, dismayed to note that this 
important activity to connect Post Offices with the Broad 
band connections is still under approval stage and the 
Department does not seem to have taken timely steps to 
expedite the matter. The Committee feel that this will mark 
a new beginning for the India Post.  The Committee would 
therefore, like the Department to take all necessary steps 
in this regard including advance coordination meetings 
with the executing agency to finalize details so that the 
proposal do not suffer for want of other formalities as soon 

 
 
as the same is cleared by the Steering Committee and the 
work is started at the right earnest.”   
 
22. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“Broadband connectivi ty has been provided in 19890 
computerized Post Offices out of total 24969 computerized 
Post Offices upto 31-03-2012.” 
 
23. The Committee are dismayed to note  from the reply that 5079 
Computerized Post Offices are still without Broadband connection 
which  shows slow performance of the Department in providing 
Broadband connectivity to all Post Offices. The Committee would like 
to draw the attention of the Department to their Fifteenth Report 
(Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9) on “Modernization of Post Offices” 
whereby computerization of Post Offices was emphasized as many 
core activities of the Department are related to the computerization. 
With this slow pace of computerization and broadband connectivity, 
the Committee wonder how the Department would enhance their  
efficiency and  address the challenges before the Department.  The 
Committee would like to know the fate of broadband connectivity in 
the remaining Post Offices and desire that all efforts should be made 
to cover all remaining Post Offices with the Broadba nd connection in 
this financial year  itself. The Committee also desire that 
computerization of all post offices should be accorded top priority 
and  may be done  at the earliest. The Committee would also like to 
know the status of broadband connectivity in  Extra Departmental 
Post Offices (EDBOs) 
 
G. MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE ACT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 32) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that during the year 2011 -12 
(upto January, 2012), the tot al number of MGNREGA 
accounts opened with the Department have increased 
however the amount disbursed have declined as the 
account holders have the option of other institutions like 
banks and the decision of the state governments regarding 
amount of such wa ges  to be distributed through Post 

 
 
Offices. The Committee have also been informed that the 
total disbursements by Posts and Banks have declined 
during 2011 -12 and the total disbursement till January, 
2012 has been Rs. 12,467 crore. The Committee wonder if  
the decline in the amount disbursed by the Post Offices 
during the period is due to the deficient services by Postal 
Department in comparison to Banks. They feel that if the 
services provided by Posts are comparable with the banks 
then the increase in the  opening of accounts would have 
led to increase in the amount disbursed. As the 
Department have greater network than banks in the rural 
areas necessary steps should be taken to increase amount 
of wages disbursed through Posts by way of improving 
their serv ices and projecting themselves. In this regard, 
the services of GDSs in mobilizing the account holders can 
be of immense helpful.  
 
The Committee also note that during 2011, 252 complaints 
relating to delay in payment, less payment, wrong 
payment, non-payment of wages, etc have been reported 
and 239 cases have been settled. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the toll free number for redressal of 
grievances in various States/UTs has still not been set up. 
The Committee are of the view that to deal with such cases 
a strong grievance redressal mechanism is essential within 
the Department. The Committee recommend that toll free 
number for grievance redressal should be set up in all 
States in order to help the Department to address the 
complaints of the MGNR EGA labourers in an efficient and 
effective manner which would also increase their 
confidence in the Department. 
 
The Committee are also seriously concerned to note that 
94 officials have been found involved in corrupt practices. 
Disciplinary action has be en initiated against 69 corrupt 
officials and in 25 cases criminal proceedings under IPC 
and Prevention of Corruption Act have been initiated. The 
Committee are of the view that such cases have shown the 
Department in poor light. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should identify such 
loopholes in their system which has led to corruption and 
deal sternly with the corrupt officials to instill confidence of 
account holders in the Department. The Committee also 
hope that the recommendations made in their Twenty Fifth 
report on the subject would be followed in letter and spirit 
by the Department. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken on all of the above issues.” 
 
 
 

 
 
25. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated 
as under:- 
“Department of Posts has taken following steps to improve the 
services under MGNREGS in order to ensure speedy disbursal of 
wages to workers:- 
 
I. Line limits for cash conveyance at various levels of Post 
Offices have been reviewed and r evised keeping in view 
the need for large cash requirement to pay wages.  
 
II. The Circles have been instructed to follow dynamic line 
limit method for conveyance of cash as well as maintaining 
the cash balances.  
 
III. Standing instructions have been issued to all  concerned 
whereby cash up to the requirement can be supplied 
beyond the normal line limits when wage payment liability 
is high. For this purpose, funds have been provided for 
hiring of vehicles for transporting cash.  
IV. Arrangements have also been made to u tilize the services 
of all the manpower including those of other officials at the 
post offices at the time of making payments to MNREGA 
wage earners to ensure prompt disbursement of wages. 
V. State governments have been requested to ensure rolling 
funds with the concerned Head Post Offices so that 
payment of wages starts immediately on receipt of wage 
bills and need to wait for cheque clearance is avoided.  
 
Phone numbers of nodal officers have already been made 
available for display at work place. In case of any grievance 
wage earners may directly contact the concerned officers for 
their immediate redressal. 
 
The Department is having efficient internal mechanism to deal 
with all types of cases of corruption. Department has taken all 
possible steps to wipe out the cases of corruption.” 
 
26. The Committee note that the Department has taken certain 
steps to improve the services under MGNREGS in order to ensure 
speedy disbursal of wages to workers.  They are , however, unhappy 
to note that their recommendation for a  toll free number for 
grievance redressal in various States/UTs has not been taken 
seriously by  the Department. The Department seem  to be rather 
contended with the display of phone numbers of nodal officers at 
work place. The Committee feel that 24 hours t oll free help line is a 

 
 
more efficient and effective manner to redress the grievances of 
wage earners which can be made use of at any place  and time rather 
than using the phone numbers of nodal officers which in most cases 
are not accessible. They , therefore, reiterate their recommendation 
to set up and display at work place a toll free number by all States in 
addition to phone numbers of nodal officers as a grievance redressal 
mechanism under MGNREGA.   
 
***

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
GROSS EXPENDITURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that the Gross Expenditure of the 
Department is gradually increasing over the years. The actual gross 
expenditure of the Department which was Rs. 13346.94 crore in the 
year 2009-10 has increased to Rs. 13793.67 crore in 2010 -11. During 
2011-12, the Gross Expenditure at BE stage was Rs. 13522.36 crore 
which increased to Rs. 13763.91 at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure upto January, 2012 was Rs. 11590.30 cr ore.  The 
Committee are of the view that the Gross Expenditure might have 
increased further with the closing of the Financial Year 2011 -12. 
According to the Department, the gross expenditure has increased in 
the year 2008 -09 onwards mainly due to payment o f arrears of Pay 
and admissible allowances and arrears of pensionary charges due to 
implementation of Sixth Central Pay Commission Report. 
Implementation of the Gramin Dak Sewak One Man Committee Report 
in 2009-10 also led to payment of arrears of Time Rel ated Continuity 
Allowance to the GDS. The Committee are of the view that since the 
main components of the gross expenditure are salary and pensionary 
charges which are subjected to annual increase, prudent utilization of 
resources would help the Department  in reducing the working 
expenses. The Committee hope that the Department would be able to 
contain working expenses during 2012 -13 by better management of 
areas of growing expenditure and devise measures to contain growing 
expenditure in such areas by having an objective analysis of the same.  
The Committee would like to be apprised about the concrete initiatives 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
Reply of  the Government 
 It is fact that the Gross Expenditure of the Department of posts 
under Revenue s ection has been increasing year after year. It was                  
` 13793.67 crore in 2010.11, `  14163.70 crore in 2011 -12 and 
projected at ` 14379.71 crore in BE 2012 -13. There are two major 
components of the Gross expenditure viz. (1) salaries (2) pens ion 
which are increased annually due to annual increment in Pay and 
increase in DA on pay and pension. The rise in pay on MACP and 
payment of 10 days leave encashment on LTC have also increased 
both the components. However the Department of Posts has been 
issuing the instructions to their subordinates circles/units from time to 
time to keep the expenditure within the budgetary grant and also 
making best efforts to control the expenditure by conducting monthly 
Video Conference  to review the expenditure vis -a-vis allotment and 
applying austerity measures as suggested by the Ministry of Finance. 
 

 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
RECOVERIES 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
  The Committee ap preciate that the recoveries received by the 
Department are gradually increasing. They however, also note that 
recoveries are still pending from a few departments besides declining 
trend of recoveries under certain Heads.  The actual recoveries in 
2010-11 were Rs. 485.72 crore thus showing an increase of Rs. 46.78 
crore from the previous year. However, during the year 2011 -12, the 
recoveries at BE stage were projected at Rs. 695.11 crore which were 
reduced to Rs. 572.05 crore at the RE stage. The actual rec overies 
upto January, 2012 were Rs. 54.90 crore. As regards the reasons for 
this slow recoveries in 2011 -12, the Department have stated that out 
of the estimated recoveries of Rs. 572.05 crore at RE in the year 2011 -
12, Rs. 449.00 crore is related to PLI/R PLI recoveries and the target 
would thus be achieved when the recoveries on account of PLI/RPLI are 
booked in the account of the Department at the closing of the Financial 
year. The Committee note that recoveries under the heads 
„Commission on WUMTS‟ and „ WUFSI‟ have declined considerably in 
2010-11 as compared to the previous year. The Committee also note 
with concern that as on 31st December, 2011, Rs. 19 crore was due 
from EPF, Rs. 10 crore from CMPF and Rs. 6 crore from DoT. The 
Committee feel that the Department is not making sincere efforts to 
effect these recoveries and need to intensify their efforts further in the 
matter. In this direction, the Committee recommend that efforts should 
also be made by the Department to increase the total share of 
Department in money remittance through Western Union by extending 
its services to more Post Offices and locations in the Country. As 
regards recoveries to the amount of Rs. 35 crore due from EPF, CMPF 
and DoT, the Committee strongly recommend to intensify thei r efforts 
to recover the outstanding amount from these Departments by taking 
up the matter at an appropriate level. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
The total number of post offices offering International Money 
Transfer Service (IMTS) in association with Western Union is 7190. 
Further expansion of this service to more locations depends upon 
business potential in particular area which is being explored. 
 
With a view to offer more options to the customers to receive 
money from abroad, Department has entered into an agreement with 
Money Gram Payment Systems Inc. which is another company 
providing International Money Transfer Service in more than 190 
countries. This service was first launched in 100 post offices and 
thereafter extended to 2046 post offices. It is expec ted that with this 
service, Department may be able to generate sufficient additional 
revenue. 
 

 
 
Further, necessary steps have been taken up with the concerned 
departments to recover the outstanding dues and it is expected that 
maximum amount shall be recovered during the year. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
REVENUE RECEIPTS 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the revenue receipts of the Department 
are gradually i ncreasing. The actual revenue receipts in 2010 -11 was 
Rs. 6962.33 crore which was Rs. 695.63 crore more than the actual 
revenue receipts of the previous year. During the year 2011 -12, the 
revenue receipts at BE stage were Rs. 7517.70 crore which were 
increased to Rs. 7522.02 crore at the RE stage. The actual revenue 
receipts upto January, 2012 were Rs. 6240.18 crore. The item wise 
analysis of the revenue receipts indicates that under the heads „PRC on 
Ordinary Services‟ and „Sale of Postage Stamps‟, revenue  receipts 
have declined in the year 2010 -11 when compared with the previous 
year. The Committee also note that to increase revenue receipts the 
Department has signed MoUs with UIDAI for enrollment and 
dispatch/delivery of Aadhar letters, dispatch and deliv ery of Smart ID 
Cards for Registrar General of India, Business from e -Commerce 
Companies like Naptol.com, e -Vitaran etc, signing MoU with Air India 
for introduction of Air Logistics Services. The Committee are of the 
view that the Department have huge pote ntial for revenue generation 
which is not being tapped properly. While acknowledging the various 
initiatives taken by the Department to increase its revenue receipts, 
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to make the postal 
services cost effectiv e and viable and the Department should make 
efforts to earn maximum revenue so as to meet its working expenses 
from its revenue receipts.  With the entry of private players in the core 
function of postal Department, the Department has to face new 
challenges everyday. In order to compete with them, the Committee 
strongly feel that the Department should come out with new initiatives 
which should not only be competitive but also cost effective, at the 
same time not deviating from its social responsibility. The  Committee 
also recommend that while making efforts to increase its revenue 
receipts by taking new initiatives, the Department should also not 
deviate from its core activity that is mail delivery. The Committee 
desire that they should  be apprised of the i nitiatives taken by the 
Department. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
  
 Under mail operations, the Department has, among other things, 
undertaken two major initiatives with a view to improve the quality of 
mail related services. The erstwhile mail networks for Sp eed Post, First 
Class and Second mail have been restructured. The optimized network 

 
 
for Speed Post has led to faster processing and delivery of mail. The 
strengthening of tracking system for Speed Post has resulted in 
availability of end -to-end information on the website for a majority of 
Speed Post articles. An online performance monitoring system has also 
been developed. The network for first and second class mail has been 
restructured recently and it is expected that the same would lead to 
faster processing and delivery of these mails as well. The Department 
has also set up Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) in Delhi 
and Kolkata and installed Letter Sorting Machines and Mixed Mail 
Sorters in these cities. These machines would help in faster sorting  of 
letters/flats/packets, which in turn, would lead to expedited delivery of 
mail. The performance of post offices with respect to mail delivery is 
also being monitored regularly with a view to improve the quality of 
mail operations at every stage.  
 
 The Department remains committed to improving the quality of 
mail operations, which would result in more traffic and revenue. At the 
same time, the Department also provides mail related services at an 
affordable rate in every corner of the country as part of its social 
responsibility. 
 
Department has also undertaken the following initiatives: 
 
(a) ‟The Marketing and Product Management efforts of the India Post 
have resulted into a consistent Speed Post growth of about 20 -
21% for the past three financial years.  Th e percentage increase 
in the year 2009-10 was 19.15%.  The increase in the year 2010 -
11 was 21.95%.  The revenue figures for 2011 -12 show an 
increase of 20%. 
 
(b) The Department has signed MoUs with UIDAI for enrolment and 
dispatch/delivery of aadhar letters. The total expected revenue is 
approx. ` 1200 crore for handling of 60 crore articles.  As of now, 
77.24 lakh enrolments have been done at post offices and 
approx. 17.72 crore aadhar letters have been booked and 16.10 
Crores articles have been delivered. 
 
(c) The Department is in the process of making arrangement for 
dispatch and delivery of Smart ID Cards (NPR) for Registrar 
General of India.   
 
(d) The Department is taking initiative to rope in the e -commerce 
companies.  In this regard the Department is trying to get the 
business from e-commerce companies like Naptol.com, e -Vitaran 
etc.  The Department has also taken initiative to deliver the 
Driving Licenses in Maharashtra and other Circles through Speed 
Post.  Passports are also being delivered through Speed Post. 
 
(e) In the present era when e -commerce has been growing at a very 
fast rate, business and customers are looking at a reliable 
medium of sending and receiving the goods ordered through 
electronic portals.  The customers as well as the e -commerce 

 
 
companies are looking for a service where they can dispatch and 
track the item through a convenient, cheap, fast and reliable 
method.  To fulfill the needs of customers as well as e -commerce 
companies, the Department of Posts is in the process of 
formulating Cash on Delivery as an add-on facility on Speed Post 
service.  This facility is likely to attract e -commerce companies.  
The standard operating procedure has been prepared and 
modification of software is underway. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Post s F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
SHARE OF POSTS IN VARIOUS SERVICES 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that in insurance sector, the share of the 
Department is 2.5 per cent in terms of premium income and 8 per cent 
in terms of number of policies. As per the market survey carried out by 
M/S IMRB, the Department of Posts has the largest number of 
customers of small saving accounts when compared with all scheduled 
Commercial Banks. The share of Posts in International Mone y Transfer 
Services is 2.4 per cent. The Committee are of the view that 
Department is earning  revenue in the form of „recoveries‟ and 
„remuneration‟ through insurance, International Money Transfer 
Service and maintaining small saving accounts. The Committ ee 
recommend that the Department should make sincere efforts to 
increase its share in the above -mentioned areas by adopting a proper 
marketing strategy. Further, in  regard to  the share of Department in 
Insurance sector, the Committee feel  that the Posta l Life Insurance 
(PLI)  can be   made a key revenue driver for the Department and for 
that the Department need  to relook at its entire operating strategy, 
including a structural framework in the insurance division and to 
develop a roadmap for the future i ncluding an analysis of insurance 
market.  
 
The Committee also observe that the amount of remittance transacted 
through India Posts has declined from Rs. 6502.92 crore in 2009 -10 to 
Rs. 4918.41 crore in 2010 -11. The Total amount of remittance 
transacted through India Posts in 2011 -12 (upto February, 2012) is Rs. 
3939.40 crore. The Committee are of the view that with proper 
marketing strategy, the share of India Posts in international money 
remittance can still grow tremendously. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should make an endeavour to 
increase its share in various services by adopting proper marketing 
strategy by analyzing market forces coupled with proper publicity 
campaigns. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 The recovery at RE stage for 2011 -12 for insurance activities of 
the Department of Posts was projected at ` 449 crores. The actual   

 
 
recovery was, however, ` 389.63 crores. In 2009 -10 the recovery was     
` 29 7.84 crores and in 2010 -11, it was `  381.60 crores. In order to 
increase the revenue share of Insurance Activities of the Department , 
following initiatives in the sphere of  sale and after sales service, 
marketing , business monitoring , technology induct ion  etc have been 
taken in the recent past :- 
 
(i) Decentralization of sale and after sale operations of PLI and RPLI 
up to Divisional level  
(ii) Publicity activities  through various media including print and 
electronic media, printed brochure, leaflet etc., dis play on 
hoardings, road shows, seminars and RPLI & PLI melas to 
popularize the schemes among clientele 
(iii) Raising the outer limit of sum assured of PLI and RPLI from ` 10 
lac to ` 20 lac and from ` 3 lac to ` 5 lacs respectively  
(iv) Fixing the business targets i n terms of premium income and 
monitoring by designated nodal officers across Circles 
(v) Training activities in an extensive manner. During 2007 -08 to 
2011-12, we have imparted training to 17,923 marketing 
personnel and 1228 Circle office staff . Licentiate tra ining has 
been imparted to Direct Agents and marketing personnel 
numbering about 3500 personnel through Insurance Institute of 
India, Mumbai in order to enhance marketing skills of the sales 
persons . 
(vi) Engagement of more than 9500 PLI and RPLI Direct Agents  for 
sale of PLI and RPLI policies. 
(vii) Facility for online deposit of PLI and RPLI premium by customer 
has been implemented. 
 
 Further, Joint Publicity campaigns along with Money Transfer 
Service partners are regularly undertaken so as to popularize the 
service through post offices. This includes public campaigns, shows 
and launching of award schemes among the customers taking 
payment through post offices. Publicity of service is also undertaken by 
distribution of leaflets through Postmen and Stamping of inwar d and 
outward foreign mail with information on availability of Money Transfer 
Service in Post Offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
RATE OF REMUNERATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Department has accepted the 
decision of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 
fixation of revised rate of remuneration based on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee. Revised rate as applic able 
in the year 2011 -12 is Rs. 151.76 per live account, Rs. 51.64 per 
Savings Certificate, Rs. 13.67 per IVP and Rs. 20.93 per silent account. 
With regard to MGNREGA account, it is stated as „Not Yet Fixed‟ and in 
the matter regarding remuneration on Zero  Balance Deposit/Balance 

 
 
Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate of remuneration, the 
Department have not furnished any information. The Committee are of 
the view that disbursement of wages to labourers under MGNREGA is 
an important activity, hence the rate of remuneration account should 
be settled at an early date with the Ministry of Finance so that an early 
decision in this regard is taken which would also help the Department 
in increasing their revenue and reducing the deficit. In the matter 
regarding status of remuneration on Zero Balance Deposits/Balance 
Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate of remuneration, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in this 
regard.” 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 In order to meet the administra tive expenditure while disbursing 
MGNREGA wages by the Department of Posts, a Plan scheme „Support 
for payment of wages to MGNREGS workers through post offices‟ was 
introduced by the Planning Commission during the financial year 2008 -
09. An amount of Rs. 8 0 crore was approved by EFC for the 2008 -09 
Annual Plan under the aforesaid scheme.  A provision for ` 100 crores 
was made at BE stage for this plan scheme under the Annual Plan for 
2009-10. Memo for consideration of EFC was approved by Ministry of 
Finance. The Finance Minister conveyed his approval with the 
observation that the entire fund of Rs. 100 crore would come from the 
administrative expenses part of budget of Ministry of Rural 
Development under MGNREGA. MoRD however expressed its inability 
to set a side this amount from the administrative expenses part of 
MGNREGA and referred the matter to the Prime Minister‟s Office. 
 
 Details of administrative expenses incurred year-wise have again 
been intimated to MoRD by DoP and the matter is under consideration  
of MoRD. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
REVENUE EARNED PER PERSON 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee observe from the information made available by 
the Department that  the percentage increase in revenue earned per 
person is 13 per cent during the year 2010 -11 as against 10.6 per cent 
during the year 2009 -10. The Committee are however perturbed to 
note that the number of employees of the Department are also 
declining which does not depict a fine picture of the Department about 
revenue earned per person. The total number of employees in 2009 -10 
was 475000 which declined to 466903 in 2010 -11. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should work out a more appropriate 
means for working out the information relating to revenue earned per 
person. The Committee hope that this would help the Department in 
realizing its potential and tracking the efficiency and productivity of the 
humans resources of the Department. 

 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 The Revenue per employee was worked out by dividing the total 
revenue earned during the year by the total number of the employees 
working during that particular year. This was shown only as statistical 
expression for MIS purpose. The Departme nt does not adopt this 
method to measure productivity of its human resources and with the 
help of its field units will explore the possibility of devising more 
appropriate method for reviewing and tracking the effective and 
productivity of human resources. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
take all necessary steps to fill up the existing vacancies i n the 
Department and apprise them accordingly. 
Reply of  the Government 
 The action to fill up the posts, which fall vacant due to 
promotions, retirement, resignation, death or leave of the incumbents 
during the year, is an ongoing process throughout the y ear.  Till such 
time the vacant posts are filled up on regular basis the work is 
managed by redistribution and combination of duties, rationalization of 
procedures, by engagement of Short Duty Staff in the Post Offices and 
paid substitutes for delivery of postal articles.  Examinations are being 
held on regular basis to ameliorate the staff position. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
CAPITAL SECTION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee find that the under utilization of Outlays under 
the Capital Section has been a matter of concern. The total allocation 
at BE stage during the entire period of the Eleventh Plan was Rs. 
1895.30 crore which was reduced to Rs. 1243.58 crore at the RE stage. 
The actual utilization upto January 2012 was Rs. 976.43 crore only. The 
Committee are not satisfied at all with the reasons advanced by the 
Department for the under utilization of funds under capital section 
during the Eleventh Plan period.   T he Committee find that during the 
years 2008 -09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 most of the schemes were 
approved and ready for implementation, however, due to the poor 
performance of the Department during the first six months of each 
year of the Eleventh Plan, the M inistry of Finance had to reduce the 
funds at RE stage.  What is more disturbing to note that even the 
reduced allocation could not be utilized by the Department In 2011 -12, 
the major activities under IT induction did not materialize due to delay 

 
 
in completing the codal formalities for finalizing the RFPs. The above 
observations indicate the lack of efforts and sincerity on the part of the 
Department to utilize the funds under Capital Section.  The Committee 
clearly disapprove the non -seriousness of the Dep artment with regard 
to the under utilization of funds allocated under capital section in each 
year of the Eleventh Plan even when most of the Plan schemes were 
approved and funds were readily available for the purpose.  The 
Committee feel that there is som e serious problem with the planning 
and execution process of schemes in the Department which results in 
under utilization of funds under Capital Section during each year. They, 
therefore, recommend that the entire mechanism for the same in the 
Ministry needs an introspection and review by the Department. In this 
regard as stated by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence 
that the Department have learnt lessons from the Eleventh Plan, the 
Committee hope that the Department would analyze their failur es, 
clearly identify the areas where the Department were found lacking 
and improve upon them so that there could be better utilization of 
funds during the twelfth plan. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 An  expenditure to the tune of Rs. 517 cr. has been incurre d  for 
the activities covered under EFC Phase I of IT Modernization Project 
during 2008-09; 2009-10 and 2010-11 ie., in Computerization of double 
handed Post Offices, Setting up of Data Centre and supply of hardware 
to the Post Offices already computerized during XI Plan.  
 
 The implementation of activities under EFC Phase II, it was 
intimated that contracts have been signed in 2 RFP projects viz, Data 
Centre Facility (DCF) RFP and Network Integrator (NI) RFP on 14.5.2012 
and 16.5.2012 respectively. Contrac t for Change Management (CM) 
project RFP was signed o 25-6-2012.  
 
 Once the vendors are on board, funds requirements will be more 
and accordingly, funds to the tune of ` 516 crore has been projected in 
the BE for 2012 -13. Hence fund allocation and expendi ture will be 
synchronized with implementation of RFPs as per payment schedule. 
 
 Based on the current status of the vendor selection process, the 
timelines defined for the approved project period have been revised. 
The Project is now expected to be rolled out by 2013-14. 
 
 In order to avoid delays in approval of schemes and further 
non/under utilisation of funds, Department has already initiated action 
for preparation of EFC /SFC appraisal memos for the schemes proposed 
to be implemented in twelfth plan. On ce the approved outlays of 
Twelfth plan are communicated by Planning Commission,  department 
will try to ensure that all the schemes are approved by competent 
authority  during the first year of the plan period itself so that the 
schemes can be implemented  smoothly in another four years of plan 
period and allocated funds can be utilised to full extent. A monitoring 
mechanism would also be adopted by the Department for speeding up 

 
 
the plan approval procedure. Thus Department aims at better 
utiisation of fund s during XII plan period by taking care of the all the 
lapses that occurred in XI Plan. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
UTILIZATION OF PLAN OUTLAYS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee observe that there has been under -spending of 
Plan Outlays by the Department during the Eleventh Plan. Out of Rs. 
4180 crore which was the total approved outlay for the Plan Schemes 
during the  Eleventh Plan, the total budgetary allocation a t BE stage 
was Rs. 2995 crore which was brought down at RE stage to Rs. 1865 
crore. The actual utilization upto February, 2012 was only Rs. 1474.54 
crore. The Committee are dismayed to note that due to under 
utilization of Plan Outlays in as many as 31 act ivities under various 
schemes, the physical achievements in the entire plan period have 
been shown as nil. The Committee are not convinced by the reasons 
furnished by the Department, such as, delay in approval of plan 
schemes and delay in adjustment of DGS &D Bill well within the 
stipulated time for under utilization of plan funds. The Committee note 
that most of the schemes were approved by the year 2009 -10 and 
even delay in adjustment of DGS&D Bill of a year could have been 
adjusted in the next Financial Y ear. The Committee also regret to note 
that some of the projects which were already cleared were not 
followed up by the Department. The Department has now stated that 
during Twelfth Plan efforts are being made by the Department for 
obtaining the approval o f the Schemes during the first year of Twelfth 
Plan itself. The Committee recommend that to better utilize funds 
under Plan Outlay during Twelfth Plan, a specific time frame should be 
drawn to obtain the approvals of the schemes during the first year of 
the Twelfth Plan by taking a lesson from the failures in Eleventh Plan. 
In this regard the Committee while drawing the attention of the 
Department to their earlier recommendation made in their Fifth Report 
reiterate that the Department should make an analysi s of the 
implementation of Plan Outlays scheme -wise and take concrete action 
accordingly. Details of the concrete action taken in this regard may 
also be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 The observations made by the Committee are t aken note of.  A 
proposal for continuation of the Plan Scheme – “Access to the Postal 
Network” during 12 th Plan Period, has been submitted to the Planning 
Commission for consideration and approval. The approval of the 
Planning Commission to the proposal is  awaited. As soon as approval 
of the Planning Commission is received, action will be initiated for 
carrying out the activities and utilization of funds under the aforesaid 
scheme.   

 
 
 
 The Twelfth plan outlays are yet to be communicated by 
Planning Commission.  Once the outlays are communicated, all efforts 
will be made by the Department to obtain the approval of schemes 
before the end of the first year of plan period itself.  All Plan 
implementing divisions have been directed to keep ready details of the 
activities and plans for execution/implementation of schemes so that 
once 12 th Plan allocations are communicated EFC proposals can be 
processed immediately depending on the date of communication of 
Plan outlays. All efforts will be made to get plan proposals  approved 
within the succeeding two quarters of the Financial Year.  Periodical 
monitoring of the progress of EFC proposals will be done and all efforts 
will be made to liaise with other agencies concerned such as Ministry 
of Finance, Planning Commission and other subject matter Ministries to 
get the requisite approvals. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH-EAST 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee  observe that the utilization under revenue 
section during the Eleventh Plan upto January, 2012 for the North -East 
was Rs. 233.98 crore, whereas during the same period the utilization 
under Capital Section was Rs. 21.13 crore. The Committee are happy 
to no te that the utilization of plan outlay under the revenue section 
during the years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 has increased with the 
exception of the year 2011 -12. They hope that this trend of utilization 
of funds in the region will continue in future also. The Committee would 
however, like to know the impact of this increasing utilization being felt 
in the region alongwith the specific sectors where the impact is clearly 
visible.  The Committee, also  recommend that Department should 
make earnest efforts to utilize the funds allocated under Capital 
Section also during the period of Twelfth Plan  keeping in mind the 
necessities and geographical factors. The Committee also desire that 
the Department should also identify the underlying reasons for the 
perennial non -utilization of funds under Capital Section in the region 
and to take remedial action to address these problems.” 
 
Reply of  the Government 
 
 The impact of funds spent under North East are: 
 
i. Officials at all levels have been imparted training based o n IT 
Induction, Business orientation  and various PLI services. 
ii. Setting up of Postal Finance Marts have enabled customers to 
access all financial services under one window. 
iii. Philatelic Exhibitions have been held at district and state levels. 
iv. Infrastructural Equipment have been provided to Branch Post 
Offices. 

 
 
v. Provision of GPS in vehicles has helped in tracking movement of 
vehicles. 
vi. Computerization & Networking has enabled Post Offices to offer 
e-enabled services to customers. 
vii. Construction of Post Offices and  Staff Quarters has created a 
congenial atmosphere for both customers and staff. 
viii. Instant Money Order Services are being provided in post offices. 
ix. Franchisee outlets have been opened, branch post offices and 
sub post offices have been relocated as part of increasing Access 
to Postal Network. 
x. Motor cycles have been provided as part of Mechanisation of 
delivery. 
xi. Parcel post centres, Speed Post centres and Logistic post centres 
have been set up. 
 
Due to the approval process being under way for IT Induction and 
major portion of capital segment being covered under IT Induction, 
funds allocated under plan segment could not be utilized as 
anticipated. The observations of the Committee are taken note of by 
the Department and all efforts will be made by the Department  in XII 
Plan to ensure utilization of funds allocated under capital segment to 
the extent possible. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
ACCESS TO POSTAL NETWORKS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee have been persistently recommending for the 
opening of new Post Offices in the country. The Committee find from a 
reply to an Unstarred Question number  478  dated 3 August, 2011 
that as on 31 March, 2011, there were 1,39,848 villa ges with Post 
Offices and 4,89,300 villages without Post Offices. The Committee are 
surprised to note that almost three fourth of villages in the country still 
do not have Post Offices. With regard to the number of Post offices, the 
Committee are dismayed to observe that there was a decline of 113 
Post offices in the Country within a period of one year from 31.03.2010 
to 31.03.2011. 
 
The Committee observe that during Financial Years (2008 -09, 
2009-10 and 2010-11), 1350 proposals for opening of Post Offices were 
received, out of which 440 proposals were found justified and 421 new 
Post offices have been opened.  19 proposals are pending with the 
Department due to various reasons such as delay in getting approval 
in 5 cases, non availability of building in 3 c ases, proposals under 
process in 10 cases and 1 Post office could not be opened due to public 
agitation. The Committee have also been informed that the proposal 
for opening 400 EDBOs by creating equal number of GDS Posts has not 
been accepted by the Internal Finance Wing of the Department and for 

 
 
the year 2012 -13, the Department has taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance for creation of additional GDS Posts.  
 
The Committee wonder how the Department would achieve their 
target to provide postal services to th e last person of the society with 
this pace of progress. The Committee are perturbed to note that 
inspite of the fact that there is a Plan scheme of the Department which 
has been continued during the Twelfth Plan with emphasis on rural 
business, a lot of r elocation of Post Offices are being done and the 
Department seems to be contended with the existing number of Post 
Offices in the country. The Committee strongly recommend that all 
desired initiatives should be taken by the Department as per the 
proposals received from various State Governments /UTs. They also 
recommend that in view of declining number of Post Offices in rural 
areas, the proposal to open 400 EDBOs should be reconsidered by the 
Department by creating equal number of GDS Posts. besides, settl ing  
the issue of creation of additional GDS Posts for 2012 -13  with the 
Ministry of Finance at the earliest.  
 
The Committee also strongly recommend that the Department 
should take necessary steps to open 19 Post offices which are pending 
with the Departm ent and make all efforts to fulfill the annual plan 
target of opening 652 BOs during 2012-13. “ 
 
Reply of  the Government 
Opening of Post Offices is an on -going process. The proposals for 
opening of new Post Offices as received from various State 
Governments/ UTs are examined as per the prescribed norms for 
opening of new Post Offices and new Post Offices are opened by 
redeployment/relocation at places where proposals are found justified.  
 
The “Opening of Post Offices (Rural)” is one of the sub -schemes 
under the Plan Scheme – “Access to the Postal Network” which 
provides for opening of new Post Offices in rural areas by creation of 
equal number of GDS posts. 
 
A proposal for continuation of the Plan Scheme – “Access to the 
Postal Network” alongwith its sub -scheme – “Opening of Branch Post 
Offices (Rural)” during 12 th Plan Period, has been submitted to the 
Planning Commission for consideration and approval. The approval of 
the Planning Commission to the proposal is awaited. As soon as 
approval of the Planning Commission is received, action will be 
initiated/ appraisal memo will be prepared for obtaining the approval of 
the competent authority for opening of new BOs by creating equal 
number of GDS posts under the aforesaid Plan Scheme.   
 
The recommendation/ obs ervation of the Committee has been 
noted for compliance. All efforts will be made to open 19 Post Offices 
pending with the Department and also to fulfill the annual plan target 
of opening of BOs during 2012-13. 
 

 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
SPEED POST 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee observe that Speed Post Service was introduced 
to provide fast and time bound delivery of services. The Committee 
have also been informed  that now 68 per cent of the Speed Post is 
being delivered within two days of posting.  The Committee are 
however dismayed to note  that despite the numerous efforts made by 
the Department to improve Speed Post, the standard of service 
delivery by the Spee d Post is still deficient in comparison to  the 
private courier services.  The Committee recommend that the 
Department should  find ways and means to improve this service by 
way of improving their monitoring mechanism, besides providing pick 
up, SMS intimation facilities to the Customers. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
The Department has restructured the operational network for 
Speed post with a view to improve the quality of Speed Post service. A 
comprehensive monitoring mechanism has also been set up and the 
performance of the field units is being monitored closely and reviewed 
at the highest level every fortnight through video conference with the 
Circles. The processes followed with respect to Speed post operations 
have been redesigned. These initiatives have led to improved delivery 
performance of Speed Post articles, better supervision and monitoring 
over operations and improved track and trace system for the public. 
Speed Post operations are constantly being reviewed and strengthened 
in order to further improve the quality of service. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
WET LEASING OF AIRCRAFTS AND SEA MAIL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee observe that freighter operations for Metros were 
discontinued w.e.f. 1st April, 2010 due to inability of Air India to 
provide consistent and reliable services. Further, the freighter 
operations in North East were also discontinued in April 2011 due to 
withdrawal of the Aircraft by Air Indi a.  The Committee are of the view 
that the carriage of mail in these sectors might have been seriously 
affected with the withdrawal of aircrafts by Air India.  Besides, the 
Committee also note that the Department have decided to do away 
with the Sea Mail.  With these impediments, the Committee wonder 
how the Department is going to run their business and compete with 
other players in the field. They are perturbed to note that no serious 
thought seems to have been given by the Department to these 

 
 
problem having a cascading effect on the overall performance of the 
Department. The Committee have been recommending the 
Department to explore the possibility of owning an aircraft like other 
private players in the field. The Committee recommend that serious 
efforts should be made by the Department in this direction at the right 
earnest and restart freighter operations for Metros and North -East by 
exploring the option of engaging private airlines.  Besides, the 
Committee would also like to know the reasons for stopping  the sea 
mail and would recommend that the Department should reconsider 
their decision to restart this service. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
The transmission of mail on the metro routes has not been 
affected on account of termination of freighter operations. The 
Department uses the services of Air India as well as other private 
scheduled airlines for the purpose of transmission of mail across the 
country. While the Department does not face any problem in mail 
transmission by air in rest of the country, the cap acity offered by 
airlines in the North East sector is found inadequate at times. 
Therefore, the Department has proposed under the 12 th Plan to charter 
an aircraft/helicopter for the purpose of transmission of mail, parcel 
and logistics in the North East Region. The options available in terms of 
air transmission in the rest of the country are adequate.  
 
Department of Post has not discontinued international sea mail 
service entirely. Only outward Parcel Service through surface mail has 
been discontinued. The  service was discontinued due to following 
reasons: 
 
(i)  Traffic under this service declined to negligible levels over the 
years, indicating a near-zero level of demand. 
(ii)  The outward surface parcels service had higher postage rates 
compared to Surfac e Air Lifted (SAL) service provided by Department 
of Posts. SAL service provides air transmission between the origin 
country and destination country. This ensures rapid delivery at 
reasonable rates avoiding any inconvenience to customers. Hence this 
is an appropriate and cost-effective alternative to customers. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
With regard to having their own aircraft by the Department,  the 
Committee also recommend that the Department may first examine 
whether they have the technical expertise to own and operate its own 
freighter operations. In this regard they recommend that the 
Department should first do a cost effective analysis betwe en operating 
its own aircraft and utilizing the aircraft of other agency, before taking 
a decision. 
 

 
 
Reply of  the Government 
The Department does not face any problem with respect to 
transmission of mail by air on metro routes, and therefore, the 
Department does not intend to either own or charter aircraft for 
carriage of mail on these routes. The Department does not have the 
technical expertise or wherewithal to manage aircraft operations on its 
own.  During the earlier freighter operations, the Department  had 
chartered the aircraft from Air India, who had the responsibility for 
operations and maintenance of these aircraft. Therefore, the 
Department does not intend to own or operate its own aircraft for the 
purpose of carriage of mail on the metro routes. F or the North east 
region, the Department has proposed under 12 th Plan to charter an 
aircraft/helicopter for carriage of mail wherein the responsibility of 
aircraft operations and maintenance would be that of the service 
provider, and the Department would o nly pay composite charges for 
the charter. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
PROTECTION OF LAND AVAILABLE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
 
 
Comparison of  data furnished by the Department while 
examining Demands for Grants (2011 -12) and Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) have revealed the contrasting figure with regard to the 
number of plots available, number of plots under encroachment and 
number of cases under litigation. Within a period of one year, the 
number of plots under encroachment have declined from 232 to 223 
and the number of cases under litigation from 62 to 59. While it is 
appreciable that the number of plots under encroachment and 
litigation have de clined, the Committee are surprised to note that 
within one year of the examination Demands for Grants (2011 -12), the 
total number of plots have declined from 1871 to 1802. Taking serious 
note of the discrepancies in the number of plots available, the 
Committee would like the Department to furnish a detailed factual 
reply at the earliest. Besides, the Committee also recommend that 
matter regarding encroachment of plots in the States may be taken up 
by the Department with the concerned authorities there and efforts 
should also be made to erect boundary walls in all the vacant plots 
belonging to the Department.  They also recommend that the 
application of satellite imagery for getting upto date status of 
encroachment at the postal plots which is under examinat ion should 
also be completed at the earliest. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
The department submits that the figure of 1871 as total number 
of plots was completed in the year 2007 -08 in connection with 
Parliamentary Standing committee on Information Technology on “Real 

 
 
Estates Management”.  This was reviewed in 2011 -12 and the figure 
was found to have come down to 1802.  The discrepancy is only to the 
extent of plots on which construction has been done during the 
intervening period.  Further, during the year 201 1-12, an amount of               
` 5.69 crores was released for construction of 84 boundary walls.  
Heads of Circles have been persuaded to take immediate action 
including litigation so that all the Departmental plots are evicted of 
encroachments.  The Hea ds of Circles have also been advised to 
complete documentation of lands and buildings. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
POSTS OFFICES OPERATING FROM RENTED ACCOMMODATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
 
The Department has furnished the information that 19941 Post 
Offices are functioning from rented accommodation in various Postal 
Circles. The amount of money spent towards payment of rent was ` 
54.60 crore in 2008 -09, ` 69.39 crore in 2009-10 and ` 74.65 crore in 
2010-11. With regard to Circle wise scenario maximum number of 
rented Post Offices are in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Orissa. As the amount of 
money spent towards rent pa yment is increasing year after year, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should seriously consider 
having its own buildings for Post Offices especially in the Circles where 
there are high number of Post Offices functioning from rented 
accommodation. The Department should also explore the option of 
hiring municipal/Panchayat and government building instead of hiring 
offices from the private and other commercial establishment at huge 
rent. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
Shortage of civil engineering staff (CE, SEs and Executive 
Engineers) is affecting the construction projects adversely.  However, 
instructions have been issued to all Heads of Circles to explore the 
option of hiring Municipal/Panchayat and Govt. building instead of 
hiring private and other commercial establishment at huge rent. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 27) 
 
Further, the Committee note that India Post IT Project 2012 is the 
biggest public procurement activity of the DoP and during the process 
of procurement there were complaints received by the office of the 
Hon‟ble MoCIT and hence there was a direction from the Hon‟ble MoCIT 
to review the entire project to ensure that the procurement ex ercise 
has been made as per the total formalities and conform to procedures 

 
 
of public procurement. The Committee observe that to ensure 
transparent procurement, 8 RFPs were floated based on open tender 
with competitive bidding. To the extant rules and inst ructions issued 
by nodal ministries such as Ministry of Finance and CVC etc were 
followed for preparation and processing of the RFPs. The tenders are 
being hosted on the website also. The Committee recommend that 
since IT Modernization Project 2012 is the biggest public procurement 
activity of the DoP all necessary steps must be taken by the 
Department to ensure that the project do not suffer due to lack of 
transparency and accountability and that the procurement process is 
transparent and e -enabled.  The C ommittee would also like to know 
the various measures taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
Request for Proposal Management Committee was constituted 
for each RFP consisting of members from Administrative Ministry, 
representatives from Internal Finance Wing/ Department of Information 
Technology/ NIC and academics from IT/ Finance disciplines so that the 
various issues involved in public procurement were deliberated upon 
on and codal formalities were followed. 
 
Each of the RFP was  an open tender exercise and in each RFP, a 
well structured pre -bid conference was held to take into account 
vendor‟s inputs and industry practices. 
The two -bid process of technical and financial bid was 
scrupulously adhered to   in each of the RFP as laid  down by CVC 
guidelines. 
 
Evaluation of RFP was done as per codal formalities laid down by 
Nodal Ministry. 
Wherever allegations were raised by the bidders/Hon‟ble MPs, 
the issues were examined. Wherever required advice was obtained 
from Department of Infor mation Technology and Ministry Of Law 
before the matter was finally decided by the Inter Ministerial Steering 
Committee. 
 
The diagram in the next page broadly represents the process 
undergone in preparation and evaluation of these RFPs. The elaborate 
process was in order to ensure transparency and accountability. 

 
 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF UIDAI PROJECT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 31) 
 
The Committee note that the Department has signed MoU with 
UIDAI for enrollment and dispatch/delivery of Aadhar letters.  The 
Committee also observed that as of now 73.3 lakh enrollments have 
been done and approximately 8.5 crore Aadhar letters have been 
booked. The Committee have been informed that at present UIDAI has 
a total mandate of issuing 60 crore Aadhar numbers and the total 
revenue expected is Rs. 1200 crore by way of delivery of these letters. 
The Committee are of the view that the initiati ve taken by the 
Department of Posts with UIDAI hold tremendous challenges for the 
Department in terms of revenue generation and preparedness of the 
Department to deliver Aadhar numbers throughout the length and 
breadth of the Country. The Committee recomme nd that the 
Department of Posts should set up more enrollment Centres and 
launch widespread publicity campaigns so as to ensure maximum 
enrollment. The issue of delay in delivery should also be addressed so 
that the Aadhar number could be delivered to the enrolled person in 
time. Any difficulty encountered by the Department in this regard may 
be communicated to the Committee. 
Reply of  the Government 
 As per the UIDAI portal, a total of 7125272 successful 
enrolments have been done by the Department of Posts  as on 24 -05-
2012. 
 
During the first phase of UID enrolment project the Department 
of Posts had identified more than 4000 enrolment stations.  However 
903 enrolment stations were active during the period.  Number of 
enrolment stations will be increased in the 2nd phase of UID enrolment 
to ensure maximum enrolments. 

 
 
 
As far as delivery of Aadhar letters is concerned the Department 
of Posts is not facing any major difficulties.  Some of the operational 
issues crop up from time to time which is resolved in a t ime bound 
manner. Further, dedicated teams have been set up at each circle level 
to monitor the delivery of Aadhar letters. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THIS COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
STATUS OF GRAMIN DAK SEWAKS EMPLOYEES 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that GDS employees are governed by 
Gramin Dak Sevaks (Conduct & Engagement) Rules, 2011 which are 
non-statutory in natur e. The Committee also observe that the issue of 
conferment of status of regular departmental employees to the Gramin 
Dak Sevaks with 8 hours duty was examined by the Group of Ministers 
in the year 1998 following the recommendation made by the Justice 
Talwar Committee but the same was not agreed to. The Committee 
feel that the Gramin Dak Sevaks are the back bone of the Department 
for running the rural network of Post Offices and their welfare plans 
should be accorded due priority.  In order to improve the po stal 
operations in rural areas, the Committee feel that they should be 
granted Departmental employees status and their working hours may 
be extended by utilizing their services in other activities of the 
Department.  In this regard, the Committee understan d that to deal 
with MGNREGA wages, the Department have been hiring the 
temporary staff to help the existing workforce to manage the large 
number of accounts. The Committee are therefore ,of the view that the 
services of GDS may also  be utilized in this ar ea. This would definitely 
lead to  better services to the people in rural areas by experienced 
personnel.  The Committee are also of the view that the 
recommendations made by the Justice Talwar Committee need to be 
seriously re -considered by the Department  which would greatly help 
the Department in improving the Postal Services in the rural areas.  
They also urge the Department that the other demands of GDSs 
employees regarding raising bonus and stopping reduction of TRCA in 
cases of reduction of workload should also given due consideration and 
the matters may be taken up with the concerned Ministry/Department 
for settling the issues.  The details of action taken by the Department 
on the aforesaid issues may also be communicated to the Committee 
at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 (A) CONFERMENT OF STATUS OF DEPARTMENTAL EMPLOYEES TO 
GRAMIN DAK SEVAKS 
 
1. Gramin Dak Sevaks and their working conditions are governed by 
Gramin Dak Sevaks (Conduct & Engagement) Rules, 2011. The GDS 
(Conduct & Engagement) Rules are non -statutory in nature. Gramin 
Dak Sevaks are engaged on terms and conditions which are 
significantly different from those of regular employees. The job profile, 

 
 
working hours, working conditions, applicability of rules for the regular 
Departmental employees and that of the Gramin Dak Sevaks are all 
together different.  Gramin Dak Sevaks are only entitled to protection 
under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India as held by the Apex 
Court and not in other matters.  While the regular Govt. em ployee 
superannuate on completion of age of 60 years, Gramin Dak Sevaks 
can enter the service on attaining age of 18 years & remain in 
engagement up to 65 years.  Further, the essential qualifications for all 
the categories of Gramin Dak Sevaks other than Branch Post Masters is 
8th and in case of Branch Post Masters it is matriculation whereas the 
essential qualification of erstwhile Group D now designated as MTS 
Group C & Postman is Matriculation & that of Postal Assistant is 10+2. 
Thus, the regular Govt. employees and Gramin Dak Sevaks are two 
separate and distinct categories.  The Gramin Dak Sevaks before 
engagement are required to give a certificate that they have other 
sources of income besides the allowances paid or to be paid by the 
Government for adequate means of livelihood for themselves and their 
families.  They work for a minimum of 3 hours and for a maximum of 5 
hours per day. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
Superintendent of Post Offices vs. PK Rajamma (1977) (3) SCC has held 
that GDS are holders of the civil post outside the regular civil services.  
 
2. Extra Departmental system in vogue since 1866 -67 provides for 
engagement of Gramin Dak Sevaks for a minimum of 3 hours and up to 
a maximum of 5 hours in a day. Rule 3 -A (i) of  GDS (Conduct and 
Engagement) Rules, 2011 provides in clearest term that “a sevak shall 
not be required to perform duty beyond a maximum of 5 hours in a 
day”. The issue of conferment of status of regular departmental 
employees to the Gramin Dak Sevaks with  8 hours duty was examined 
by the Group of Ministers in the year 1998 following recommendation 
made by Justice Talwar Committee but the same was not agreed to.  
Gramin Dak Sevaks are paid Time Related Continuity Allowance on a 
pro-rata basis as approved by  Cabinet. They are also paid discharge 
benefits like ex -gratia gratuity & severance amount at the time of 
discharge. The Government has introduced a Service Discharge Benefit 
Scheme effective from 01.04.2011 for the benefit of Gramin Dak 
Sevaks working in the Department of Posts on monthly contribution 
basis (from Department‟s side only) devised on the basis of New 
Pension Scheme (NPS) -Lite scheme launched by the Pension Fund 
Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA). This Scheme has been 
offered in lieu o f the existing Severance Amount Scheme on an 
optional basis for the existing Gramin Dak Sevaks while new Gramin 
Dak Sevaks entering into service with effect from 01.01.2011 have 
been mandatorily covered by the Scheme. Their Time Related 
Continuity Allowanc e (TRCA), Other Allowances, Group Insurance and 
Service Discharge benefits have already been revised following 
implementation of recommendations of Shri RS Nataraja Murti 
Committee after being approved by Cabinet. Women Gramin Dak 
Sevak are now made entitl ed to maternity grant equivalent to 3 
months Time Related Continuity Allowance(TRCA) for each child up to 
the birth of maximum of two children limited to a maximum of two 
confinements resulting into birth of first two children only during the 
entire engagement period out of welfare grant. Women GDS can now 

 
 
be granted maternity leave not exceeding six months covering the pre 
and post confinement period & they are paid maternity grant for three 
months and leave for another three months without allowances and 
these provisions have already been made effective from 09 Oct 2009.  
 
3. As per table 4.2.12 of survey carried out by National Sample 
Survey Organization (NSSO) vide report of October 2008, 41.7% of 
Gramin Dak Sevaks had working hours up to 3 hours, 17.1% had 
working hours from 3 -4 hours and 36.2% had working hours from 4 -5 
hours. As per table 4.3.1 of the said survey, 5% of GDS had workload 
for less than or equal to 50 Points, 12.3% had workload for 51 -75 
Points, 13.7% had workload for 76 -100 Points, 19.8% had workload for 
101-150 Points, 12.4% had workload for 151 -200 Points, 16% had 
workload for 201 -300 Points and 20.9% had the workload exceeding 
300 Points based on pre -revised norms. GDS Committee observed in 
Para 9.7 of its report that the point system for determining Branch 
Postmaster‟s workload with minor changes continues to be adopted for 
the last 51 years especially the cash handling. On estimation it was 
revealed that 64.87% to 86% of the workload was mainly on account of 
cash handling. The said no rm had not undergone a review in the last 
50 years. Keeping in view the increase in cost index by 31.49 times 
and revision of treasury norms downwards by 22.5 times, the 
Committee recommended credit of one point for every ` 20000/ - cash 
handled per month. The norms   for   assessment of work load of 
Branch Postmasters based on point system were   prevailing from 
1932. As per Rajan committee report, the point system was evolved   
and communicated on 20 -3-1932. The standard was for stamp sale   
and cash handl ed.  This  was  subsequently  refined  by  Rajan  
committee  in 1958  and  introduced   point  system  for  various  other  
items  of  works  also.   They continued   till recently.  One -man  
committee  headed  by  Shri R.S.Nataraja  Murti   recommended  t o  
the  department  for conducting  a study  for revision  of  cash  
handling  norm.  The  Integrated Finance Wing further    wanted  that,  
a  comprehensive  study  be conducted  for  providing  norms  for  all   
works  performed  by  the  BPMs.  The Depa rtment after getting 
conducted a scientific study through SIU, revised the norms of 
workload assessment of GDS BPM under No. 5 -1/2007-WS-1(PT.) dated 
16.12.2010.  1 Point of workload denotes a workload of 60 minutes a 
month and 2.4 minutes of workload in a  day.  As per norms on the 
subject, a Branch Post Office qualifies for upgradation to departmental 
post office in case its workload exceeds 5 hours. 
 
4. Financial parameters prescribed for opening and retention of the 
Branch Post Offices in Tribal/Hilly/Ba ckward areas is that they should 
derive income to cover at least 15% of the cost and the Branch Post 
Offices in respect of normal areas the BO‟s are expected to generate 
an income of 33.33% of their cost. The one man Committee conducted 
a survey and as per  the result of the survey reflected in Para 8.22.5, 
83.15% of BOs in normal areas were found not generating even the 
expected percentage of income of their cost. 16.86% of BOs were 
found deriving income more than the prescribed norm while a meager 
1.79% of  the BOs were found self supporting and remunerative. In 
regard to backward/hilly/tribal areas, about 66.75% were found not 

 
 
generating the minimum percentage of income of 15% of the cost and 
33.26% were generating income of more than 15% and only 0.96% 
were found self supporting and remunerative. Under MNREGA, 
GDSBPM is being allowed incentive @ 0.35 per new account and Rs. 
1.50 per MNREGA payment in excess of 20 MNREGA payments daily 
while the other categories of GDS are paid incentive @ 0.20 per 
MNREGA pa yments in excess of 20 MNREGA payments daily as 
prescribed in this Directorate letter No. 01 -14/2009-RB dated 
18.01.2010 and the MNREGA work is not prescribed to be reckoned for 
the calculation of workload of the GDSBPM. 
 
5. Apart from the above, the issue  of allowing the same benefits as 
available to regular departmental employees in the capacity of holders 
of civil post is already subjudice as three Writ Petitions (Civil) No. 
17/2009 in the matter of Vinod Kumar Saxena & ors vs. UOI, WP (civil) 
No. 468/2009 in the matter of Murari Lal Sharma & ors vs. UOI & Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 37/2011 in the matter of Buta Ram & ors vs. UOI 
(clubbed together) are pending consideration of the Apex Court.  
 
In the light of the aforesaid and in particular keeping in vie w the 
viability of the Extra Departmental Post Offices & workload, there is no 
justification for conferment of status of regular departmental 
employees to the Gramin Dak Sevaks. Furthermore, the issue is 
already subjudice before Apex Court. 
 
 
(B) STATUS ON  DEMANDS OF GDS WORKERS REGARDING RAISING 
BONUS AND STOPPING REDUCTION IN TRCA IN CASE OF REDUCTION OF 
WORKLOAD 
 
1. Productivity Linked Bonus (PLB) for P&T employees was 
introduced in the year 1980 after an agreement was reached between 
the Department and  
 
 
Staff Side of the Department Council of JCM. When the scheme of 
PLB for Departmental employees was introduced in the year 1980, the 
issue of extending the payment of similar incentive to ED employees 
now called as Gramin Dak Sevaks was examined and the bonus 
payable to GDS was termed as ex -gratia payment. Currently the 
monthly ceiling applicable to the regular departmental employees is ` 
3500 for the purpose of productivity linked bonus while it is ` 2500 for 
the purpose of ex-gratia payment to the Gramin Dak Sevaks. The issue 
of increase in ceiling from ` 2500 to ` 3500 for the purpose of ex -gratia 
payment to Gramin Dak Sevaks was taken up only recently but the 
proposal has been rejected by the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure. 
 
2. The issue of protection of TRCA in case of reduction of workload 
was recently examined by a Committee constituted for the purpose by 
the Department. The report of the Committee has since been received 
and the recommendations made are under consideration. The 
Integrate Finance Wing has sought impact of the proposal and 

 
 
resultant to the observation, the issue will be further considered on 
analyzing details as may be received in due course from the Circles. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20-
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 8 of the Chaper-I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
With regard to stopping of Certificate of Posting, the Secretary 
during the course of oral evidence admitted that la tely due to many 
court cases where the Department has to suffer a lot, the Department 
has stopped certificate of Posting. The Committee do not find this a 
plausible reason for stopping the Certificate of Posting which provided 
an assured service to a custo mer at affordable cost besides being a 
revenue drivers for the Department. They feel that the reasons cited 
by the Department for stopping this service could have been dealt with 
by them in a more vigilant and effective manner. The Committee 
therefore woul d like to know the circumstances under which this 
service was stopped and would recommend to review their decision  
and apprise them accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The decision to discontinue the „Certificate of Posting‟ has been 
reviewed.  The obje ctive of „Certificate of Posting‟ was to afford the 
public an assurance that letters and other articles for which no receipts 
are granted by the Post Office and entrusted to servants or 
messengers for posting have actually been posted.   
 
Articles posted u nder ‟Certificate of Posting‟ are ordinary Postal 
articles which are treated exactly in the same manner as posted in 
letter box and no documentation is kept in Post -Office at any stage.  
The services like registration for which receipts are granted by Post  
Offices are entirely different services provided by the Department and 
documentation of article is kept from posting to delivery stage.  This 
limits the chances of loss of an article and delay in delivery as the 
responsibility can be fixed. 
 
The „Certific ate of Posting‟ does not confer any proof of article 
that has been delivered.  Sometimes, agents obtain this certificate of 
posting fraudulently without actually posting the articles, as a result of 
which department gets involved in litigation. 
 
The propos al for discontinuation of „Certificate of Posting was 
approved by Hon‟ble MOC&IT. 
 
The Gazzette notification GSR -58(E) dated 31 -01-2011 deleting 
the Rule 195 on „Certificate of Posting‟ has been laid on tables of both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
 

 
 
Therefore, there seems to be no justification to reintroduce the 
facility of „Certificate of Posting‟. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para  11 of the Chaper-I) 
 
AUTOMATED MAIL PROCESSING CENTRES 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee observe that the Department had proposed to 
set up AMPCs in Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bangalore 
during the Eleventh Plan and the Plan Scheme for setting up  of AMPC 
was approved by the Finance Minister on 19 January, 2010.  However, 
AMPCs could be set up only in Delhi and Kolkata during the Eleventh 
Plan and AMPC in remaining cities could not be set up due to building 
related issues.  Now that 11643 sq. meter s. of land has been approved 
in Chennai, the Committee would like the Department to take speedy 
action for setting up of new AMPC in Chennai.  Necessary steps should 
also be taken up by the Department with Mumbai International Airport 
Limited for early set tlement of site for AMPC. The Committee also 
observe that  during the Twelfth Plan, in addition to the Eleventh Plan 
proposal, the Department proposes to set up AMPCs at Ahmedabad, 
Jaipur, Kochi, Patna, Lucknow, Bhubaneshwar, Ludhiana and Vashi 
(Navi Mumba i). The Committee are of the view that setting up of 
AMPCs would have tremendous impact on the mail delivery and 
revenue generation of the Department. The Committee are not happy 
with the reasons cited by the Department for not setting up AMPCs in 
other ci ties as  alternative sites  in those cities could have been 
explored. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the building 
related issues for setting up AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore 
and Hyderabad may be sorted out at the earliest in consultation wi th 
the respective States lest alternative options should be explored by 
them. Initiatives taken for setting up of AMPCs during the Twelfth Plan 
may also be completed in a time bound manner and Committee be 
informed  accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 Department submits that 11,643 Sq. mtrs. Of land has been 
approved for locating AMPC/APSO at Chennai.  However, in spite of our 
taking up the matter with Ministry of Civil Aviation/AAI, possession of 
the land has not yet been given to the Department of Posts .  Here it 
would be pertinent to mention that this Department did take minimum 
time in assessing and conveying the suitability of the land for the 
purpose of setting up AMPC/APSO.  Further, action for relocation of 
AMPC/APSO at the new land may be possible only after the Department 
has been handed over its possession.   
 
 
 

 
 
Settlement of site with Mumbai International Airport Limited 
 
The issue of identification of alternate site for location of 
AMPC/APSO at Mumbai still remains unresolved.  A meeting in thi s 
regard was scheduled to be taken by Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on 15-06-2012 but was postponed.  However, the Department 
is in touch with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airport Authority of 
India with a view to find an early solution to th e issues being faced at 
Mumbai and Chennai with respect to setting up of AMPCs. The 
Department will make all efforts to expedite the process of setting up 
of AMPCs in other cities during the XII Plan. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F . No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of the Chaper-I) 
 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
The Committee note that the Department has decided to enter 
into a PPP to develop Estates in the Commercial locations for revenue 
generation and an Inter -Ministerial Group has been formed for the 
purpose. They further note that the Inter Ministerial Group has pointed 
out deficiencies/discrepancies in the Model Concession Agreement and 
a decision has been taken to hire the services of a Consultant and for 
the purpose an EoI is under issue. The Committee are dismayed to 
observe the slow pace of work of the Department for entering into a 
Public Private Partnership to develop Estates in the commerci al 
locations for revenue generation. They regret to note that even the 
Expression of Interest for engaging the service of the Consultant to 
draft a Model Concession Agreement is still yet to be issued by the 
Department and are  of the view that with this s low pace it will take 
years to develop Estates in the commercial locations, as a number of 
formalities would be required to be completed even thereafter. They 
feel that since, the Department has already done a study to ascertain 
the potential of revenue ea rnings through commercial utilization of 
land by taking into account four sample of plots, the Department 
should issue EoI for engaging the Consultant at the earliest so that a 
Model Concession Agreement may be finalized. The Committee would 
like to be app rised of all the efforts made by the Department in this 
regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
Expression of Interest(EOI) drafted for engaging the Consultant 
has been got vetted by Internal Finance Wing and will be sent to DAVP 
shortly for its publication in o ne of the leading newspaper,  It may, 
however, be submitted for the information of Standing Committee on 
Information (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) that the 
subject is highly technical and the stakes are very high in the form of 
precious lands.  As per existing instructions, each case of 
alienation/long term lease of land requires approval of the Cabinet, 

 
 
until a policy is formulated and approved by the Cabinet.  In the light of 
the above background, every step in the entire exercise of Public 
Private Partnership(PPP) is taking long time. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of the Chaper-I) 
 
IT INDUCTION – POSTAL OPERATIONS 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 26) 
The Committee observe poor utilization of funds under the 
scheme IT Induction-Post Operations during the year 2011-12 where an 
amount of ` 676.50 crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced 
to ` 142.36 crore at RE stage. The ac tual utilization upto January, 2012 
was only ` 50.61 crore which is just 7.48 percent of the BE Outlay. The 
Committee note that delay in finalization of RFPs was mainly due to 
review of the entire project to ensure that procurement exercise 
conform to proc edure of public procurements, meeting of the RFP 
Management Committee consisting of members from DIT/NIC and 
experienced eminent resource from various IITs/IIITs, queries and 
clarification to bidders due to complex nature of RFPs etc.  The 
Committee note that now 8 RFPs have been floated and are at various 
stages of finalization. The Committee feel that the Department has 
somewhat been negligent in attaching due importance to this 
important component of Postal  industry which would have boosted the 
performance of Department considerably. In this regard the Committee 
feel that  plans of the Department relating to mail operations, Core 
Banking Solutions, setting up of Post Bank of India, PLI software, 
provision of toll free number for MGNREGA for grievance red ressal, 
operating of call centre for DoP, net working of Post Offices and various 
other activities are dependent on the success of the implementation of 
the scheme IT -Induction in Postal Operations. The Committee 
recommend that necessary steps may be taken  for the early 
finalization of 8 RFPs so that various activities of the Department under 
this scheme may be initiated during the current Financial Year. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of an updated status in this 
regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
Department has taken the adopted the below mentioned steps to 
comply with the observations of the Standing Committee: 
 
The delay in finalization of RFPs was mainly due to review of the 
entire project to ensure that procurement exercise conform to 
procedure of public procurements etc. The Department is trying hard 
to expedite the procurement process and start the entire work so that 
the benefits can accrue from the integrated IT Project. 
 

 
 
Out of eight RFPs floated, five have been finalized and Letters of 
Intent (LOIs) issued. Among them, contract has been signed in three 
RFPs. 
In case of two other RFPs, the advice has been sought from 
Ministry of Law. The Department  has pursued with Ministry of Law for 
expeditious advice so that the RFPs can be carried forward. 
 
In the case of the remaining RFP, the RFP was cancelled and 
fresh bids are being called for through re-tendering. 
 
 
RFP Name Status Project 
Start 
Date 
Tentative 
Pilot 
Completion 
Date 
Tentative 
Implementation 
Completion 
date 
Data Centre 
(DCF)* 
Contract 
Signed  
June 
2012 
  2013-14 
Network 
Integration  
(NI)** 
Contract 
Signed  
June 
2012 
Jan 2013 2013-14 
Change 
Management 
(CM) 
Contract 
signed  
June 
2012 
 May 2014 
Financial 
Services 
(FSI)*** 
LoI Issued. 
Finalisation 
of the 
contract is 
under 
process. 
 
June 
2012 
March 
2013 
May 2014 
Rural 
System 
Integrator            
(RSI)**** 
LoI Issued. 
Finalisation 
of the 
contract is 
under 
process. 
June 
2012 
  
Core System 
Integrator (CSI) 
Evaluation 
of financial 
bids to be 
finalized 
Advice from Ministry of Law is awaited. 
Rural Hardware 
(RH) 
Evaluation 
of financial 
bids is 
under 
process. 
 Advice from Ministry of Law is awaited. 
Mail Operations 
Hardware (MOH) 
RFP 
Cancelled 
on 2.5.2012 
after 
obtaining 
approval of 
the Steering 
Committee 
in the 
RFP to be issued for receipt of fresh bids by  
MOH RFP Management Committee. 
  

 
 
meeting  
held on 
17.4.2012 
(vide 
minutes 
dated 
24.4.2012)  
 
In brief, five out of eight RFPs are awaiting start of work and two  
RFPs are awaiting response from Ministry of Law. One RFP is awaiting 
re-tendering. Upon signing of the contract with the vendors, it is 
expected that the implementation will begin soon.  The Project is 
expected to be rolled out by 2014. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para  20 of  the Chaper-I) 
 
STATUS OF BROADBAND CONNECTIVITY 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 28) 
On the status of broadband connectivity, the Department has 
informed that the proposals of providing broadband con nectivity in 
8270 Departmental Post Offices have been submitted to the Steering 
Committee for approval and if the same is approved, 8270 
Departmental Post Offices will be provided with Broadband by 30 th 
April, 2012. The Committee are however, dismayed to n ote that this 
important activity to connect Post Offices with the Broad band 
connections is still under approval stage and the Department does not 
seem to have taken timely steps to expedite the matter. The 
Committee feel that this will mark a new beginnin g for the India Post.  
The Committee would therefore, like the Department to take all 
necessary steps in this regard including advance coordination 
meetings with the executing agency to finalize details so that the 
proposal do not suffer for want of other formalities as soon as the 
same is cleared by the Steering Committee and the work is started at 
the right earnest.”   
Reply of the Government 
Broadband connectivity has been provided in 19890 
computerized Post Offices out of total 24969 computerized Post Offices 
upto 31 -03-2012.  Details of Computerized Post Offices having 
broadband connectivity is listed in Annexure A. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 23 of the Chaper-I) 
 
 

 
 
MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 32) 
The Committee observe that during the year 2011 -12 (upto 
January, 2012), the total number of MGNREGA accounts opened with 
the Department  have increased however the amount disbursed have 
declined as the account holders have the option of other institutions 
like banks and the decision of the state governments regarding 
amount of such wages  to be distributed through Post Offices. The 
Committee have also been informed that the total disbursements by 
Posts and Banks have declined during 2011 -12 and the total 
disbursement till January, 2012 has been ` 12,467 crore. The 
Committee wonder if the decline in the amount disbursed by the Post 
Offices d uring the period is due to the deficient services by Postal 
Department in comparison to Banks. They feel that if the services 
provided by Posts are comparable with the banks then the increase in 
the opening of accounts would have led to increase in the amo unt 
disbursed. As the Department have greater network than banks in the 
rural areas necessary steps should be taken to increase amount of 
wages disbursed through Posts by way of improving their services and 
projecting themselves. In this regard, the servic es of GDSs in 
mobilizing the account holders can be of immense helpful.  
 
The Committee also note that during 2011, 252 complaints 
relating to delay in payment, less payment, wrong payment, non -
payment of wages, etc have been reported and 239 cases have be en 
settled. The Committee are dismayed to note that the  toll free number 
for redressal of grievances in various States/UTs has still not been set 
up. The Committee are of the view that to deal with such cases a 
strong grievance redressal mechanism is esse ntial within the 
Department. The Committee recommend that toll free number for 
grievance redressal should be set up in all States in order to help the 
Department to address the complaints of the MGNREGA labourers in an 
efficient and effective manner which would also increase their 
confidence in the Department. 
 
The Committee are also seriously concerned to note that 94 
officials have been found involved in corrupt practices. Disciplinary 
action has been initiated against 69 corrupt officials and in 25 cases  
criminal proceedings under IPC and Prevention of Corruption Act have 
been initiated. The Committee are of the view that such cases have 
shown the Department in poor light. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should identify such loopholes  in 
their system which has led to corruption and deal sternly with the 
corrupt officials to instill confidence of account holders in the 
Department.  The Committee also hope that the recommendations 
made in their Twenty Fifth report on the subject would be  followed in 
letter and spirit by the Department. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken on all of the above issues. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Posts has taken following steps to improve the 
services under MGNREGS in order to ensure speedy disbursal of wages 
to workers:- 
 
I.            Line limits for cash conveyance at various levels of Post Offices 
have been reviewed and revised keeping in view the need for 
large cash requirement to pay wages.  
 
II.            The Circles have  been instructed to follow dynamic line limit 
method for conveyance of cash as well as maintaining the cash 
balances.  
 
III.            Standing instructions have been issued to all concerned 
whereby cash up to the requirement can be supplied beyond the 
normal line limits when wage payment liability is high. For this 
purpose, funds have been provided for hiring of vehicles for 
transporting cash.  
 
IV.             Arrangements have also been made to utilize the services of 
all the manpower including those of other officials at the post 
offices at the time of making payments to MNREGA wage earners 
to ensure prompt disbursement of wages. 
 
V.            State governments have been requested to ensure rolling funds 
with the concerned Head Post Offices so that payment of w ages 
starts immediately on receipt of wage bills and need to wait for 
cheque clearance is avoided.  
 
Phone numbers of nodal officers have already been made 
available for display at work place. In case of any grievance wage 
earners may directly contact the concerned officers for their 
immediate redressal. 
 
The Department is having efficient internal mechanism to deal 
with all types of cases of corruption. Department has taken all possible 
steps to wipe out the cases of corruption. 
 
(Ministry of Communication s & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of the Chaper-I) 

 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
REVENUE DEFICIT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee note that the Department could contain revenue 
deficit to some extent during the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 when 
compared to the respective previous year. The actual revenue deficit 
in 2010-11 was Rs. 6345.62 crore  as compared to Rs. 6641.30 crore in 
the year 2009 -10. The actual revenue deficit upto January, 2012 was 
Rs. 5295.13 crore. The Department has now projected the Revenue 
deficit at Rs. 5921.35 crore at BE for the year 2012 -13 which shows an 
increase of Rs. 611.8 crore over the revenue deficit at BE stage of the 
previous year. The Department has stated that this is due to increase 
in Gross Expenditure of the year 2012 -13, decline in recoveries in BE 
2012-13 and approved SB/CC Revenue of Rs. 3793.31 crore in t he year 
2012-13 by the Ministry of Finance whereas the Department expects to 
earn more revenue in 2012 -13.  The Department expects that the 
revenue deficit as projected in BE 2012 -13 would come down as the 
remuneration rate of SB/CC work for 2012 -13 was en hanced by the 
Ministry of Finance. As revenue deficit is the difference between the 
gross expenditure and the total revenue receipts,  the Department 
need to adopt various strategies to increase revenue receipts which 
include proper implementation of Plan Schemes relating to IT 
Modernization, aggressive marketing of its products, expansion of 
scope and activity relating to insurance, banking activities, efficient 
management of the human resources, optimization of its network for 
better delivery of mails, ex ploring new initiatives for business 
expansion with a view to increase revenue earnings of the Department 
and by introducing customer friendly and competitive devices so as to 
attract customers for various services provided by the Department of 
Posts. The Committee would like the Department to take concrete 
action on the suggested lines and also remind them of the mandate 
given to them during the previous plan to become deficit free. 
Reply of the Government 
The following are the areas of revenue generation which would 
help the Department to reduce its deficit : 
 
PLI 
In 2011 -12 (RE), the recoveries for insurance was projected at  
`449 crores while the estimate for 2012 -13 (BE), is ` 536 crores. 
However, for the year 2011 -12, the actual recovery was ` 389.63 
crores.   Therefore, an increase in amount of recovery by `146.37 
crores in the year 2012 -13 has been targeted. Matter of expansion of 
scope of insurance activities has also been taken up with Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
MNERGA 

 
 
The scheme of disbursement of MGNR EGA wages through post 
office accounts is operational in 19 postal Circles (26 States and 5 UTs) 
of the country excepting Delhi, J&K and Tamil Nadu Postal Circles 
(Tamil Nadu and Puducherry). The disbursal of MGNREGA wages 
through Post Offices involves wor ks associated with opening and 
maintaining the Savings Bank accounts and administrative activities to 
meet statutory obligations under MGNREGA. The Department of Posts 
therefore needs to be compensated for this work. So far, no 
compensation has been receiv ed by the Department from 01.04.2009 
for disbursing MGNREGA wages. The issue has been firmly taken up 
with MoRD/MoF. Department is optimistic that the issue will be sorted 
out shortly and Department will get remuneration which will further 
reduce deficit of the Department. 
 
Mails 
As part of Mail Network Optimization Project, the Department has 
optimized the mail network for Speed Post and other categories of 
mail. This initiative includes restructuring and consolidation of the 
countrywide operational networ k, streamlining and standardization of 
processes followed, i.e., from booking to delivery, in mail operations 
and putting in place an effective system of mail monitoring. These 
efforts have led to a simplified operations, effective monitoring and 
faster processing and delivery of mail. As part of 12 th Plan proposals, 
the Department plans to further improve mail network and operations. 
These initiatives are expected to bring in more business which will 
ultimately reduce the revenue deficit.  
 
(Ministry of Co mmunications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
FRANCHISEE OUTLETS 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee observe a poor performance of the Department 
under the activity of opening of Franchisee Outlets dur ing the entire 
Eleventh Plan. As against the proposal of opening 8100 Franchisee 
Outlets, only 463 could be opened during entire Eleventh Plan.  The 
Committee feel the need for opening more Post offices/Franchisee 
Outlets in urban outgrowths. The Departmen t have however, not been 
able to receive sufficient applications for opening Franchisee Outlets in 
these areas, because of voluntary nature of scheme.   In this regard, 
the Committee are surprised to note that instead of making the 
scheme more attractive, the Department have decided not to change 
the rate of commission under the Franchisee Schemes for the time 
being which would have attracted more parties to come forward .The 
Committee wonder if this could be one of the reasons for the private 
parties not v olunteering to come forward in the matter of franchisee 
outlets. The Committee are of the view that the activity „Opening of 
Franchisee Outlets‟ is a novel idea of making private participation in 
the activity of the Department of Posts. If implemented earn estly, this 
scheme would be able to meet the demand for opening of Post Offices 
in the urban outgrowth areas. As recommended in their Twenty -fourth 

 
 
Report, all initiatives should be taken by the Department to open more 
Franchisee Outlets in upcoming urban townships, new industrial 
centres, colleges, etc. even if it necessitates reviewing of their  
decision not to change the rate of commission. The Committee also 
recommend that a thorough review of the functioning of Franchisee 
Outlets may be undertaken so a s to increase their business 
performance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Franchise Scheme was launched in February, 2007 to 
provide postal facilities in such urban & semi -urban areas where there 
is justification for opening of post office but it is not possi ble to open 
new post offices due to some reasons. There are 1670 Franchise 
Outlets (as on 31.3.2012) functioning in the country.  
 
A proposal for expansion of the range of services to be offered by 
the franchisees, extension of the area of activity of fran chise scheme 
and for provision of additional commission beyond the prescribed 
amount of transactions under the franchise scheme, is under 
consideration of the Department. This will make the scheme more 
attractive and remunerative to the parties. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
MAIL OPERATIONS 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee observe that the main focus under this Scheme 
during the Twelfth Plan will be on rationalization o f the mails network 
and expediting transmission and delivery to improve the quality of mail 
operations. The Department has undertaken consolidation and 
optimization of mail network, track and Trace system for speed post, 
installation of AMPC in Delhi and K olkata, enhancing the usage of Pin 
Code, mechanization of mail delivery in North -East and GPS enabled 
for MMS vehicles in North -East. The Secretary during the course of the 
oral evidence informed about first class mail that the Department are 
going to have  test letter programmes which will be run by a private 
agency for which the Department is calling tenders. While appreciating 
the efforts made by the Department to improve mail delivery and the 
achievement made in delivery of Speed Post articles, the Commi ttee 
are of the view that a more stringent monitoring needs to be done so 
as to ensure better delivery of mail.  The Committee also recommend 
that the Department besides paying attention to Speed Post should 
also improve the service delivery of ordinary ma ils so as to increase 
customer confidence in ordinary mails as reliable and cost effective 
option of sending mail. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has put in place a comprehensive online 
monitoring system for Speed Post operations. The performance o f the 
Circles is monitored on a day -to-day basis on various operational 

 
 
parameters defined as Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in terms of 
booking at post offices, processing of these articles at Speed Post 
Sorting Hubs and delivery through post offices. A special emphasis has 
been laid upon providing delivery information on the website for Speed 
Post articles for the benefit of the people using Speed Post. A review is 
also done on a fortnightly basis by the Secretary through video 
conference where all Chi ef Postmasters General participate. A similar 
performance monitoring system is currently being designed for 
Registered mail. The monitoring system will contain tools to measure 
the transit time between cities and within cities as well as adherence 
to processes such as scan compliance. Once this is completed, online 
performance monitoring for registered mail through this online system 
would be done. The operational network for ordinary and registered 
mail has also been restructured recently. The processes be ing followed 
in mail offices have been redesigned, operational lay out has been 
changed and new equipments have been introduced to strengthen 
mail operations. A monitoring system for unregistered mail has also 
been developed. Through this system, it is mea sured whether the new 
network flow between mail offices is being complied with. As informed 
earlier, the process for engaging an independent agency for 
undertaking the test letter programme is going on. As an interim 
measure, the Department has also put in  place an internal web -based 
test letter programme for monitoring the transit time for unregistered 
mail. This would help the Department in measuring the transit time for 
mail across the country in a more effective manner. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT /Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
POST BANK OF INDIA 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
The Committee observe that the aim of Post Bank of India is to 
provide full banking services primarily to the rural poor who still d o not 
have the privilege of modern banking facilities and have to depend on 
the informal sector for their credit requirements. PBI is envisaged as a 
profit generating institution, which would enable the Department of 
Posts to reduce its deficit. The Commit tee feel that an enormous 
amount of thought, structuring effort would be needed to make the 
new entity a success and fulfill its development role. The Committee 
also feel that the bank will have to become an efficient deposit taker 
and provider of better f inancial services like payments and 
remittances. To achieve the objective, the Committee recommend that 
the proposed Post Bank of India will have to take core banking to rural 
areas provide ATM facilities in the remote areas. This will immensely 
help in mo bilizing small savings from rural areas.  The Committee are 
however, perturbed to note that this proposal is still at a conceptual 
stage since Eleventh Plan.   The Committee would therefore like the 
Department to work out all details including finalization o f the 
Expression of Interest/Request for Proposal to engage a Consultant so 
that a detailed project report on establishing a Post Bank of India may 
be completed at the earliest. As the proposal has to be put up to 
Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Fina nce for further approval, the 

 
 
Committee would like the Department to draw proper timelines so that 
Post Bank of India could become a reality within the Twelfth Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Department has floated Expression of Interest (EOI) on Creation 
of Post Bank of India (PBI). EOI has been received from various bidders 
and the process of short listing the firms for issue of RFP is under 
progress. Department intends to issue RFP for engaging a consultant 
firm for preparing Detailed Project Report(DPR)  in the month of July 
2012 so that DPR exercise can be completed by December 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee n ote that 5.39 crore MGNREGA accounts have 
been opened with the Department upto January, 2012 and the 
Department on its own is utilizing its network and limited resources to 
reach to the unbanked level population to bring them into the fold of 
small saving schemes. The Committee are however surprised to note 
that since Department of Posts is not doing full -fledged Banking 
Activities, its efforts on financial inclusion are not being recognized at 
the national figure of financial inclusion. The Committee also observe 
that the Department had highlighted its activities particularly opening 
of MGNREGA accounts to Planning Commission, Cabinet Secretariat as 
well as the Finance Ministry to include its data in the National Statistics 
of Financial Inclusion but despit e this, it was not agreed to by the 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee are of the view that apart from 
MGNREGA accounts, the Department are also operating RPLI and small 
saving schemes in rural areas and there is no reason why the 
Department should not be included is the national statistics of financial 
inclusion. As the Department have vast rural networks and rural Post 
Offices are engaged in various financial activities, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take it up afresh with the 
Ministry of Finance at the highest level in a forceful manner by way of 
projecting clear picture of the activities of the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department had taken up this issue at the highest level and 
the reply has been received from Minist er of State For Finance 
(Expenditure & Financial Services). However, as recommended by the 
Committee, this issue will be taken up again. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 

 
 
PROVISION OF COMPETITIVE RATES OF INTEREST UNDER VARIOUS 
SMALL SAVINGS SCHEMES. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 29) 
The Committee note that MoF have not agreed to provide 
autonomy to DoP to fix interest rates provided under various Small 
Saving Schemes, however, on the recommendations of an Expert 
Committee headed by the Dy. Governor of RBI, MoF have decided to 
review interest rates of Small Savings Schemes before the start of 
each financial year based on the market rate of auction of Government 
Securities on comparable maturity. While examining the Action Taken 
Note on Demands for Grants (2011 -12), the Committee note that the 
Department were of the view that interest rates on small saving 
schemes should be market linked in line with the recommendation of 
the Committee. The Committee also note that the main reason for the 
reduction in accounts under various saving schemes is because 
Department of Posts have not been provided autonomy for fixing rate 
of interests. As recommended by the Committee consistently, the 
Department should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
provide autonomy to the Department of Post in the matter of fixing 
interest rates under various small saving schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All funds mobilized under Small Savings Schemes are ma naged 
by Min. of Finance. On the recommendations of the Committee for 
giving autonomy to Department of Posts in the matter of fixing interest 
rates under various Small Savings Schemes, Min. of Finance reviewed 
interest rates through an Expert Committee hea ded by then Dy. 
Governor of RBI. Based on the recommendations of that Committee, 
Min. of Finance has decided   to review interest rates every year which 
it was not doing since 2003. As a result of Committee‟s 
recommendation, Interest rates were first revis ed from 1.12.2011 and 
then from 1.4.2012 and now Min. of Finance is suitably appraised and 
taking care of Small Savings Scheme interest rates. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
EXTENSION OF CLIENTELE AND INTRODUCTION OF NEW PRODUCTS 
UNDER PLI/RPLI 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 30) 
With regard to the extension of clientele and introduction of new 
products under PLI/RPLI, the Committee note that the Ministry of Law 
have given the opinion th at it would be advisable for the Department 
of Posts to carry out insurance business with the proposed new 
schemes as a Government Department by making use of the exception 
accorded under section 118(C) of the Insurance Act, 1938. However, 
the Ministry of Finance have stated that no expansion of the insurance 
activity by the Department of Posts can be permitted and the present 
operations of the Department of Posts will have to be supervised by 
IRDA. On the basis of the opinion of the Ministry of Law, severa l 

 
 
correspondences have taken place with the Department of Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance. The Secretary during the course of oral 
evidence apprised the Committee that the matter would be taken to 
Cabinet Secretary particularly when two different o pinions of two 
different Departments have emerged. The Committee while taking 
note of the status of the long pending issue raised by the Committee 
consistently in the Report, emphasize that the matter should be taken 
up with the Cabinet Secretary so as to sort out the matter 
expeditiously. While taking any decision in this regard, the Committee 
would also like to reiterate their cautionary observation to maintain the 
identity of Posts. 
Reply of the Government 
 For introduction of new products, the case was taken up again 
with Ministry of Finance at the level of Secretary (Posts) on 14.02.2012. 
However, there was no change in the stand of MoF as per their reply 
received on 02.04.2012. Therefore, to resolve the issue regarding of 
introduction of new products a nd for extension of clientele base, the 
matter has now been taken up by the Minister  of Communications & IT 
with Minister of Finance on 20.04.2012. Response from Ministry of 
Finance is awaited. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 2 0-
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
INCENTIVES FOR OPENING NEW MGNREGA ACCOUNTS/PAYMENT 
/LEDGER ENTRIES 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 33) 
The Committee during the Study visit to Kolkata in the year 2011 
were apprised of the rate of incentives being g iven to the Postal 
officials for opening new MGNREGA account/ MGNREGA payment/ 
ledger entries by the Circle Office, the details of which have been given 
in the Part –I of the Report. The Committee observe that the incentives 
being given to postal officials  for opening the new account for making 
payment and for making ledger entries are too low and wonder if this 
could be one of the reasons for the Department‟s inability to tap their 
full potential.  The Committee feel that increase in incentives would 
induce the postal officials to deliver better services and therefore, 
recommend that the Department should explore the possibility of 
increasing the incentives under these heads in order to motivate the 
postal officials to intensify their efforts to bring more MGNERGA 
workers within the ambit of Department and thus increasing the 
number of Accounts and disbursal. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The existing MGNREGA incentive structure to the post office 
staff involved in MGNREGA related work is under review. A Com mittee 
was constituted to review the existing MGNREGA incentive structure. 
The recommendation of the Committee is under consideration. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F. No. 20 -
2/2012-Bgt(PA)/33rd Report dated 07-08-2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
12  December, 2012  Standing Committee on 
21  Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)         Information Technology 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 7 th December, 2012 from 1500 
hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
6. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Shri Salim Ansari 
8. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
9. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
10. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra 
Agrawal, a Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitting 
in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration of the 
Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13) relating to the 
Department of Posts and xxxxxx. After some discussion, the Committee 
adopted the same without any modification. The Committee, then, 
authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the reports to the House 
during the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
4.  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx. 
 
 
5.  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
xxxxx Matters not related to the Report. 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 , 9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 19, 20, 
24, 25, 27 & 31 
 
 Total 18 
 Percentage 54.54 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:-13, 16, 18, 23, 26, 28 & 32  
 Total 07 
 Percentage 21.22 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of 
interim nature 
 Para Nos.:-  4, 14, 15, 21, 22, 29, 30 & 33  
 Total 08 
 Percentage 24.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 