13
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-second
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Management of Funds by the
Department of Posts through Banking and Insurance activities’]
THIRTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka)


THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-second
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Management of Funds by the
Department of Posts through Banking and Insurance activities’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.8.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.8.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 214
Price : Rs. 96.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ..................... 21
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Government ..................................... 43
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require r eiteration ..................................................... 4 4
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are of interim in natur e .............. 54
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Meeting held on 19 April, 2010
under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary
(FS) at Room No. 131A, North Block,
New Delhi-110001 ..................................................... 67
II. Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) O.M. of even number dated 7 June,
2010 on issues relating to ‘providing competitive
rates of interest for various small savings
schemes’ ...................................................................... 70
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2009-10) held on
7 January, 2010.......................................................... 73
IV . Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2009-10) held
on 10 February , 2010 ............................................... 75

V. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2009-10) held on
4 March, 2010 ............................................................ 78
VI. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2009-10) held on
10 June, 2010 ............................................................. 82
VII. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Information Technology (2009-10) held on
August, 2010 .............................................................. 85
VIII. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Sixty-second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee ..................................................... 87
PAGE N O.
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-10)
   Shri Rao Inderjit Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Milind Deora
*5. Shri Charles Dias
6. Shri Rajen Gohain
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
**9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
11. Shri Abdul Rahman
12. Shri Prem Das Rai
#13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji
16. Dr. Bhola Singh
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri C. Sivasami
20. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
* Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 19th November, 2009.
** Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 10th September, 2009.
# Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 13th October, 2009.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
$23. Vacant
##24. Shri Jesudas Seelam
25. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
26. Shri Prabhat Jha
27. Shri P . Rajeeve
&28. Vacant
$$29. Vacant
30. Shri M.P . Achuthan
31. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
$ Consequent on retirement of Shri Dharampal Sabharwal, w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
## Nominated to Committee, w.e.f. 5th January, 2010.
& Consequent on retirement of Shri Shriram Pal w.e.f. 4th July, 2010.
$$ Consequent on retirement of Shri N.R. Govindarajar, w.e.f. 29th June, 2010.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report on action taken
by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Management of Funds by the Department of Posts through
Banking and Insurance activities’ of the Department of Posts (Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology).
2. The Sixty-second report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20 October, 2008. The Department of
Posts furnished updated action taken notes on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-second Report on 20 January, 2010.
Four sittings of the Committee were held on 7.1.2010, 10.2.2010,
4.3.2010 and 10.6.2010 in connection with the examination of action
taken notes.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Posts (Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology) and Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services (Ministry of Finance) at their sitting held on 4.3.2010.
Subsequently on the insistence of the Committee, a meeting under
the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary was held on 19 April, 2010 to
sort out the various long pending issues between the Ministry of
Finance and Department of Posts as raised in Sixty-second report.
The Committee took further evidence of the Department of Posts
(Ministry of Communication and Information Technology) and
Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial Services (Ministry of
Finance) at the sitting held on 10 June, 2010.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10 August, 2010
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology) and Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services (Ministry of Finance) for appearing before the Committee
and making efforts to sort out the various long pending issues between
the two Ministries.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold Chapter-I
of the Report.
7. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixty-second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
    N EW D ELHI; RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
13 August, 2010 Chairman,
22 Sravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(vi)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-second
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Management of funds by the
Department of Posts through Banking and Insurance activities’ relating
to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Posts).
2. The Sixty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
20 October, 2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
22 October, 2008. It contained 29 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government
Para Nos:- 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28 & 29
Total 19
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government
Para Nos:- NIL
Total  NIL
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration
Para Nos:- 10, 11,  18,  19,  20 &23
Total 06
Chapter IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:-
Para Nos:- 3, 4, 5 and 12
Total 04
Chapter V
4. Sixty-second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Management of Funds by the Department of Posts through Banking
and Insurance activities’ was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 October,
2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 October, 2008. The Draft Action
Taken Report drafted by the Secretariat based on the Action Taken
Notes submitted by the Government was considered by the
Committee at their sitting held on 7 January, 2010. After some
deliberations, the Committee observed that some of the crucial issues
viz. the need for revision of rates of interest on Postal Savings
Bank Schemes comparable with those of the Commercial Banks,
raising the maximum limit of deposits in Postal Savings Account,
starting of some new Schemes for girl child, working women, rural
women etc. and securing the annual 10 per cent increase in the rate
of remuneration for agency services, etc., as recommended by the
Committee in the Sixty-second Report are long pending with the
Ministry of Finance. Not only that some of these issues have
consistently been recommended by the Committee in their earlier
Reports too. In view of this, the Committee decided to take oral
evidence of the nodal Department and the Ministry of Finance
before finalizing the draft Action Taken Report.
5. Accordingly, the Committee took evidence of the
representatives of the Departments of Financial Services and
Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance and Department of
Posts of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology at their sitting held on 4 March, 2010. The detailed
deliberations on the aforesaid long pending issues were held at the
aforesaid sitting. However decision on the aforesaid issues could
not be arrived at. As such the Committee requested the Secretaries
of the Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services and Posts
to sort out various long pending issues. The Committee also decided
that after a month, the representatives of the two Departments of
the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Posts would again
be called after giving due intimation to them.
6. While examining the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Department of Posts, the Committee again emphasized to take

3
decision expeditiously on the aforesaid matter as recorded in the
Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee.
7. With the continuous insistence of the Committee, a meeting
under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary was held on 19 April,
2010. The aforesaid meeting was attended by the Secretary,
Department of Expenditure, Secretary, Department of Revenue (DoR),
Secretary, Department of Posts, other representatives of Department
of Posts and Joint Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Joint
Secretary (Budget) and Director, National Saving Institute, Nagpur.
8. In the light of the aforesaid developments, the Committee
took further evidence of the representatives of Departments of Posts,
Financial Services and Economic Affairs at the sitting held on
10 June,2010. Besides the Secretaries of the aforesaid Ministries/
Department, the Chairman, IRDA was also present at the sitting.
The Committee in the light of the decisions taken at the sitting of
the Secretaries held on 19 April, 2010, deliberated at length various
long pending issues as recommended in Sixty-second Report. With
the efforts made by the Committee some of the issues could be
resolved which inter-alia include increasing the ceiling of deposits
in single and joint account in Post Office and starting of new
Schemes by the Department of Posts. On the other issues, there
was some progress. On the issues like the rate of remuneration of
Small Savings Schemes and giving autonomy to the Department of
Posts for providing competitive rate of interests on Small Savings
Schemes, the matters have been referred to a Committee constituted/
proposed to be constituted for the purpose. About the insurance
activities, the matter has been taken up with the Department of
Financial Services which has made a reference to the Ministry of
Law. The efforts of the Committee not only resolved the long
pending issues as given in the Sixty-second Report but also were
helpful in resolving some of the long pending matter suo-moto
taken up by the Departments of Posts with the Ministry of Finance
as indicated in the Minutes of the meeting of the Secretaries of the
Ministry of Finance and the Department of Posts held on 10 June,
2010 as well as the correspondence of the Ministry of Finance dated
7 June, 2010 are given at the Appendix-I & II respectively. These
issues inter-alia include ‘Appointment of Small Savings Agents’,
‘Delegation of Powers in Operating schemes’ and ‘Grant of Loans
against NSC/KVP/TD’ etc. The Committee would like to place on
record that their efforts resulted in resolving some of the issues on
which there were long pending dispute between the Department of
Posts and the Ministry of Finance.

4
9. The Committee have dealt with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in Chapter-I of the
Report. The details of the deliberations held and the decisions
arrived at with the efforts of the Committee have been indicated in
the Report. The Committee would like to emphasize that the
decisions on the matters where interim action has been taken by
the Government as explained in detail in the Report should be
taken up by the Ministry of Finance/Department of Posts without
any further delay and the Committee be kept informed accordingly.
I. Declining trend of amount mobilized under POSB Schemes
Recommendation of the Committee (Para Nos. 3, 4 & 5)
10. While noting the trend of declining deposits and rising
withdrawals in respect of various Post Office Saving Bank Accounts
(POSB) as reflected in the data furnished by the Department, the
Committee had emphasized to thoroughly look into the reasons and
take the corrective measures to restore the POSB Schemes to their
previous role of the most favoured option of the common man. From
the data made available to the Committee, the Committee had further
noted that out of 22 Circles, declining trends were observed in 13
Circles viz Assam, Base (Army Postal Circle) Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana,
Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, North-East, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar
Pradesh, West Bengal & Uttarakhand. Looking at Circle-wise trends,
the Committee stressed on analyzing the performance State-wise and
taking the corrective action.
The detailed examination of the matter by the Committee revealed
that the important reason for the declining trend of amount mobilized
under POSB schemes was that the rate of interest on POSB schemes
had not been increased by the Ministry of Finance though the
Commercial Banks had been permitted to do so. Although the
Department had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance,
which was followed up at various levels, yet no relief was forthcoming.
The Committee observed that the Department of Posts ought to be
provided with a level playing field and their case for increasing the
rate of interest in various Small Saving Schemes at par with Banks
deserved serious consideration. As such the Committee had
recommended that the matter regarding making the interest rates on
POSB Schemes comparable to Banks should be taken up by the
Department of Posts with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level
without wasting any further time.

5
Reply of the Government
11. The Department has stated that in case of PPF and SCSS
schemes, the rate of interest offered by Banks is equivalent to the rate
of interest given by the Department and the account base has
increased. However, in respect of investment based schemes like MIS,
TD and RD, the declining trend is noticed. The Department in the
action taken note has furnished the data of number of accounts
Scheme-wise and Circle-wise. With regard to the observation of the
Committee on competitive rate of interest on various Saving Schemes,
the Department stated that it had taken up the matter with the
Ministry of Finance at the level of Minister, but the Ministry of Finance
has not agreed to raise interest rate as interest on Small Savings
Schemes are benchmarked to the average yield on Government
Securities of comparable maturity in the secondary market. The interest
rates of various schemes are decided by the Ministry of Finance
through the Committee on Administered Interest Rates and the Post
Office only collects the small savings on behalf of the Ministry of
Finance.
12.  Elaborating further on the aforesaid issue the Secretary,
Department of Posts during the course of oral evidence at the sitting
of the Committee held on 4 March, 2010 submitted as under:
“We would like a certain amount of flexibility in running these
two very important services because we find, if it were made
more viable, and made more attractive, we would be able to serve
and also get more deposits and also be able to get more revenue
for the Department. The Department of Posts is introducing Core
Banking in the current plan into its Post Offices. We are also
looking at networking all our rural Post Offices by giving the
village Post Master a handset so that the quality of our services
should substantially improve. This was the evidence that was given
earlier before the Consultative Committee. We are well on the
way. Our EFC is before the Finance Ministry. Probably we may
get the clearance this year and hopefully we should be able to
start running our pilot this year. We are not able to get many of
our clearances from the Ministry of Finance because the Ministry
of Finance has got its own internal problems.”
Commenting on this aspect, the Finance Secretary stated as under:-
“The Small Savings interest rates are administered interest rates.
They are administered basically because this is a sort of surrogate
borrowing of the Government which is shared in some proportion

6
between the Central Government and the State Governments. So
there has to be some linkage, some benchmark on which the rate
of interest is paid. The interest rate regime is not possible to have
a flexible interest rate regime, which has to have a benchmark or
linked to what Government is otherwise able to borrow and what
Government is offering on the securities, which are otherwise the
Small Savings Securities. Therefore, the perception of the
Department of Posts that this is something which is holding them
back may not be the right perception in the light of this broad
framework.”
13. On the insistence of the Committee, the issue was further
deliberated between the Finance Secretary and the Secretary,
Department of Posts. In pursuance thereof, Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) vide correspondence dated 7 June,
2010 informed as under:
“So far as the issue relating to ‘providing competitive rates of
interest for various Small Savings Schemes’ is concerned, the
Thirteenth Finance Commission in its report submitted to the
President on 30th December, 2009, has made recommendations to
provide debt relief to States in which the Commission has inter
alia recommended that the interest rate on loans contracted by
the States till 2006-07 and outstanding at the end of 2009-10 be
reset at a common interest rate of 9 per cent per annum in place
of 10.5 per cent or 9.5 per cent. The Commission has recommended
that all aspects of the design and administration of the National
Small Savings Fund (NSSF) be examined with the aim of bringing
transparency, market linked rates and other much needed reforms
to the scheme.
The Government has accepted, in principle , the recommendations
of the Commission relating to interest rate reset on NSSF loans to
the States. However, since the recommendations are comprehensive
and cover other structural aspects like interest rate mismatch, tenor
mismatch and other administrative matters, it was decided that
Ministry of Finance will constitute a Committee to work out
detailed modalities for implementation of this recommendation.”
14. It has further been stated in the aforesaid correspondence that
the Government has decided to set up a Committee with
Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor as the Chairperson. Orders
for setting up the aforesaid Committee would be issued shortly after
receipt of concurrence from the State Governments of West Bengal

7
and Maharashtra for inclusion of their Finance Secretaries in the
Committee. While informing about the status on the matter, the
Secretary, DoP at the sitting of the Committee held on 10 June, 2010
informed that still final action on the rate of interest has not been
taken.
Comments of the Committee
15. The Committee have persistently been recommending to
make the interest rates on Post Office Saving Schemes comparable
to Banks, particularly when the deposits in POSB schemes are
declining and the withdrawals are rising. The Department of Posts
has continuously been expressing helplessness on the plea that
interest rates of various Schemes are decided by the Ministry of
Finance through the Committee on Administered Interest Rates and
the Post Office only collects the small saving on behalf of the
Ministry of Finance. The same position has been explained in the
Action Taken Note submitted by the Department of Posts. When
the issue was pursued further by the Committee with the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the Department
of Posts, the Committee found that there was apparent difference
between the two Ministries on the issue. The detailed deliberations
further revealed that even when Thirteenth Finance Commission in
its Report submitted to the President on 30 December, 2009, had
recommended that all aspects of the design and administration of
the National Small Saving Funds be examined with the aim of
bringing transparency, market linked rates and other much needed
reforms to the Scheme, the Ministry of Finance during the course
of deliberations at the sitting of the Committee held on 4 March,
2010, i.e. almost more than four months after the Thirteenth Finance
Commission had submitted its Report had reiterated the stand that
interest rates on POSB Schemes cannot be flexible as these are
benchmarked to the average yield on Government securities of
comparable maturity in the secondary market. Even when the
Committee gave the Ministry of Finance and Department of Posts
a deadline for settling the long-pending issue within one month
the matter could not be settled as informed by the Secretary,
Department of Posts at the sitting of the Committee held on
10 June, 2010.
The Committee would again like to emphasize that the present
customer has various options of investing money in the market and
for any saving scheme to survive, it is utmost necessary that the
competitive rate of interest is provided. As such it is utmost

8
necessary to keep track of the frequent changes happening with
regard to the rate of interests in the market and act fast. Without
providing autonomy to the Department of Posts in this regard, it is
not possible to provide competitive rate of interest on POSB
Schemes. Even when it is accepted that the Department of Posts is
providing POSB Schemes on behalf of the Ministry of Finance,
there is an urgent need to have some sort of mechanism which can
be under the Department of Posts or alternatively under the umbrella
of the Ministry of Finance and that the Department of Posts to take
quick decisions with regard to the rate of interests so that these
rates are comparable with the rate of interest provided on the similar
instruments by the Commercial Banks and other private banks, etc.
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid deliberations that their
persistent recommendation on the aforesaid aspect was not given
heed by the Ministry of Finance, but they find solace from the fact
that at last the Ministry of Finance has decided to set up a
Committee on the recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance
Commission as informed to the Committee vide Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) correspondence dated 7 June, 2010
just three days before the concluding evidence of the Ministry of
Finance and the Department of Posts was taken by the Committee.
The Committee hope that some decision would be taken on the
matter. The Committee strongly recommend that aforesaid Committee
should be set up expeditiously and the matter decided within the
definite timeframe. The Committee should be kept apprised about
the progress made in this regard.
16. The Committee find from the composition of the aforesaid
Committee that the Finance Secretaries of only two States viz.
West Bengal and Maharashtra are proposed to be included in the
aforesaid Committee. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the specific reasons for selecting only these two States to be
represented in the aforesaid Committee.
II. Raising the limit of tax concession on interest accrued under
Post Office Saving Schemes
The recommendation of the Committee (Para 7)
17. Post Office Savings enjoy tax concession on interest accrued,
of 
 1 lakh in single and 
  2 lakh in joint account. Based on the
representations received from general public, Department of Posts had
requested the Ministry of Finance to raise this limit. Ministry of
Finance took up the matter with Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)

9
who took a stand that there would be a revenue loss if the demand
was acceded to. The Committee had found that the tax concession on
interest accrued is an added benefit of POSB Schemes and observed
that a suitable increase in the limit would be a definite addition
attracting more depositors in the Post Office Savings. The Committee
as such had recommended the Government to give favourable
consideration to the proposal of the Department of Posts.
Reply of the Government
18. The Department in the action taken note has informed that
the matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance vide
correspondence dated 26 May, 2008 and 3 December, 2008 and the
recommendation of the Committee in this regard was also sent to the
Ministry of Finance. However, the Ministry of Finance did not agree
to the proposal.
19. The Committee at the sitting held on 4 March, 2010 requested
the Secretaries of the Department of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services of the Ministry of Finance and the Secretary of the Department
of Posts to sort out the aforesaid issue. Accordingly the matter was
deliberated at the meeting held on 19 April, 2010 under the
Chairmanship of Finance Secretary. The proposal of DoP to remove
the ceiling on maximum balance and restricting the tax benefit to
interest accrued on the balance as per current ceiling was finally
accepted, subject to the condition that the tax accrued would be
deducted at source as per the existing provision of TDS. Finance
Secretary observed at the said sitting that DoP should move a formal
proposal for amendment to relevant laws and guidelines/rules.
20. The Secretary, DoP during the course of oral evidence on
10 June, 2010 informed the Committee that they had sent the proposal
in this regard.
Comments of the Committee
21. The Committee while noting that representations were being
received from general public to increase the ceiling of 
 one lakh
in single and two lakh in joint account in respect of tax concession
being offered on interest accrued under Post Office Saving Schemes,
had recommended to give favourable consideration to this aspect.
As usual, the Ministry of Finance did not agree to the proposal
even when recommended by the Committee. It was when the
Committee insisted on the matter and requested the Secretaries of
Departments of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance and

10
Department of Posts of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology that the proposal of DoP to raise the
aforesaid ceiling was agreed to in principle subject to the condition
that the tax accrued would be deducted at source as per the existing
provision of TDS. Accordingly, the Department of Posts was
requested to give the formal proposal. The Committee appreciate
that very quickly the Department of Posts sent the proposal to the
Ministry of Finance as informed to the Committee at the sitting
held on 10 June, 2010. The Committee again emphasize that the
increase in the aforesaid limit would definitely attract more
depositors and therefore desire that the final decision in this regard
should be taken by the Ministry of Finance without any further
delay and the Committee informed accordingly.
III. Starting of New Schemes by DoP under Small Saving Schemes
Recommendation of the Committee (Para Nos. 8 & 9)
22. The Committee had recommended for starting various new
schemes for girl child, working women, rural women and also for
providing additional incentive for vast membership of POSB schemes
in rural areas in the country.
The Reply of Government
23. The Department has explained about the initiatives taken to
make the Small Schemes more attractive and investor friendly which
include removing of restriction on opening of more than one account
during a calendar year under the Senior Citizens Saving Scheme,
allowing all categories of pensioners to open and maintain Pensioner
Account, rationalization of penalty on premature withdrawal of
deposits under POMIA from 3.5% to 2% on withdrawal on or before
expiry of three years and 1% on withdrawal after expiry of three
years, increase in the maximum deposit ceiling under POMIA from
 3 lakh and 
  6 lakh to 
  4.50 lakh and 
  9 lakh under single and
joint accounts respectively, bonus at the rate of 5% on the deposits
made under Post Office Monthly Income Account (POMIA), extending
the benefit of Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to the
investments made under Five Post Office Time Deposit Accounts and
Senior Citizens Savings Schemes, promoting and popularizing these
schemes through print and electronic media and launching of website
to facilitate interface with the public and providing additional incentive
of benefit of Accidental Insurance through Oriental Insurance Company
for 
 1 lakh to POSB holders with nominal premium of 
  15. The
Department has further informed that the aforesaid recommendation

11
of the Committee has been sent to the Ministry of Finance vide
correspondence dated 28 November, 2008.
When the issue was pursued further by the Committee, the
Department of Economic Affairs in the written note stated that the
Department of Posts was informed on 9 January, 2009 that any specific
proposal that Department of Posts may have in this regard may be
referred to them.
24.  On the insistence of the Committee, the aforesaid issue was
further deliberated in the meeting held on 19 April, 2010 under the
Chairmanship of Finance Secretary whereby the suggestion of DoP to
start new schemes for women/girl child was agreed to in principle as
per the Minutes of the said meeting made available to the Standing
Committee on Information Technology. DoP was requested to formulate
the schemes accordingly and send it to MoF. The Secretary, Department
of Posts during the course of oral evidence on 10 June, 2010 informed
the Committee that proposal in this regard have been sent to the
Ministry of Finance.
Comments of the Committee
25. The Committee find that no decision on their
recommendation was initially taken by the Government as informed
in the Action Taken Note. They are happy to note that when the
issue was pursued further, the recommendation of the Committee
to start new Schemes for women/girl child was agreed to in principle
at the meeting of the Secretaries of the Ministry of Finance and the
Department of Posts on 19 April, 2010 and the Secretary of the
Department of Posts was requested to formulate the Schemes. Not
only that, the Department of Posts formulated the proposal and
sent it to the Ministry of Finance as informed to the Committee
during the course of oral evidence held on 10 June, 2010. The
Committee strongly recommend that the final decision in this regard
should be taken expeditiously and the Committee informed
accordingly.
IV . Market share of POSB Schemes
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 10)
26. Having noted that despite the advantage in terms of reach,
network and goodwill, the Department had a meagre market share in
the country’s Banking Sector, the Committee had recommended that
the Department ought to evolve a centralized monitoring and

12
evaluation system at the Headquarter level. This system manned by
senior officials with relevant professional qualification should keep an
eye on the market size, market development and trends on a day to
day basis so as to provide the much needed directional support and
guidance to the field officers.
Reply of the Government
27. The Department in the action taken note has stated that the
Post Office Savings Bank is operated by DoP on behalf of MoF and
its mandate is limited to the collection and disbursement of the funds
deposited therein and maintenance of records. The actual fund
management is done by MoF.
28. In reply to the subsequent query of the Committee probing
whether any need for giving some freedom to DoP in matter of policy
framing was felt by the Department, DoP has stated that the issue
related to the Ministry of Finance.
 Comments of the Committee
29. The Committee are constraint to note that even when the
Department of Posts had made the demand for giving autonomy in
respect of various matters relating to banking and insurance activities
as contained in the Sixty-second Report, the Department seems
reluctant to take the responsibility of having a centralized monitoring
and evaluation system at the Headquarter level as recommended by
the Committee. The Department of Posts in an evasive manner has
tried to shift the responsibility by stating that Post Office Saving
Banks (POSB) is operated on behalf of Ministry of Finance. The
Committee are not inclined to accept the aforesaid argument of the
Department of Posts. The Committee understand that in this
competitive era it is utmost necessary to keep an eye on market
size, market development and trends on day-to-day basis for which
there is an urgent need to have some centralized monitoring and
evaluation system at the Headquarter level. Since POSB Schemes
are being operated by the Department of Posts, it is the
responsibility of the Department to evolve and maintain such system.
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would
like to emphasize that instead of shifting the responsibility, the
Department of Posts should take immediate action in this regard
and the Committee informed accordingly.

13
V. Organisational Structure
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 11)
30. While taking note of the fact that the Department was looking
more and more towards numerous avenues for revenue generation
through Financial Services, the Committee observed that following
was important for the Department; (i) personnel specifically qualified
for the purpose should also be in the Department; and (ii) specialized
internal in-house training for the existing staffs entrusted with these
works is provided.
Reply of the Government
31. The Department did not respond at all to the recommendation
of the Committee as given at (i) above. With regard to training aspect,
the Department explained as under:-
“To train/update officers and staff about the development taking
place in the field of financial services, operationalisation and
management specialization training is imparted to them from time
to time through specialized institutions such as Postal Training
Centres and National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) (for
training in banking related processes). Department is also imparting
training at regular intervals to its staff through Induction and
Refresher Courses at specialized training centres for updating their
knowledge in Post Office savings Bank rules and procedures,
Public customers relations, soft skill, etc. The mutual fund
companies namely Principal, UTI, SBI, Franklin Templeton and
Reliance provide training to postal staff to enable them to pass
Association of Mutual Fund of India (AMFI) test so that staff
could retail the mutual fund product effectively. Similarly, the ICICI
Prudential Life Insurance Co.Ltd. provide the training to staff about
its pension product”.
 Comments of the Committee
32. The Committee note that the aforesaid recommendation of
the Committee with regard to organizational structure was partially
responded by the Department in the Action Taken Note. The
Department has not addressed to the part recommendation whereby
the Committee had emphasized that professionally qualified
personnel should also be in the Department, particularly when the
Department was looking more and more towards numerous avenues
for revenue generation through financial services. The Committee

14
while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the
Department to take the action on the aforesaid recommendation of
the Committee and inform accordingly.
VI. Rate of remuneration for Agency Services
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
33. The Committee had recommended as under:-
“The Committee note that based on the recommendations of an
Expert Committee set up by MoF in 1993-94, the Department of
Posts were to be paid agency charges by MoF with an annual
increase of 10 per cent over the preceding year’s remuneration.
However, the Ministry paid agency charges to DoP as per this
formula for a few initial years but have thereafter, failed to adhere
to the recommendations of their very own Committee. Finding
merit in the contention of the plea of DoP , the Committee have
been recommending a positive consideration by MoF in the matter
in their successive Reports. Midway through the examination of
the present subject, the Committee asked DoP and MoF to reconcile
their differences in this regard at the earliest. As a result, MoF
have increased the rate of remuneration for the year 2008-09 by
4.6 per cent over the last year. The Committee while appreciating
this move of MoF still feel that this increase is nowhere near the
10 per cent benchmark. The Post Office Savings Schemes with
more than 17 crore accounts and a bevy of services to offer entail
a lot of additional workload on DoP . The massive corpus of these
Schemes is a significant contributor to the developmental efforts.
The Committee, therefore, desire that as recommended in their
Fifty-sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2008-09), the
Department should continue to vigorously pursue with MoF for
securing the annual 10 per cent increase in the rate of remuneration
as per the recommendations of the Expert Committee.”
Reply of the Government
34. The Department in the action taken note has stated that after
sustained efforts of the Department of Posts, the Ministry of Finance
has constituted a new Expert Committee to review the agency charges.
35. The Secretary, DoP during the course of oral evidence
submitted that the issue of payment of remuneration on zero balance
accounts is also being asked to be included as an issue for the
consideration by the Expert Committee.

15
36.  With regard to the timelines for the Expert Committee the
Secretary informed as under:-
“I understand that the Ministry of Finance has set four months
for the Expert Committee to come to a conclusion on the decision
about the remuneration”.
 Comments of the Committee
37. The Committee find that based on the recommendation of
an Expert Committee set up by the Ministry of Finance in 1993-94,
the Department of Posts was to be paid agency charges with an
annual increase of 10 per cent over the preceding year’s
remuneration. Pursuant to the aforesaid recommendation, the
Ministry of Finance paid agency charges to the Department of Posts
as per this formula for a few initial years but thereafter, failed to
adhere to the recommendations of their very own Committee.
Thereafter the Department of Posts insisted upon the remuneration
as per the recommendation of the Expert Committee. Although there
have been some increase in the rate of revenue, it still fell short of
the 10 per cent benchmark. In this connection, the Committee had
consistently been recommending to reconcile the differences between
the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Posts. To resolve
the matter, the Ministry of Finance has again constituted a new
Expert Committee as informed in the Action Taken Note. The
Committee have further been informed during the course of
deliberations that the Ministry of Finance has set four months time
for the Expert Committee to come to a conclusion on the decision
about remuneration. Besides, the demand of the Department of Posts
for the payment of remuneration on zero balance accounts is also
referred to the aforesaid Expert Committee. While taking note of
the aforesaid developments, the Committee emphasize that aforesaid
Expert Committee should give the Report within the stipulated
timeframe of four months followed by expeditious decision by the
Ministry of Finance so that the aforesaid long-pending issue is
settled for the effective functioning of the Department of Posts.
The Committee should be kept informed about the progress made
in this regard .
VII. Expansion of Insurance Schemes of Department of Posts and
Regulatory Mechanism
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 19, 20 & 23)
38. The Committee had observed that PLI and RPLI, riding on
the twin advantage of lower premium and higher bonus rates vis-à-vis

16
products of other players, had grown phenomenally at the estimated
rates of 15 percent and 40 percent respectively during the preceding
five years but still its market share remained a meagre 2.7 percent.
The Committee found that this tardy progress is mainly because of
the fact that the insurance activities of DoP are, even in this era of
liberalization, shackled with norms that are highly restrictive. They
are required to seek direction of the Ministry of Finance (Insurance
Division) in terms of their letter dated 20 September, 1993 for all
policy matters like extension of scope so as to cover other clientele,
introduction of new products etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that the conditionals imposed on DoP by the
communication of 1993 ought to be withdrawn forthwith.
39. Besides strategy of luring individual customer, the Committee
also recommended the Department to take initiatives with regard to
signing MoUs with various bodies/Institutions for the Postal Life
Insurance Schemes by way of offering certain attractive discounts on
bulk membership.
40. The Committee further observed that in view of the
Department’s ambitious plan for increasing financial activities, it has
become incumbent upon the Department to have some sort of
regulatory mechanism on an urgent basis so as to make their
functioning more transparent and accountable.
Reply of the Government
41. On the issue of allowing DoP to extend their clientele and
introduce new products, the Department in the action taken note
submitted as under:—
“The issue of bringing certain categories of employees within the
fold of PLI was taken up with the MoF (Banking & Insurance
Division) vide PLI Directorate letter No. 25-06/2000-LI dated
07.01.2007, 13.07.2007 and 03.06.2008. The Ministry asked to prepare
a road map for coming under IRDA vide their letter No. S-11019/
10/2006-Ins. III dated 18th June, 2008. But unless PLI is
corporatized, it is not possible to bring it under the regulations of
IRDA. However, the recommendations of the Standing Committee
are being brought to the notice of the Insurance Division of the
Ministry of Finance so that the restrictions imposed to PLI in
terms of their letter No. 97(25)/Ins.II/93 dated 20th Sept., 1993
for extension of scope so as to cover other clientele, introduction
of new products/schemes etc. are withdrawn and Department of

17
Posts is given a level playing field with other operators in the life
insurance sector.
However, PLI does not have any mandate to sale non-life products
viz. Medical Insurance, Crop Insurance, Vehicle Insurance etc. In
this connection, it may be stated that premium mobilized through
sale of PLI/RPLI policies, do not add to revenue of the
Department. All the premia gets accrued to Post Office Life
Insurance Fund (POLIF) and Rural POLIF. Even the returns on
these funds are accrued to the fund itself. Department of Posts
recovers the administrative expenses in running the schemes out
of this fund at some predetermined rate.”
42. With regard to the recommendation of the Committee for
offering attractive discounts to bulk membership, the Department in
the Action Taken Note has submitted as under:-
“Providing attractive discounts in the premium for bulk
membership is possible only in respect of Group Insurance
Schemes. As on day PLI is not having any Group Insurance
Scheme for bulk membership. Such schemes designed in past for
BSNL employees did not get approval of the Insurance Division
of the Ministry of Finance.
As such idea of signing MoUs with various bodies/institutions
for their Postal Life Insurance Schemes by way of offering
attractive discounts on bulk membership can be implemented only
when Insurance Division, Ministry of Finance, gives necessary
authority and freedom to the Department of Posts, similar to the
authority enjoyed by other players in the Insurance Sector to
design such products. However, the observations of the Standing
Committee is being taken up with the Ministry of Finance at
appropriate level”.
43. On the issue of regulator, the Department submitted as under:-
“Postal Life Insurance and Rural Postal Life Insurance (PLI/RPLI)
are exempted insurers under Section 118(C) of Insurance Act 1938
and also under Section 44(d) of the LIC Act 1956. These Schemes
do not come under the purview of IRDA Act 1999, and
consequently, not regulated by IRDA. Recommendation of the
Committee in respect of other activities will be kept in view while
drafting the IPO Act, Amendment (Bill)”.

18
44. On the insistence of the Committee to resolve the aforesaid
issues within a given time of one month, the meeting under the
Chairmanship of Finance Secretary was held on 19 April, 2010. The
following decision with regard to the aforesaid issue as recorded in
the Minutes was taken:
“Secretary, DoP explained that DoP has proposed an expansion of
the Life Insurance scheme offered by it to the IRDA. However,
IRDA has opined that it is not competent to regulate activities of
the sovereign. JS, DFS explained that IRDA has pointed out two
issues, viz. the premium calculations of the DoP are not on
actuarial basis and thus may lead to long term deficit in the
scheme and implicit liability on the Government; and that IRDA
is not competent to regulate activities of the Government. He
explained that since the scheme is implicitly underwritten by the
Government, low premium may eventually devolve upon the
Government. Secretary, DoP explained that the issue of IRDA
regulating the insurance activity of DoP can be posed to Law
Department for their opinion. DoP expressed that they are not
against corporatization of the insurance business of DoP but it is
not proper to withhold expansion till corporatisation. FS felt that
in long run, it may be better for DoP to corporatize the insurance
activity and an in-principle decision needs to be taken and a time
bound road map needs to be prepared, if DoP decides in favour
of corporation.
It was decided that opinion of Law Department may be sought
on IRDA’s competence to regulate DoP’s insurance activity. DoP
may proactively examine the issue of corporationsation of the
insurance activity in long run and DoP may interact with IRDA
on other issues regarding costing etc. raised by IRDA.”
45. Elaborating further on this issue, the Secretary, DoP during
the course of the oral evidence on 10 June, 2010 stated that the
Department preferred to continue as mandated by the Government,
but if it is inevitable, the Department is not against corporatizing its
insurance activities.
The Secretary further stated as under:
“We are claiming that we can continue our insurance activities
under the Insurance Act. But what we are saying is, since it is
with the Law Ministry, we will discuss them and we will await
their advice”.

19
46. Indicating the status on the aforesaid matter, the Secretary,
Department of Posts during the course of oral evidence 10 June, 2010
stated that the Department of Financial Services has made a reference
to the Ministry of Law and the Ministry of Law has asked the
Department of Financial Services for the comments of the Department
of Posts basically regarding what is the plan and vision of DoP and
also the views of the Department on other issues that have been
pointed out by the Department of Financial Services. The Department
of Posts received the correspondence on 26 May , 2010 and it is under
examination of the Department.
Comments of the Committee
47. The Committee note that the conditions imposed on the
Department of Posts vide the Ministry of Finance communication
dated 20 September, 1993 are withholding the plans of the
Department of Posts to enlarge the insurance activities. The
Committee understand that the whole issue of autonomy to be
provided to the Department of Posts is being mixed up with the
issue of regulator. While appreciating the fact that with the proposed
ambitious plans of the Department of Posts for increasing Banking
and Insurance activities it is urgently required to have some sort of
regulatory mechanism, the conditions to seek permission of the
Ministry of Finance on each and every matter are not
understandable.
48. It has come out during the deliberations that the main issue
being deliberated between the Ministry of Finance, the Department
of Posts and IRDA is competence of IRDA to regulate the financial
activities undertaken by the Government i.e. Department of Posts.
Even when the Committee gave one month time to resolve the
aforesaid matter, the decision could not be arrived at. With the
further insistence of the Committee, now this matter has been
referred to the Ministry of Law who has asked certain clarifications
from the Department of Financial Services and Department of Posts.
49. The detailed deliberations further reveal that to solve the
aforesaid issue, Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services) and IRDA are suggesting to create a corporate entity under
the Companies Act which would handle the Postal Life Insurance
which then can be regulated by IRDA. The Department of Posts
though prefer to continue with the existing system, the Secretary
Department of Posts during the course of deliberations candidly
admitted that they are not against it, if it is inevitable.

20
50. While reiterating the earlier recommendation of the
Committee to set up some sort of regulatory mechanism, the
Committee have certain reservations on the issue of corporatization
of the Department of Posts for handling the insurance activities.
The Committee observe that the mandate of the Department of Posts
is to provide postal and financial services to the last person of the
society and for that purpose the Department is offering multifarious
services to the citizens of the country through the vast infrastructure
created by the Department. Besides the large infrastructure, the
Department has huge strength of officers and staff who are
performing diversified activities. The solution lies in effectively
using the large infrastructure of the Department covering every nook
and corner of the country and exploit the tremendous trust of the
general public on the Postal Department. The aforesaid challenge
can be met by the optimum use of available infrastructure of the
Posts and also by making the huge human resource available with
the Department of Posts more efficient by giving suitable training.
As such the Committee would like to emphasize that before taking
any decision on the regulatory mechanism, it should be ensured
that the identity of the Department of Posts is maintained. In this
regard, the Committee may like to emphasize that the Government
should study various models of regulator with regard to postal
activities available internationally. The Committee would also like
to recommend that the restriction of taking the permission of the
Ministry of Finance on each and every matter by the aforesaid
circular should be reviewed and some sort of autonomy should be
provided to the Department immediately without waiting for the
decision on the issue of regulator.

21
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Banking and Insurance Services of DoP
The Department of Posts (DoP), through the world’s largest
network of Post Offices, 89% of which exist in rural areas are providing
a wide range of services such as collection, transmission and delivery
of mails (including premium products), money transfer, financial
services such as banking and insurance and a variety of retail services.
The Committee note with concern that with the significant decline in
mail traffic, increasing competition and recurring operating losses
(partly on account of its Universal Service Obligation) the Revenue
deficit of the Department has been a massive 
 6649.00 crore in the
Tenth Plan. During the first two years of the ongoing Eleventh Plan,
this is expected to be of the tune of 
  2617.90 crore. India Post,
therefore, faces great pressure to reduce costs, increase revenue and
operate on a far more commercial basis while fulfilling the rising
expectations of the customers. The Committee feel that these challenges
can be faced only by improving services and adapting them to the
needs of the rapidly evolving and increasingly technology driven
world. With the obvious revenue generation limitation on account of
fulfillment of USO, this calls for intensified focus on non-core activities
like financial and non-financial and information technology based
services by mainly leveraging their network.
Reply of the Government
The Department has taken the following initiatives in financial
services during the last few years to increase the revenue of the
Department as also its customer base:
(i) Introduction of Instant Money Order Service.
(ii) Operation of International Money Transfer Service (Western
Union Financial Service Inc. USA).
(iii) Retailing of Mutual Fund (Principal, UTI, SBI, Franklin
Templeton and Reliance) and Pension Fund (ICICI Prudential
Life Insurance Co. Ltd.).

22
(iv) Distribution of non-life products of Oriental Insurance Co.
(v) Oriental Accidental Death Insurance Cover to Post Office
Savings Bank (POSB) account holders.
(vi) Field Postal Orders.
(vii) Setting up of Postal Finance Marts (PFMs).
(viii) Electronic Clearance Service.
The Department was able to generate additional revenue of
 75 crores (approx.) during the financial year 2007-08 from above
noted initiatives which is likely to increase during the financial
year 2008-09. In addition to this, recently Department has signed an
Memorandum of Agreement with ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Co.
Ltd. to retail their pension products through select post offices on
referral model. It is expected that these initiatives will generate
additional revenue for the Department.
In 2008-09, Department generated additional revenue of
 120 crore (approx.) from these initiatives.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that DoP seek to enable access to financial
markets and enhance opportunities without discrimination, to all
regions and social groups in the Country. The financial services offered
by DoP can broadly be classified into three categories. These are, the
Banking Services operated on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, the
Insurance Services administered by the Director General, Posts
(Secretary, DoP) and the International Money Transfer and Mutual
Funds carried through tie-up arrangements. The Committee note that
the Department have received 
 1861 crore, 
  2323 crore and
 2490 crore during the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively
from the Ministry of Finance as remuneration charges for performing
Savings Bank/Cash Certificates work. Further, the premium income
of DoP from Insurance operations are stated to be 
 1285.46 crore,
 1553.76 crore, 
  1812.82 crore and 
  2145.80 crore for the years
2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08 respectively. Evidently, these
figures indicate that the contribution of DoP in these areas is not
insignificant. The various aspects arising out of the Committees’
examination of the management of funds by DoP through banking
and insurance activities are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.

23
Reply of the Government
The Department has stated that the recommendation of the
Committee has been noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee find it strange that the Department have no targets
fixed for opening Savings Banks accounts as a whole or on a Circle-
wise basis but Circles are allotted revenue targets in respect of Savings
Bank/Savings Certificate work for each year. The Committee feel that
unless targets for opening new accounts are fixed at the national
level, a holistic picture cannot emerge. The revenue targets for the
Circles may of course act as additional inputs in this regard, but
these should be separately fixed for Savings Bank and Cash Certificates
work as this will help the Department to identify the areas of under
performance in each of these activities and remedial measures can be
taken accordingly. The Committee also find that against a revenue
target of 
 2992.55 crore for year 2007-08 various Circles could generate
revenue to the tune of 
  2362.29 crore which is 78.89 per cent of the
target fixed. The Committee find it disconcerting that several Circles
have missed their revenue targets by sizable margins. With account
targets and revenue targets fixed in tandem in future, the Committee
expect that the declining trend in achieving the targets will be reversed.
The concrete action taken in this regard should be intimated to the
Committee.
Reply of the Government
For the year 2008-09, Ministry of Finance has made a provision of
 2907.20 crore in the Budget Estimate (BE) for remuneration on
account of management of Savings Bank and Savings Certificate work.
The Department has now fixed both revenue targets and targets for
opening new accounts for the Circles. The performance of the Circles
is being regularly monitored and is also being reviewed with Circle
Officers.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that Post Office Savings which enjoy tax
concession on interest accrued, have a ceiling of 
 1 lakh in single
and 
  2 lakh in joint accounts. Based on representations received
from general public, DoP have requested the Ministry of Finance to
raise this limit. MoF have in turn taken up the matter with Central
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) to increase the limit to 
 3 lakh. The

24
Department of Revenue (CBDT) have, however, taken a stand that
there will be a revenue loss if the demand is acceded to. The
Committee are of the view that the tax concession on interest accrued
is an added benefit of Post Office Savings Scheme. A suitable increase
in the limit would be a definite addition attracting more depositors
in the Post Office Savings and stem the current declining trend. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should give
favourable consideration to the proposal of DoP .
Reply of the Government
Department of Posts requested Ministry of Finance to raise the
maximum limit of deposit in savings account vide letter No. 113-23/
2005-SB dated 26.5.2008. The Ministry of Finance did not agree to the
proposal. The matter was again taken up vide D.O. letter No. 113-23/
2005-FS dated 03.12.2008. It may be stated that the recommendations
of the Standing Committee has also been sent to Ministry of Finance
for necessary action under intimation to Department of Posts. Ministry
of Finance again intimated on 14.1.2009 that there is no change in
their earlier decision.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 21 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the MoF have recently reintroduced a
bonus of 5 per cent on MIS and tax exemption on investments in
Five year Term Deposits and Senior Citizens Savings Scheme. The
Committee strongly feel that a lot more needs to be done to make
POSB Schemes more attractive to the investing public. It is inexplicable
why sufficient incentives have not been introduced with focus on
rural India that is the predominant clientele of the Schemes of the
Department and for most of whom tax benefits have no meaning, as
they generally do not come within the Income Tax net. The Committee
desire that the Department should work out in tandem with the
Ministry of Finance to provide some additional incentives for the vast
membership of POSB Schemes in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
In the recent past, Government has taken the following steps to
make the small savings schemes more attractive and investor friendly:
(i) The restriction on opening of more than one account during
a calendar month under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme
has been removed with effect from 24th May, 2007.

25
(ii) All categories of pensioners have been allowed to open and
maintain ‘Pension Account’ under Post Office Savings
Account Rules, with effect from 11th July, 2007.
(iii) With effect from 10th February, 2007, the penalty on pre-
mature withdrawal of deposits under the Post Office
Monthly Income Account (POMIA) scheme has been
rationalized from 3.5% to 2% on withdrawal on or before
expiry of three years and 1% on withdrawal after expiry of
three years.
(iv) The maximum deposit ceilings of 
 3.00 lakh and
 6.00 lakh under the Post Office Monthly Income Account
(POMIA) Scheme has been raised to 
  4.50 lakh and
 9.00 lakh in respect of single and joint accounts
respectively.
(v) Bonus at the rate of 5% on the deposits made under Post
Office Monthly Income Account (POMIA) Scheme on or after
8th December, 2007 upon the maturity of the deposit, has
been reintroduced.
(vi) The benefit of Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 has
been extended to the investments made under 5-Year Post
Office Time Deposits Account and Senior Citizens Savings
Scheme, with effect from 01.04.2007.
(vii) Measures are also taken to promote and popularize these
schemes through print and electronic media as well as
holding seminars and meetings, providing training to the
various agencies involved in mobilizing collection in Small
Savings Schemes etc.
(viii) A website of the National Savings Institute under
Government of India, Ministry of Finance has also been
launched to facilitate interface with the public through wider
dissemination of information on small savings and on-line
registration and settlement of investors grievances. The
website address is nsiindia.gov.in.
Department of Posts is providing additional incentive of benefit
of Accidental Insurance through Oriental Insurance Company for
1 lakh to the Post Office savings account holders with nominal
premium of 
 15.
Since Ministry of Finance is the nodal Ministry in respect of Small
Savings Schemes, the recommendation of the Committee has been
sent to Ministry of Finance vide ID No. 116-10/2007-SB dated 28.11.2008
for taking further necessary action.

26
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 25 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee further note that the Department have in the recent
years requested MoF for starting some new Schemes for girl child,
working women, rural women, etc. in the light of direction of MoF
on gender budgeting. The Committee find strong merit in these
proposals of DoP and desire that these should be pursued in right
earnest with MoF to fructify them at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Since starting of any new schemes under Small Savings Schemes
is the prerogative of Ministry of Finance, the recommendation of the
Committee has been sent to Ministry of Finance vide ID No. 116-10/
2007-SB dated 28.11.2008 for taking necessary action.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 25 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Eleventh Five-Year Plan Scheme of ‘Banking & Money Transfer
Operations’: An Analysis
The Committee note with appreciation that to fully realise the
potential of vast customer base and capitalise on the good will of
India Post in the area of banking and money transfer operations and
in order to develop the Post Office network in the manner of financial
service provider, the Department have taken up the Scheme of Banking
and Money Transfer Operations’ during the Eleventh Plan. A sum of
 142.50 crore has been provided, under the Scheme for the Plan
period with emphasis on technology infrastructure options, hardware
and software requirements and networking. The Committee, however,
observe that during the first year of the Plan, the performance of the
Department has been very poor. A sum of 
 22.50 crore was allocated
for the Scheme at BE stage for the year 2007-08. This was pruned
down drastically to 
 8.82 crore and the actual expenditure upto
December, 2007 has been a paltry 
  0.08 crore i.e. less than 1 per cent
of the RE allocation. On the physical achievement side too, against
the targets of one consultancy, upgradation of IT infrastructure and

27
networking system integration in 33 Post Offices, setting up of 84
PFMs, extending instant money order services to 6350 Post Offices
and providing training to 100 officials in relation to setting up of
Postal Bank of India, the Department have nil achievements as on
31 December, 2007. This is clearly indicative of the unsatisfactory
planning and execution processes in the Department, which needs
rectification. The Committee, therefore, desire that at least in the
remaining years of the Eleventh Plan, the Department should make
all possible efforts to judicially and maximally utilise the allocated
amount. This will certainly help the Department in having Centralised
Banking Solutions which would make the operations efficient and
cost effective and further strengthen the network for exploring
untapped segments for fee-based services while broadening the
Department’s revenue generation base.
Reply of the Government
It may be stated that the year 2007-08 was the first year of the
11th Plan period (2007-2012). Procedural formalities like preparation
of SFC/EFC Memo, technical evaluation of the project, etc. in
consultation with other Government Departments like Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance and obtaining approval of EFC/
SFC are to be completed before incurring expenditure under plan
activities. In these circumstances, expenditure could not be incurred
in 2007-08.
However, it may be stated that in April 2008, a training
programme in banking function was organized at National Institute
of Bank Management (NIBM), Pune for officers of the Department of
Posts for the purpose of setting up of Post Bank of India (PBI). The
Memorandum of the Project on Anytime Anywhere Any branch
Banking (Core Banking Solution) for Post Office Small Savings Scheme
has been approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its
meeting held on 31.10.08. Further necessary action is being taken for
the implementation of the Project.
As regards Postal Finance Marts, it is intimated that upto the
Financial Year 2006-07 a total of 313 Postal Finance Marts have been
set up across the country . A target for setting up of 500 Postal Finance
Marts has been fixed for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. For the year
2008-09 funds to the tune of 
 5.85 crores have been allocated to all
the circles for setting up of a total of 122 Postal Finance Marts.

28
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
ELECTRONIC FUND/MONEY TRANSFER MECHANISM
The Committee note that two very useful Schemes operated by
the Department viz. Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) and Warrant
Payment Scheme (WPS) were rendered non-functional due to
discontinuation of VSAT network. While EFT facilitated end-to-end
fund transfers by banks on behalf of corporate sector and capital
markets, the WPS facilitated redemption of dividend warrants. The
Department are now proposing to set up Core Banking Solutions (CBS)
enabling ‘Anytime–Anywhere’ banking in 4000 Post Offices all over
the Country. Once the infrastructure is in place in these 4000 Post
Offices, Schemes like EFT and WPS could be considered for re-
introduction. The Committee expect that the CBS facility will be made
functional at the earliest at these 4000 Post Offices followed by time
bound expansion of the Scheme throughout the country as this will
enable the development of seamless transfer of information and a
coordinated platform for various financial activities for all the
customers, employees and the management in an integrated and
comprehensive manner.
Reply of the Government
 Department of Posts is considering to introduce Anytime,
Anywhere, Anybranch Banking through Core Banking Solutions (CBS)
for Post Office Small Savings Schemes during the 11th Five Year Plan
(2007-12) with a financial outlay of 
 106 crores. The Scheme envisages
setting up 4000 CBS branches (Head Post Offices and major Sub Post
Offices throughout India) during the Plan period. The system so setup
would enable providing new services such as National Electronic Fund
Transfer (NEFT), Electronic Clearing Service (ECS), and Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS), etc. The Project after implementation will
also pave way for delivery channels like ATM, etc. The Expenditure
Finance Committee in its meeting held on 31.10.08 has approved the
Memorandum of this Project. Further necessary action is in progress.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee further note that Schemes like Instant Money Order
(IMO) and facility of electronic Clearance Scheme (ECS) for MIS have
been introduced by the Department. The International Money Transfer
Service in association with Western Union Money Transfer has also
been generating revenue for the Department. The Committee appreciate
these initiatives of the Department and desire that the Department

29
should link the domestic instant money order service with the Savings
Bank (SB), Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) and other domestic services
which can be further linked to the Universal Postal Union’s
International Financial Systems (IFS)/Eurogiro/SWIFT and other
relevant international systems without any further delay in order to
facilitate two way money transfer facility between India and other
Countries. Considering the fact that India receives the highest amount
of remittances anywhere in the world and there is still a huge potential
for money transfer on account of large Indian diasporas across the
globe, these linkages ought to be accorded top priority by the
Department.
Reply of the Government
International Financial System (IFS) service has been introduced
for inward International Electronic Money Order Service from UAE
to India. To expand the business covering more postal administrations,
we are in discussion with partner countries.
The Eurogiro service has already been launched for updating of
international remittance service provided by India Post.
In addition to partnering with other postal administrations, the
Department is also putting in place partnerships with private
international remittances organizations to tap this market.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
POST BANK OF INDIA (PBI)
The proposal for setting up of a Post Bank of India has been
under consideration of the Government for several years now.
Numerous queries of the Committee in connection with their previous
Reports met with a stoic answer that the Post Bank was at the
conceptual stage. While examining the present subject, the Committee
were informed by DoP that Post Bank was proposed to be set up
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. However, during the oral evidence,
the representative of MoF informed the Committee that in the present
trend of consolidation and mergers, RBI was very reluctant to issue
fresh license for banks. The Committee have also been given to
understand that RBI had already come out with its guidelines on
banking correspondent and banking facilitator models. The banking
correspondent model foresees Post Offices being used by the banks
as their banking correspondents, who can collect deposits for the
banks, give small credit facilities from the banks, perform remittance

30
facility, etc. Under this banking correspondent model, the Department
presently have a tie-up with the State Bank of India on pilot basis in
about 100 Post Offices in five postal Circles viz. Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Jharkhand. The Committee are
unhappy over the state of indecision that has prevailed in DoP and
MoF with regard to Post Bank of India for years together. Now that
a more achievable and practical banking correspondent model has
been identified and is under implementation, the Committee hope
that on the basis of experience gained through the pilot project, the
Department would extend it to other Circles and cover more Post
Offices in a phased manner and also make use of the opportunities
created by growing retail services in an innovative way by forging
tie-ups with various Government/Private institutions/agencies.
Reply of the Government
The proposal to set up Post Bank of India is in conceptual stage.
State Bank of India entered into a tie up with Department of Posts
on 29th June, 2007 to sell its Assets and Liability products through
identified post offices in rural and semi urban areas under banking
correspondent scheme. Initially the scheme was started in five circles.
It was later extended to 10 circles. The scheme is being closely
monitored and performance of the tie up is reviewed regularly. As on
31st October, 2009, the total Assets products sold amount to 14.85
crores. The total number of different kind of accounts opened through
post offices is 1,33,278.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
As the Department have the edge in terms of institutionalized
banking structure and immense goodwill, the Committee feel that the
Department can very efficiently bridge the gaps in credit availability
and enhance the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi-
urban areas and also ensure better revenue generations. More
significantly, the vast network of Post Offices can become the ideal
delivery platform for various rural development Schemes of the
Government. In this regard, the Committee may like to refer to their
recommendation made in Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of DoP , whereby it has been recommended to capture rural
sector by the strategy of opening Savings Bank accounts of every BPL
family under the NREGA and any other Central sponsored Scheme,
whereby the Post Offices have been involved with the objective of
financial inclusion. The Committee hope that the Department would
have been taking the desired initiatives. The Committee would like to

31
be apprised of the outcome of the initiatives taken by the Department
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view of the objective of financial inclusion in the rural
and semi urban areas of the country the Department of Posts has
taken the following steps:
(i) NREGS (National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme)
The Department has taken the responsibility to disburse the wages
through post offices by opening savings bank accounts in the name
of NREG Scheme beneficiaries. Starting with Andhra Pradesh Postal
Circle in 2005, the payment of wages under NREGS is currently
operational in 19 postal circles comprising of 21 states. The scheme is
operational through 1,02,739 post offices (including Head Offices/Sub
Offices/Branch Offices). As on 30.11.2009 a total number of 3.82 crore
NREGS accounts have been opened. Implementation of the scheme is
being monitored at appropriate levels in coordination with Ministry
of Rural Development on regular basis.
(ii) India Post/SBI tie-up
State Bank of India entered into a tie up with Department of
Posts on 29th June, 2007 to make its Assets and Liability products
(ASSET PRODUCTS Retail Assets : Home Loans/Loans against
property, Auto Loans, Loans against TDR/Securities/KVP/NSC, Gold
Loans Business Assets : Non Agro SME Loans, General Purpose Credit
Cards, Kisan Credit Cards LIABILITY PRODUCTS: Current Account,
Saving Account with balance more than one lakh, Term Deposit
Accounts having currency less than one year and more than five
years, Recurring Deposit Account having currency less than three years
and above five years) through identified post offices in rural and
semi urban areas. Initially the scheme was started in five circles. Now
the scheme is operational in 19 Postal Circles barring Assam, Delhi
and J&K. The scheme is operational in 5226 Post Offices. The scheme
is being closely monitored and performance of the tie up is reviewed
regularly. As on 31st October, 2009, the total Assets products sold
amount to 14.85 crores. Total number of different kind of accounts
opened through post offices is 1,33,278.
(iii) Disbursal of Microcredit to Self Help Groups
The Department of Posts in collaboration with NABARD is
providing the facility of micro credit to Self Help Groups (SHGs)

32
through mutually identified post offices on agency basis. Upto
December 2009, 1121 Self Help Groups have benefited from the scheme.
The Revolving Fund Assistance (RFA) of 
  1 crore has been given by
NABARD in appropriate installments. Loans are disbursed to SHGs
at the interest rate of 9% p.a. One third of the interest earned on loan
repayments comes to DoP as commission. The repayment has to be
made in 24 installments by SHGs. The actual repayment is nearly
126% which is a very encouraging fact. The Pilot is in operation in
five districts comprising nine postal divisions of Tamil Nadu Circle.
(iv) Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS)
The department is also opening SB pension accounts for the
beneficiaries of Indira Gandhi Old Age Pension Scheme. The disbursals
under NSAP/IGNOAPS are made either through POSB accounts of
Money Orders or through both the services.
In respect of total No. of Money Orders under IGNOAPS and
No. of beneficiaries with amount all the Circles have been addressed.
On receipt of information the same will be updated.
Recommendation (Para 21)
The Committee observe that the Department have provided
 35 crores for the Scheme ‘Insurance Operations’ for the development
of insurance software for online operations, computerization of PLI/
RPLI, publicity of insurance products/training of marketing personnel
in insurance marketing and for the training of Circle Office personnel
in under writing for the Eleventh Plan. The Committee are, however,
unhappy with the performance of the Department in execution of
this Scheme. In the very first year of the Eleventh Plan, out of an
earmarked Outlay of 
 7.06 crore not even a single rupee could be
spent upto December, 2007  i.e. during the first nine months of the
fiscal. As in the case of the schemes meant for banking activities, this
scheme for insurance activities also could not take off due to non-
receipt of requisite clearances and approvals. While appreciating the
limitations of the Department in this regard, the Committee want
them to ensure that the funds allocated under the scheme are
prudently and fully utilised in the rest of the Eleventh Plan so that
the Department are able to provide all the facilities at par with other
players and are in a position to compete effectively and efficiently
with them on an equal footing.

33
Reply of the Government
The funds under plan head were released during Jan.–Feb. 2008
after approval of the Plan schemes. The utilization till 31.03.2008 was
as under:
Schemes Allotment Expenditure
(
  in crores) (
  in crores)
Online operation upto HO/Div. level 0.50 0.42
(Computerization)*
Computerization of PLI/RPLI 0.25 0.23
(Software Development)*
Training of Circle Office personnel 0.11 0.10
and marketing personnel**
Publicity of Insurance Product *** 2.00 1.90
* The scheme was approved on 10.03.2008.
** The scheme was approved on 04.02.2008.
*** The scheme was approved on 09.01.2008.
Allotment and Expenditure under Plan schemes during 2009-10
(30.11.2009) is as under:
Schemes Allotment Expenditure
(
  in crores) (
  in crores)
Online operation upto HO/Div. 0.74 0.033
level (Computerization)
Computerization of PLI/RPLI 0.60 0.450
(Software Development)
Training of Circle Office personnel 0.57 0.189
and marketing personnel
Publicity of Insurance Product 0.34 0.270
The Plan outlays during the remaining period of plan schemes
2007-12 will also be utilized purposefully to the fullest extent.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that in pursuance of the directive of the
Ministry of Finance (Budget Division), the incremental accretion to

34
POLIF and RPOLIF will now have to be invested as per Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) [Investment]
regulations, 2000 as amended in 2001. Accordingly, the corpus of POLIF
and RPOLIF would be frozen on a specific cut-off date and converted
into dated securities over a period of three years offering a mix of
maturities to be decided. The corpus of POLIF and RPOLIF and the
accretions to the fund after the cut off date will no longer form part
of the Special Deposit Scheme of the Ministry of Finance. The fund
will now be invested in the market by the Department as per the
guidelines of IRDA. The Committee also note that though as a
Government Department, the DoP are not a part of IRDA but they
have voluntarily chosen to follow IRDA norms for investment of this
Fund. The Department are planning to set up an Investment Board
for the purpose which will be assisted by an Investment Division.
The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Department of
voluntarily choosing to follow the IRDA norms for investment. This
would send a very positive signal to investors, both the current and
prospective ones about the Insurance Schemes being operated by DoP .
The compliance with IRDA norms would also put the services rendered
by the Department in insurance sector at par with other players in
the field. The Committee, therefore, desire that all preparatory works
for setting-up of Investment Board, Investment Division, secueritisation
of corpus after the cut off date, etc. may be completed in a stipulated
time frame. The new Scheme of fund investment is an uncharted
course and devolves the responsibility of safe keeping and fund
management by the Department for the first time. The Committee,
therefore, hope that the Department would make earnest efforts to
have the best available professional talent included in the Investment
Board so as to ensure that the Fund is managed judiciously and
efficiently in the years to come. Further, the Investment Board should
have very clearly defined duties, responsibilities and powers. In
addition, since IRDA Investment regulations do not permit out-sourcing
of investment functions, the Department need to develop their own
cadre of investment personnel to take care of every aspect of the
investment function and investment strategy besides taking care of
day to day activities within a short period of three to four year i.e.
till the time PLI & RPLI Fund comes under IRDA norms. This is an
onerous task and the committee desire that the Department should
take all measures to achieve it. The Committee would like to be
apprised of a definite roadmap, including targeted dates for each of
these activities, at the earliest.

35
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of approval of the Union Cabinet, Investment Board
has since been formed. The Board includes three outside experts,
selected from a panel sent by the Ministry of Finance. The entire
Board has been briefed of its responsibilities and role in a meeting
held on December 30, 2008. Department of Posts is now working to
fill up the newly created positions in Investment Division who are to
take day to day decisions on the matters relating to the management
of the funds under the guidelines framed by the Investment Board.
This position in the Investment Divisions will be filled up initially on
deputation/contract, by the experts who are having requisite
background in Public Sector Banks/financial institutions. These
arrangements will be purely on ad hoc basis for a period of one year
or till regular arrangements are made based on recruitment rules to
be framed. Personnel Division of the Department of Posts has already
decided the eligibility criteria for ad hoc selection against these
positions.
Decisions of the Investment Division will be implemented through
two Public Sector Asset Management Companies under ‘passive’ or
‘non-discretionary’ mode of Fund Management. The agreement with
the Fund Managers has been signed, the Investment Division is
functioning and the investment of POLIF/RPOLIF has commenced
w.e.f. November 2009.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
COMPUTERISATION AND MODERNISATION OF POST OFFICES
The Committee observe that the Department have computerised
8263 Post Offices, all Circle Offices, Regional Offices, Postal Account
Offices, 206 Divisional Offices, Speed Post Centres and 816 Head Post
Offices throughout the Country in the Tenth Plan. The Committee
further note that the Department have plans for computerizing
remaining 17598 Departmental Post Offices and 64000 Branch Post
Offices during the Eleventh Plan and are developing and implementing
various softwares for effective and prompt services. The Committee
while appreciating Department’s efforts think that the focus on
technology induction with an increased emphasis on rural areas should
continue and the approach for network access needs to be reviewed
with the introduction of alternative mechanisms like franchising, etc.
The Committee, in view of the increased financial activities of the
Department recommend that the project for restructuring/process
reengineering and modernisation and total networking and

36
computerization of the Accounts Wing of the Department should also
be carried out expeditiously. The Committee are confident that the
network of fully computerised Post Offices, besides augmenting
revenue generation through consolidation of existing services,
introduction of new value added services, increased banking and
insurance activities, will also support the e-governance initiatives of
the Central Government particularly the NeGP .
Reply of the Government
The Department is in the process of engaging professional
consultant(s) to develop a technology strategy and action plan for
process re-engineering total networking and computerisation of post
offices, administrative offices and offices of the accounts wing.
Department have constituted internal team of officers for carrying out
business process re-engineering exercise in consultation with the
stakeholders. Based on the advice of the Consultant(s) further action
will be taken to engage Technology partner(s) for developing integrated
modular software and a network of fully computerized of offices
during the Eleventh Plan.
The Department has since engaged the services of a professional
consultant to develop a technology strategy and action plan for
computerization.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee during the examination of Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of DoP observed that the National Data Centre has been
developed and the Department have proposals for setting up some
Regional Data Centres. The Committee think that the National Data
Centre will have to be strengthened to network various categories of
Post Offices and Administrative Offices and to enable all levels to
access management information on real time basis, thus helping to
take quicker decisions and cut processing costs. Further, as the
Department are a data repository, the Committee opine that with
proper data management they can also provide business intelligence
with substantial possible commercial spin off.
Reply of the Government
 The Department is in the process of engaging professional Project
Consultant(s) to advise the Department in conceptualization and
implementation of the Project. Based upon the advice of Project
Consultant(s), a comprehensive IT roadmap will be developed for

37
network architecture, integrated software, proper data management
including strengthening/ establishment of National Data Centre(s) and
Disaster Recovery Centre.
The Department has since engaged the service of a professional
for conceptualization and implementation of the project.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
POSTAL FINANCE MARTS (PFMs)
The Committee note that the Department have plans for setting
up of 500 PMFs in addition to the 300 odd PFMs set up during the
Tenth Plan as a one stop shop for all financial services. The Committee,
however, note with concern that none of the 84 Postal Finance Marts
earmarked for 2007-08 could be opened due to want of mandatory
clearances and approvals of various agencies. For the year 2008-09 a
target of 120 PFMs has been projected by the Department. Keeping in
view the immense importance of the PFMs in giving the much needed
fillip to the activities of the Department in financial sector, the
Committee exhort them to take all necessary measures for expediting
the requisite clearances and approvals so that the Plan target of 500
PFMs is atleast achieved in the remaining four years of the Plan. The
Committee are sure that the PFMs would help in creating a distinct
identity and brand for the Department and also serve as a front end
for the tie-ups with various financial institutions and banks for vending
their retail services. The Committee would also like the Department
to equip the PFMs with all the utility products ranging from
photocopying facility to facsimile, stationery, packaging material,
internet connectivity, etc. to meet the growing customer expectations
and competition and to increase business volume.
Reply of the Government
 Upto the Financial Year 2006-07 a total of 313 Postal Finance
Marts have been set up across the country. A target for setting up of
500 Postal Finance Marts has been fixed for the Eleventh Five Year
Plan. For the year 2008-09 funds to the tune of 
 5.85 crores have
been allocated to all the circles for setting up of a total of 122 Postal
Finance Marts. The Postal Finance Marts provide Post Office Savings
Bank services like Saving Bank, Recurring Deposit, Monthly Income
Scheme, Time Deposit, Senior Citizen Savings Scheme, National Saving
Certificate, Kisan Vikas Patra as well as other financial services like
Postal Life & Non-life insurance, Mutual Funds & Bonds, Government
Securities, Pension Schemes, International Money Transfer, Money

38
Order, Instant Money Order etc. under one roof as ‘One Stop Shop
for Financial Services’ in a fully computerized office supported by
technology and in a customer friendly ergonomically improved
environment at par with the reputed banking institutions. The facilities
like Internet connectivity, availability of forms & stationery and
comfortable sitting arrangement for the customers are already provided
in Postal Finance Marts.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee note that during the financial year 2004-05,
2005-06 and 2006-07 the Department have spent 
 72.70 lakh, 
  198.25
lakh and 
  194.43 lakh respectively for marketing of various POSB
allocated for marketing and advertising of financial services, which is
a substantial increase over past allocations. However, the Committee
are dismayed to note that only 1.00 crore each have been allocated
for the purpose during the first two fiscals of the Plan. It is
inexplicable why such meagre allocations have been made during the
first two years and 90 per cent allocations have been left for the
remaining three years of the Plan. The Committee would impress
upon the Department to ensure an evenly spread of allocation of the
funds meant for marketing and advertisement of Financial Services so
that not only the earmarked activities do not suffer but the Department
are also not compelled to surrender precious funds.
 Reply of the Government
Being the first year of the XIth Plan period approval of outlay
was received from Planning Commission only during September 2007.
Only thereafter action could be initiated by the Department for
obtaining the approval of the schemes, hence minimum funds to the
extent of 
 1 crore was only allocated during 2007-08. The scheme
was approved during March 2008. Subsequently proposal to the extent
of 
 6 crore was projected during the BE proposal 2008-09 but the
fund was restricted to the extent of 
  1 crore due to reduction of BE
outlay 2008-09 by the Planning Commission. Keeping the above fact
in view the remaining fund has been proportionately distributed for
the remaining three years. During the year 2009-10, a total of
 20 lakh have been allocated for advertising and publicity of Financial
Services under the concerned Plan Scheme. However, the Department
will ensure that the fund earmarked for the activity will be fully
utilized.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee point to the fact that as the Department have to
function in a competitive market, their advertising/branding exercise

39
should be professional, quick in response and focused in approach to
the segment targeted. This calls for involving print and electronic
media and they should be optimally utilized according to the DAVP
regulations. All new Schemes and services, changes in existing banking
and insurance Schemes must be showcased in all the Post Office
through standardised, well designed, attractive posters and notices so
that they immediately catch the attention of the customers. They
should also be well published through newspapers and hoardings in
order to establish an ongoing interaction with the customers. Further,
for due publicity of the banking and insurance products there is an
urgent need to have coordination with local governing bodies too.
The forum of Gram Sabha meetings can be the best platform to make
the rural people aware of the schemes of the Post Offices. The
Committee further want the Department to evolve an effective
marketing strategy, multi pronged marketing action strong evaluation
mechanism and strive for research based product development.
Reply of the Government
Business Development & Marketing Directorate, which has the
responsibility for advertising/publicity has adopted an extensive Media
Plan, which include the following modes of Marketing:-
Print Media–Newspaper & Magazine
Electronic Media–TV Channel, Radio
Out-door Publicity-Hording, Banners at Air Port, Metro Station
etc.
e-enabled Marketing-advertisement on Website through SMS
In sales promotion, maximum stress is being placed on
strengthening delivery system in rural areas. Instructions have been
issued to Circles to restore the confidence of public in financial Services
by publicity of Saving Schemes, Money Order Service through
electronic media, proper display of posters, Sign Boards, and
pamphlets. The value added financial services are also being
highlighted among the public. Circles have been asked to coordinate
with local bodies namely Village Pradhan/Sarpanch/Gram Secretary/
Distt. Panchayat Officer and Gram Sabha to make the rural population
aware of Schemes of the Post Offices. Thus an effective marketing
strategy, multi-pronged marketing action and strong evaluation
mechanism are being pursued to promote products and services of
the Department of Posts.

40
(ii) Separately for promotion of Insurance related products PLI
Directorate has prepared the Media Plan for the 11th Five-year Plan
period, which is presently under implementation. In the plan period
2007-12, a sum of 
  10 crore has been approved for advertisement,
sales and publicity. In the media plan, 20% is proposed to be spent
in advertisement in print media including preparation of brochures
and leaflets on PLI/RPLI, another 20% is proposed to be spent on
outdoor media viz. hoardings, canopies, posters, scrolls and in
organizing Road Shows and 10% is proposed to be spent on Radio/
TV Channel. Remaining 50% of the Plan fund on promotion is spent
• in organizing seminars on PLI in places which are having
potential client base,
• in organizing RPLI melas in villages and in supplying
brochures on PLI/RPLI through these seminars/melas and
through Post Offices.
In sales promotion, maximum stress is given in direct contact.
Whereas, the major chunk of the PLI business is organized through
Departmental employees, almost the entire RPLI business is mobilized
through Gramin Dak Sevaks. Departmental employees and the Gramin
Dak Sevaks are paid incentives at a very moderate rate to canvas
business in Sundays/Holidays and outside office hours in normal
working days. This helps PLI in keeping the cost of operation
extremely low compared to other Insurance Companies and the surplus
is passed on to the insurants in the form of higher bonus. A proposal
is being pursued with the Department of Personnel to allow employees
of other Government Departments to take up the work of sale of PLI
outside their working hours.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
To sum up, the foregoing paragraphs identify certain key areas in
the administration of the Financial Services of the Department of Posts,
particularly the Banking and Insurance activities, which requires urgent
attention. Some of the tasks to be achieved and impediments and
shortcomings which need to be handled with utmost seriousness and
promptitude on the banking side include, arresting the declining trend
of deposits and the rising withdrawals from the Savings Deposits; the
alarming decrease in the number of accounts in POSB Schemes in
several States; shortfalls in Savings Certificates operations; the need
for revision of rates of interest on POSB Schemes in rural areas;
introduction of a centralized monitoring and evaluation system at the
Headquarters for banking operations; settlement of the long pending

41
remuneration charges for agency services in consultation with MoF;
extension of banking correspondent model in a phased manner from
pilot project to a pan India presence etc. The points emerging in the
Insurance Sector include, the need for maintaining the increasing trend
of policies and income from premia of PLI & RPLI; pursuing
vigorously with the MoF, the withdrawal of conditionalities imposed
about launching of new Schemes to ensure a level field with other
players in the Insurance Sector; charting out at the earliest, a definite
and time bound roadmap for transition to the new investment pattern
of PLI and RPLI funds to ensure expeditious implementation of the
Scheme etc. There is also a need for judicious utilization of funds
allocated for Banking and Insurance Sector Schemes for the Eleventh
Plan to avoid slippage; and establishment of a regulatory mechanism
to oversee the multifarious activities of the Department including
postal operations, banking insurance and money transfer activities.
The imperatives for re-orienting/restructuring the administrative
organization including human resource development need hardly be
over emphasized. The Committee expect the Department to take
necessary action in right earnest so that India Post not only make
their valuable contribution to national growth in an effective way but
also improve their financial health in the process.
Reply of the Government
• Department of Posts has taken up the matter of raising
interest rates on post office small savings schemes even at
the level of Minister. But Ministry of Finance has not agreed
to raise interest rates as interest on small savings schemes
are benchmarked to the average yield on Government
Securities of comparable maturity in the secondary market.
The recommendation of the Standing Committee matter has
been sent to Ministry of Finance for examination.
• After sustained efforts of the Department of Posts, the
Ministry of Finance has now agreed to constitute a new
Expert Committee to review the agency charges. However,
the terms of reference and constitution of the Committee
are awaited. Ministry of Finance is being pursued to expedite
the matter.
• The proposal to extend the banking correspondent scheme
to 5000 post offices throughout the country is under
consideration in consultation with SBI.
• Department is also proposing to introduce Anytime
Anywhere Banking through Core Banking Solution (CBS)

42
for Post Office Small Savings Schemes in the 11th Five Year
Plan. It is hoped that CBS once started will go a long way
to meet the technological need of POSB customers and will
increase the customer base of the Department.
• The Department is already providing Accidental Insurance
through Benefit Oriental Insurance Company for 
  1 lakh
to the Post Office savings account holders with nominal
premium of 
 15.
•A  comprehensive IT roadmap will be developed for network
architecture, integrated software, proper data management
including strengthening/establishment of National Data
Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery Centre.
• The issue of removal of conditionality for extension of client
base of PLI and for introduction of new products will be
pursued with the Insurance Division of the MoF and
recommendation of the Standing Committee will be taken
up with the MoF.
• Recent initiatives relating to investment of Post Office Life
Insurance Fund (POLIF) and Rural POLIF are being steered
with extreme caution.
• Every effort is being taken for effective and proper utilization
of Plan fund.
• Innovative promotional measures are being taken for
maximum direct contact with potential customers.

43
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—

44
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
MARKET SHARE OF POSB
The Committee are perturbed to note that despite the advantages
in terms of reach, network and goodwill, the Department have a
meagre market share in the country’s banking sector. Curiously, the
Department do not even maintain any data on the market size, market
share, etc. under the plea that they are not the sole operator of such
Schemes. From the data submitted to the Committee by the
Department from the Reserve Bank of India website, it is noted that
the aggregate deposits of the Savings Schemes of Scheduled
Commercial Banks in the Country as on March, 2007 stood at
 2608309 crore. The outstanding balance of all POSB Schemes
excluding Savings Certificates was 
  351590 crore on the corresponding
day. According to the Department, this is 11.88 per cent of the
aggregate national deposits. On a relook, the Committee found that
in percentage terms, the balance in Post Office Savings Bank Schemes
as on March, 2007 worked out to 13.47 per cent of the aggregate
deposits of Savings Schemes of Scheduled Commercial Banks and not
11.88 per cent. All this is indicative of lack of seriousness on the part
of the Department towards an activity, which has all the potential to
act as the much needed lifeline for the Department to enable them to
sustain their operations. For their banking operations to succeed and
expand further to their real potential, the Department ought to evolve
a centralised monitoring and evaluation system at the Headquarters
level. This system, manned by senior officials with relevant professional
qualifications should keep an eye on the market size, market
development and trends on a day to day basis so as to provide the
much needed directional support and guidance to the field offices
Reply of the Government
The foundation of the Government Savings Bank was laid in the
year 1833 when first bank was opened in Calcutta for investment of

45
the savings of all classes—British and Native. In 1860, the scheme of
District Bank was drawn up and sent to State Governments. The
establishment of District Savings Banks was announced on 16.5.1870.
The Government passed “Government Savings Bank Act, 1873 in 1873.
By 1881, 171 District Banks, 3 Presidency Banks, 14 Railways Banks
and 183 Regimental Banks had been established. The Government
decided to engage Post Office as an agency for execution of any
Savings Scheme under this Act and on 1.4.1886 , the Post Office
Savings Banks were opened all over India. From 1.4.1886, the District
Banks were merged with Post Office Savings Banks.
Department of Posts is functioning as an operative agency of the
Ministry of Finance. All policy decisions on launching of small savings
schemes and management of funds collected/mobilized are taken by
Ministry of Finance. Department of Posts was given the task of
operationalising the Government sponsored schemes. The rules of the
Small Savings Schemes are framed by the Ministry of Finance in
consultation with National Savings Institute (NSI) which is under
control of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs.
Promotion of the business in the Post Office Savings Bank is mainly
the concern of the National Savings Institute. The Institute is solely
responsible for the publicity of the various savings schemes and works
for promotion of the ideal thrift as a way of life among the people
and for mobilization of their household savings for the national
development. NSI is also responsible for collection and collation of
data and providing policy inputs to the MoF, structuring of different
financial products/schemes, launching of new financial products,
designing, structuring of new financial products, co-ordination with
State Governments for mobilization of small savings.
All deposits under small savings schemes are credited to the
‘National Small Savings Fund’ (NSSF), established in the Public
Account of India with effect from 1.4.1999. All withdrawals by the
depositors are made out of the accumulations in this Fund. The balance
in the Fund is invested in special Government securities as per norms
decided from time to time by the Central Government.
The sums received in NSSF on redemption of special securities
are being reinvested in special Central Government securities. The
debt servicing of Central/State Government securities is an income of
the Fund while the cost of the interest paid to the subscribers and
cost of management of small savings schemes are expenditure of the
Fund. The special Central Government securities issued to NSSF
constitute a part of the internal debt of the Government of India.

46
Briefly therefore, the Post Office Savings Bank is operated by the
Department of Posts on behalf of the MoF and its mandate is limited
to the collection and disbursement of the funds deposited therein and
maintenance of records. The actual fund management is undertaken
by the MoF. However, this Department takes a proactive role in
expanding small savings customers’ base by marketing the products
at grassroot level through its Postmasters and Gramin Dak Sevaks
(GDS) who command trust of common man. Efforts of the Department
to disburse wages under NREG Scheme is a step in this direction.
The progress in expansion of customer base and quality of banking
service provided is regularly monitored at Circle level and at the
level of Directorate in FS Division. Various workshops and training
programmes are being held in reputed institutions to enhance capacity
building in this regard.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE
 The Committee note that though the Department have a defined
organizational structure at various levels for carrying out banking
and other financial activities, no professional qualifications have been
laid down by the Department for the personnel manning these
specialised financial areas. The Committee are not convinced with the
Department’s explanation that it has not been done since they are not
doing full fledged banking and other financial activities though some
training is provided to persons entrusted with such work. Such
reasoning would have sounded logical in the past when the
Department were largely focused on postal services and related
activities. Now when the Department are looking more and more
towards the numerous avenues for revenue generation through
financial services, it is but imperative that personnel specifically
qualified for the purpose are also in place in the Department. Moreso,
when the activities of the Department as a banking correspondent
have become well defined now, would lead to substantial increase in
their banking and related activities. The Committee would also like
the Department to provide for specialised intensive in-house training
for the existing staff entrusted with these works. The Department
should, in this context, also seek outside professional guidance and
help in designing and carrying out training modules and activities
for ushering highest levels of professionalism in the personnel carrying
out these activities.

47
Reply of the Government
To train/update officers and staff about the development taking
place in the field of financial services, operationalisation and
management specialization training is imparted to them from time to
time through specialized institutions such as Postal Training Centres
and National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) (for training in
banking related processes). Department is also imparting training at
regular intervals to its staff through Induction and Refresher Courses
at specialised training centres for updating their knowledge in Post
Office Savings Bank rules and procedures, Public customers relations,
soft skill, etc. The mutual fund companies namely Principal, UTI, SBI,
Franklin Templeton and Reliance provide training to postal staff to
enable them to pass Association of Mutual Fund of India (AMFI) test
so that staff could retail the mutual fund product effectively. Similarly,
The ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Co. Ltd. provide the training to
staff about its pension product.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
INSURANCE ACTIVITIES
INSURANCE SCHEMES OF DEPARTMENT OF POSTS
The Committee note that Postal Life Insurance (PLI) was
introduced in the year 1884 as a Scheme initially meant for the welfare
of the postal employees and was gradually extended to the employees
of the Telegraph Department, Central and State Governments, Public
Sector Undertakings, Universities, Government aided Educational
Institutions, National Banks, Local bodies, etc. The Rural Postal Life
Insurance (RPLI) was introduced in March, 1995. It is open to all
between the age of 19 and 60 years having a rural address. The
prime objective of RPLI is to benefit weaker sections and women
workers of rural areas and to spread insurance awareness among the
rural populace. The Committee further note that unlike Post Office
Savings Bank Schemes, the products and their features under PLI and
RPLI are designed by the Department of Posts though with the
concurrence of the Ministry of Finance. The total number of policies
under PLI is 32,97,825 as on 31st March, 2007 and the number of

48
policy holders under RPLI stands at 
  52,46,673 on the corresponding
date. The total sum assured under the two Schemes is 
  26,753.17
crore and 
  33,865.65 crore respectively. The corpus of PLI at the end
of 2006-07 is 
  10,342.61 crore. The corpus of RPLI at the end of
fiscal 2006-07 stood at 
  2284.92 crore. The Committee note with
satisfaction that the premium income of DoP from these two Schemes
has also shown an encouraging upwards trend. The income from
premium from PLI rose by about 30 per cent from 
 904.58 crore in
2004-05 to 
  1211.79 crore in 2006-07. Similarly, the income from the
premium of RPLI grew by more than 50 per cent from 
  380.88 crore
in 2004-05 to 
  601.03 crore in 2006-07. The Committee expect that
DoP will maintain this trend in the years to come
Reply of the Government
The business growth of PLI and RPLI over last few years is given
below:—
Year No. of PLI Sum assured No. of RPLI Sum assured of
Policies as on of PLI policies policies as RPLI policies
31st March procured in on 31st March procured in
the year the year
(
  in crores) (
  in crores)
2000-01 19,52,639 10,405.08 8,23,566 2,898.17
2001-02 20,08,574 11,870.30 11,33,013 4,403.92
2002-03 20,98,577 13,676.80 17,95,070 7,464.53
2003-04 22,08,683 15,917.61 26,66,485 12,385.11
2004-05 23,91,662 19,105.44 37,38,798 18,520.93
2005-06 30,90,248 22,951.60 47,02,776 25,229.66
2006-07 32,97,825 26,753.17 52,46,673 33,865.65
2007-08 35,50,084 31,469.01 61,67,928 41,846.09
2008-09 38,41,539 38,403.00 73,56,446 53,072.10
The above table confirms that PLI is maintaining a consistent
trend in upward growth of business. This growth is reflected also in
terms of growth in the premium mobilized and also in the growth of
the corpus size. Premiums mobilized over the years and the corpus
size as on March 31 of the corresponding year is given below.

49
Year Premium Cropus size of Premium Cropus size of
Mobilized from PLI fund as Mobilized from RPLI fund as
PLI Schemes on 31st March PLI Schemes on 31st March
(in 
  crores) (in 
  crores) (in 
  crores) (in 
  crores)
2000-01 436.58 4,462.27 67.98 235.17
2001-02 503.07 5,090.16 94.97 341.05
2002-03 592.22 5,797.30 171.63 510.69
2003-04 699.46 6,619.81 245.96 756.48
2004-05 906.10 7,686.43 381.31 1127.61
2005-06 1080.48 8,933.59 475.72 1624.77
2006-07 1213.73 10,342.61 601.87 2284.72
2007-08 1482.49 12,081.71 665.43 3003.78
2008-09 1862.51 14,152.59 879.24 3994.36
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that the number of policies under PLI have
increased from 
  2098577 in 2002-03 to 
  3297825 in 2006-07 i.e. by
about 80 per cent during the Tenth Plan Period. The RPLI policies
have shown an almost 300 per cent growth from 
 1795070 in 2002-
03 to 
  5246673 in 2006-07. The total sum assured under PLI almost
doubled during this period from 
  13677 crore to 
  26753 crore. The
Sum Assured under RPLI also increased almost four and a half times
during the Tenth Plan period from 
  7465 crore to 
  33866 crore. The
estimated growth rates of PLI and RPLI has been 15 per cent and 40
per cent per annum respectively. While fully appreciating the strides
taken by the Department for expanding their insurance activities, the
Committee note that these achievements are the proverbial tip of
iceberg and the full potential of the Insurance Schemes operated by
DoP is yet to be exploited. Inspite of lower premium rates and higher
bonus rates as compared to similar policies of other players in the
insurance sector, the market share of DoP is a meagre 2.7 per cent. In
the opinion of the Committee this tardy progress is mainly because
of the fact that the insurance activities of DoP are, even in this era
of the fact that the insurance activities of DoP are, even in this era
of liberalization, shackled with norms that are highly restrictive. They
are required to seek directions of the Ministry of Finance (Insurance

50
Division) in terms of their letter No.97 (25)/INS.II/93 dated 20
September, 1993 for all policy matters like extension of scope so as to
cover other clientele, introduction of new products etc. While other
players are having freedom to come up with all sorts of products,
DoP cannot even introduce Unit Linked Insurance Products (ULIPs)
inspite of the market demand just because the concurrence of MoF is
not forthcoming. The Committee find this a very unsatisfactory
situation. They are of the opinion that DoP should also be given at
least as much freedom, if not more, as enjoyed by other players in
the insurance sector. They, therefore, strongly recommend that the
conditionalities imposed on DoP by the communication of 1993
regarding mandatory concurrence of Insurance Division when
launching any fresh initiatives ought to be withdrawn forthwith and
DoP should be allowed to extend their clientele and introduce new
products on their own after exercising due diligence. The Committee
further recommend that the Department should consider the
desirability of going in for tie-ups with other Government/Private
insurance agencies in rural and semi-urban areas for various life and
non-life products like medical insurance, farming vehicle/equipment
insurance products, etc. as these schemes have a readymade market
and may definitely help the Department to substantiate their revenue
generation. The Committee feel that given this much needed functional
freedom and diversification, DoP would continue their good work in
insurance sector and improve their market presence.
Reply of the Government
PLI/RPLI is having 2.7% of the total market share. The fact may
be appreciated in the light of following limitations:
• In urban areas PLI can be sold only to the employees of
Government and semi-Governmental organizations.
• PLI has got only traditional insurance products in its basket
viz. Whole Life Assurance Policies, Endowment Assurance
Policies and Anticipated Endowment Assurance Policies
(Money Back).
In terms of premium underwritten in the year 2006-07 in the
‘Individual Non-single Premium Group/position of PLI/RPLI was 4th
amongst other public sector and private sector life insurance
companies. Premium underwritten by the major life insurance
companies of the country in the year 2006-07 is given below (source
: IRDA Journal).

51
Name of the Organization Premium Underwritten
(in 
  Crores)
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LICI) 23,899
ICICI–Prudential  3,925
Bajaj Allianz  3,028
PLI/RPLI  1,815
HDFC–Standard  1,220
SBI Life  1,199
The issue of bringing certain categories of employees within the
fold of PLI was taken up with the MoF (Banking & Insurance Division)
vide PLI Directorate letter No. 25-06/2000-LI dated 07.01.2007,
13.07.2007 and 03.06.2008. The Ministry asked to prepare a road map
for coming under IRDA vide their letter No. S-11019/10/2006-Ins.III
dated 18th June, 2008. But unless PLI is corporatised, it is not possible
to bring it under the regulations of IRDA. However, the
recommendations of the Standing Committee are being brought to
the notice of the Insurance Division of the Ministry of Finance so that
the restrictions imposed to PLI in terms of their letter No.97(25)/
Ins.II/93 dated 20th Sept., 1993 for extension of scope so as to cover
other clientele, introduction of new products/schemes etc. are
withdrawn and Department of Posts is given a level playing field
with other operators in the life insurance sector.
The matter is still under correspondence with the Ministry of
Finance regarding removal of restrictions imposed on PLI for extension
of scope so as to cover other clientele, introduction of new products/
schemes etc.
However, PLI does not have any mandate to sale non-life products
viz. Medical Insurance, Crop Insurance, Vehicle Insurance etc. In this
connection, it may be stated that premium mobilized through sale of
PLI/RPLI policies, do not add to revenue of the Department. All the
premia gets accrued to Post Office Life Insurance Fund (POLIF) and
Rural POLIF. Even the returns on these funds are accrued to the fund
itself. Department of Posts recovers the administrative expenses in
running the schemes out of this fund at some predetermined rate.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 47, 48, 49 & 50 of Chapter–I)

52
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee expect that while persisting with their current
strategy of luring individual customers, the Department while devising
new Schemes and marketing strategies should also keep in mind the
need and requirements of corporate and institutions as their potential
clients. The Committee would like the Department to take initiatives
with regard to signing MoUs with various bodies/institutions for their
Postal Life Insurance Schemes by way of offering certain attractive
discounts on bulk membership. This will also help the department to
ensure timely payment of premium and mitigate the risk of default.
Reply of the Government
Providing attractive discounts in the premium for bulk membership
is possible only in respect of Group Insurance Schemes. As on day
PLI is not having any Group Insurance Scheme for bulk membership.
Such schemes designed in past for BSNL employees did not get
approval of the Insurance Division of the Ministry of Finance. As
such idea of signing MoUs with various bodies/institutions for their
Postal Life Insurance Schemes by way of offering attractive discounts
on bulk membership can be implemented only when Insurance
Division, Ministry of Finance, gives necessary authority and freedom
to the Department of Posts, similar to the authority enjoyed by other
players in the Insurance Sector to design such products. However, the
observations of the Standing Committee are being taken up with the
Ministry of Finance at appropriate level.
As stated in para 19 above, the matter is still under correspondence
with the Ministry of Finance.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 47, 48, 49 & 50 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee in their earlier Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of DoP , considering the increased activities of the Department
in the various fields of postal operations, banking, insurance and
money transfer activities, have recommended that the Government
should consider setting up of a regulatory mechanism in this regard.
In view of the Department to have some sort of regulatory mechanism
on an urgent basis so as to make their functioning more transparent
and accountable and win the trust and faith of the clients. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter.

53
Reply of the Government
Postal Life Insurance and Rural Postal Life Insurance (PLI/RPLI)
are exempted insurers under Section 118(c) of Insurance Act, 1938
and also under Section 44 (d) of the LIC Act, 1956. These Schemes do
not come under the purview of IRDA Act, 1999 and consequently, not
regulated by IRDA.
Recommendation of the Committee in respect of other activities
will be kept in view while drafting the IPO Act, Amendment (Bill).
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 47, 48, 49 & 50 of Chapter–I)

54
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLY IS INTERIM IN NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
BANKING ACTIVITIES
POST OFFICE SAVINGS BANK (POSB)
The oldest and the largest banking institution in the country, the
Post Office Savings Bank (POSB), functions as an agency of the
Ministry of Finance, (MoF) Government of India. MoF pay an annual
remuneration to DoP for the performance of the Savings Bank function.
The Committee note that the Department at present through the Post
Office Savings Bank are offering products like Savings Bank Account
(SB), Recurring Deposits (RD), Time Deposits (TD), Monthly Income
Scheme (MIS), Public Provident Fund (PPF), Kisan Vikas Patra (KVP),
National Savings Certificates (NSC) and Senior Citizen Saving Scheme
(SCSS). The total number of accounts under different Schemes as on
31 March, 2007 are 172397269 with a total deposit of 
 351547.72
crore. The Committee are constrained to observe that the Savings
Deposits are showing a declining trend. Their examination revealed
that the deposits of 
 130474 crore during the year 2005-06 came
down to 
  116085 crore during 2006-07. On the other hand, the
withdrawals have shown an increasing trend being 
  76740 crore
during the year 2005-06 and swelling further to 
  90922 crore during
the year 2006-07. Since the Post Office Savings have been the most
preferred investment/savings option of the general public, the
Committee find this negative trend of declining deposits and rising
withdrawals very perturbing and a reflection of the shrinking
popularity and trust of the people in the Schemes of the Department.
The Committee desire that the Department should thoroughly look
into the reasons for this and take corrective measures at the earliest.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by
the Department to revive the Savings deposits as the foremost
investment option of the people.
Reply of the Government
The negative trend in growth is a matter of concern to the
Department. Efforts to increase the accounts base of the Post Office

55
by fixing circle-wise targets etc. are being made. It is seen that broadly
there is a difference in performance of investment based schemes
wherein long term investments are being made and small deposit
based schemes where the customer is mainly looking for facility for
small savings. There has been an annual increase in number of small
deposit based account holders like Savings Accounts even in the last
few years. It is expected that there may also be an increase in number
of investment based account holders in view of the current market
conditions. In case of PPF and SCSS schemes, the rate of interest
offered by Banks is equivalent to the rate of interest given by the
Department and the account base has increased. However, in respect
of investment based schemes like MIS, TD and RD (no upper limit of
deposit) the declining trend is noticed. A table showing the number
of accounts in the major Post Office Savings Schemes is given below:
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise
S B MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 61492639 24625490 64723609 8576579 1981703 489931
2006-07 64342873 24921140 67027234 12429827 2111082 752260
2007-08 69107518 23224188 66169851 11916977 2157675 855311
2008-09 78046881 24737525 74372853 8898668 2209780 1014296
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 15 & 16 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4 )
The Committee find from the data furnished by the Department
relating to the Circle-wise position of number of accounts of All
Savings Schemes that there is an alarming trend of decline in the
savings account. Out of 22 Circles, declining trends have been observed
in 13 Circles viz. Assam, Base (Army Postal Circle) Delhi, Gujarat,
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, North-East, Orissa, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Uttarakhand. The worst is the position
in Haryana where the number of accounts during the year 2005-06
has sharply declined almost by 30 per cent of the total accounts. The
Committee strongly recommend that the reasons for the sharp decline
in the number of Savings Scheme Accounts in the aforesaid States be
analysed State-wise and corrective actions be taken in this regard.
The Committee may be kept apprised of the concrete action taken by
the Department.

56
Reply of the Government
A statement detailing the number of accounts in the major Post
Office Savings Schemes is given below:
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 61492639 24625490 64723609 8576579 1981703 489931
2006-07 64342873 24921140 67027234 12429827 2111082 752260
2007-08 69107518 23224188 66169851 11916977 2157675 855311
2008-09 78046881 24737525 74372853 8898668 2209780 1014296
From the above table, it may be seen that there is increase in
number of accounts in the Savings Bank (SB), Public Provident Fund
(PPF) and Sr. Citizen Savings Scheme (SCSS) during the last four
years. In MIS/RD/TD also, the number of accounts increased in
2006-07 as compared to previous year 2005-06. However, in 2007-08
the decreasing trend was observed in these three schemes. Again the
number of accounts increased in MIS and RD in 2008-09 as compared
to 2007-08.
In respect of the 13 circles referred to in the report, broad trend
shows that account base of investment based scheme is declining and
that of small deposit based scheme is increasing with exception in
some circles. Position on the trend observed in 13 circles referred to
in the report about their account base in the last four years is given
below.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Haryana Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 1377587 567639 1356080 455008 64744 13252
2006-07 1495316 586203 1398797 480991 68908 21092
2007-08 1589198 575318 1330917 391431 72411 22405
2008-09 1705529 562511 1253868 354963 76481 21830
In Haryana Circle, there is increase in number of accounts in the
Savings Bank (SB) and Public Provident Fund (PPF) during the last
four years. However, in 2008-09, the number of accounts in Sr. Citizen

57
Savings Scheme (SCSS) decreased as compared 2007-08. In MIS/RD/
TD also, the number of accounts increased in 2006-07 as compared to
previous year 2005-06. However, in 2007-08 and 2008-09 the decreasing
trend was observed in these three schemes.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (U.P . Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 13515417 1461071 3985274 905606 133885 42591
2006-07 14028668 1474457 4502359 1438779 136056 45621
2007-08 14656722 1473619 4487137 1362184 137709 53276
2008-09 8086733 1930157 8646202 1484674 140364 72235
In UP Circle, there is increase in number of accounts in the Public
Provident Fund (PPF) and Sr. Citizen Savings Scheme (SCSS) during
the last four years. However, in 2008-09, the number of accounts in
the Savings Bank decreased as compared to 2007-08. In MIS/RD/TD
also, the number of accounts increased in 2006-07 as compared to
previous year 2005-06. However, in 2007-08 the number of accounts
decreased in these three schemes. Again in 2008-09, the increasing
trend was observed in these schemes.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Assam Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 1154114 160888 1265222 73966 29334 2112
2006-07 1240690 177411 1331551 91936 30365 3564
2007-08 1060231 168251 1059455 96961 29051 3663
2008-09 1655120 225312 1314050 125146 19424 4652
In Assam Circle, there is decrease in number of accounts in the
SB/PPF and MIS/RD in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07, though
increasing trend was observed in these schemes in the year 2006-07
as compared to 2005-06. The account base of TD/SCSS increased
during the last four years. There is increase in number of accounts in
all the schemes except PPF in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Base–Army Postal Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 188458 17294 248243 10424 3170 166
2006-07 205673 19525 286099 7776 3653 246
2007-08 226153 19148 323083 4111 3842 257
2008-09 192855 19645 359017 3055 4228 269

58
In Army Postal Circle (Base), the account base of PPF/SCSS and
RD has increased during the last four years. There is decrease in
number of accounts in the MIS in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07,
though increasing trend was noticed in the scheme in the year 2006-
07 as compared to 2005-06. Decreasing trend is also observed in TD
during the last four years. In SB, the increasing trend was observed
from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts in the SB
decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Delhi Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 832286 912722 634063 202766 182664 76033
2006-07 870530 899572 642079 201951 190769 96307
2007-08 901259 844198 606809 157362 195933 95712
2008-09 906263 775730 601254 133892 186758 92078
In Delhi Circle the account base of SB has increased during the
last four years. Decreasing trend in number of accounts in the SCSS/
RD has been observed during the last three years though number of
accounts in the Scheme in the year 2006-07 increased as compared to
2005-06. Decreasing trend is noticed in TD/MIS scheme during the
last four years. In PPF, the increasing trend was observed from 2005-
06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts in the PPF decreased
in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise ( Gujarat Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 1706619 2077922 561992 721017 177916 29552
2006-07 1891881 2166578 5766338 778199 183785 61466
2007-08 1881936 2621365 3664715 713295 201569 96793
2008-09 3013302 3040093 3936021 845666 226848 98829
In Gujarat Circle, number of accounts in SB decreased in 2007-08
as compared to 2006-07. However, in 2008-09 the increasing trend has
been observed in number of accounts in SB as compared to 2007-08.
The number of accounts of PPF and SCSS increased during the last
four years. Account base of MIS also increased during the last four
years. In TD/RD also, the number of accounts increased in 2006-07 as

59
compared to previous year 2005-06. However, the account base of
TD/RD decreased in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07. Again in 2008-09,
the account base of TD/RD increased as compared to 2007-08.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (J&K Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 534621 86942 1316837 175655 7700 0
2006-07 557596 92567 1318497 183304 7282 3306
2007-08 584051 89835 1348256 298809 7588 3494
2008-09 382104 97154 183971 129364 5015 3474
In J&K Circle, there is increase in number of accounts in SB/SCSS
and RD/TD from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts
in these schemes decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08. The
account base of PPF decreased in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06
whereas it increased in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07. But again in
2008-09, the account base decreased. In MIS, the account base
decreased in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07 whereas the increasing
trend was observed in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06 in the scheme.
Again in 2008-09, the account base in MIS increased.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Kerala Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 1757771 1003925 5729989 231152 17964 22867
2006-07 1907167 1049229 5459814 232088 25740 38680
2007-08 2054454 1002615 5765564 218772 26682 37390
2008-09 2611540 734949 5908044 198715 22456 23613
In Kerala Circle, there is increase in number of accounts in SB
during the last four years. In PPF, the increasing trend was observed
from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts in the PPF
decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08.
Decreasing trend in number of accounts in the SCSS, MIS and TD
has been observed during the last three years though the number of
accounts in the schemes in the year 2006-07 increased as compared to
2005-06. In RD, the number of accounts increased in 2007-08 as
compared to 2006-07 whereas the accounts in the scheme decreased

60
in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06. Again in 2008-09, number of
accounts in RD increased.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (NE Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 512860 138049 545676 71044 17691 487
2006-07 451989 131789 653621 52222 10536 1283
2007-08 510054 94136 546670 42150 10114 2584
2008-09 726668 52009 457160 32264 7082 1811
In NE Circle, in SCSS, the increasing trend was observed from
2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts in the SCSS
decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08. Decreasing trend was
observed in PPF during the last four years. In SB, the account base
decreased in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06 though increasing trend
was observed from 2006-07 to 2008-09. In MIS/TD, the decreasing
trend was observed during the last three years. In RD, the number of
accounts increased in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06 whereas the
accounts in the scheme decreased from 2006-07 to 2008-09.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Orissa Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 2374512 239689 628652 109844 8660 9525
2006-07 2490955 251337 753870 124255 9732 13660
2007-08 2609996 251101 773104 120492 10154 14161
2008-09 4610603 458810 1559016 200506 12212 12266
In Orissa Circle, there is increase in number of accounts of SB/
PPF and RD during the last four years. There is increase in number
of accounts in SCSS from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of
accounts in the scheme decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08.
In MIS/TD, the account base decreased in 2007-08 as compared to
2006-07 though the accounts in the scheme increased in 2006-07 as
compared to 2005-06. Again in 2008-09, number of accounts increased
in these schemes.

61
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Tamil Nadu Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 6766498 1804153 7203955 762471 218732 62806
2006-07 7543502 2414610 7420662 787789 242772 95329
2007-08 8183028 800114 7418267 705542 253908 94361
2008-09 6626316 1660124 7040397 624729 261423 91131
In Tamil Nadu Circle, there is increase in number of accounts of
PPF during the last four years. There is increase in number of accounts
in SB from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number of accounts in
the scheme decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-08. Decreasing
trend in number of accounts in the SCSS, RD and TD has been
observed during the last three years though number of accounts in
these schemes in the year 2006-07 increased as compared to 2005-06.
In MIS, the account base decreased in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-
07 whereas the increasing trend was observed in 2006-07 as compared
to 2005-06 in the scheme. Again in 2008-09, the account base in MIS
increased.
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (Uttaranchal Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 760386 155892 843635 213220 15155 7215
2006-07 842489 162642 930224 3063594 15874 9199
2007-08 1043789 160342 965565 3046203 17436 9542
2008-09 2111886 168558 1100823 251926 18192 8209
In Uttaranchal Circle, there is increase in number of accounts of
SB, PPF and RD during the last four years. In SCSS there is increase
in number of accounts from 2005-06 to 2007-08. However, the number
of accounts in the scheme decreased in 2008-09 as compared to 2007-
08. In MIS the account base decreased in 2007-08 as compared to
2006-07 though the account in the schemes increased in 2006-07 as
compared to 2005-06. Again in 2008-09, the account base in MIS
increased. Decreasing trend in number of accounts in TD has been
observed during the last three years though number of accounts in
the scheme in the year 2006-07 increased as compared to 2005-06.

62
No. of Accounts Scheme-wise (West Bengal Circle)
Year SB MIS RD TD PPF SCSS
2005-06 7368160 7066004 6023256 1747903 92829 60051
2006-07 5324475 6159699 5289631 1398928 119393 114433
2007-08 5628344 6091422 4704853 1369209 104382 153577
2008-09 7161774 5423625 4449339 1260588 127211 155784
In West Bengal Circle, there is increase in number of accounts of
SCSS during the last four years. In PPF, the account base decreased
in 2007-08 as compared to 2006-07 though the account in the scheme
increased in 2006-07 as compared to 2005-06. Again in 2008-09 the
account base in PPF increased. In SB, the account base decreased in
2006-07 as compared to 2005-06 though increasing trend was observed
from 2006-07 to 2008-09. In RD/MIS/TD, the account base decreased
during the last four years.
In this connection, it is submitted that investment in any
instrument depends on investor’s choice for effecting personal savings.
The decline in number of accounts in these savings scheme may be
apparently due to lower rate of interest as compared to similar schemes
in the Commercial Banks.
Department of Posts has taken up with Ministry of Finance to
raise interest rates on post office saving schemes. Ministry of Finance
intimated that interest rates on small saving schemes are benchmarked
to the average yields on Government Securities of comparable maturity
in the secondary market, as recommended by the Committee on
Administered Interest Rates under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.V . Reddy,
the then Dy. Governor, Reserve Bank of India and reviewed from
time to time. After the review made in February, 2007, Ministry of
Finance has decided to maintain status quo in the matter.
A statement indicating the comparison of interest rates of post
office savings schemes vis-à-vis Government Securities is given below:
Post Office Savings: Comparison with Government Securities Rates
                   Government Securities 
A verage Yield (%) Spread (bps)
Scheme Tenor Existing Term to 2008-09 2007-09 Over Over
(Years) Interest Maturity (weighted 1 year 1 year
Rate (p.a.) (Years) average average weighted
for 2 years) average
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Post Office Time
Deposits (POTD)     
1 Year 1 6.25 1 7.15 7.30 -90 -105
2 Year 2 6.50 2 7.25 7.39 -75 -89

63
3 Year 3 7.25 3 7.39 7.50 -14 -25
5 Year 5 7.50 5 7.52 7.60 -2 -10
Post Office Recurring 5 7.50 5 7.62 7.60 -2 -10
Deposit (PORD)
Senior Citizens Savings 5 9.00 5 7.52 7.60 148 140
Scheme (SCSS)
Post Office Monthly 6 8.00 6 7.57 7.64 43 36
Income Account
(POMIA)
National Savings 6 8.20 6 7.57 7.64 63 56
Certificate (NSC)-
VIII Issue
Kisan Vikas Patra 8 Years 8.40 9 7.65 7.71 75 69
(KVP) 7 Months
Public Provident 15 8.00 15 8.10 8.09 -10 -9
Fund
Notes:-
1. Weighted Average: Weighted for 2007-08 is 33% and for 2008-09 is 67%
2. Two years period is from April, 2007 to March, 2009
 However, with a view to sustaining investors’ interest, various
improvements and amendments to the small savings schemes have
been carried out from time to time. In the recent past, Government
has taken the following steps to make the small savings schemes
more attractive and investor friendly:
(i) The restriction on opening of more than one account during
a calendar month under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme
has been removed with effect from 24th May, 2007.
(ii) All categories of pensioners have been allowed to open and
maintain ‘Pension Account’ under Post Office Savings
Account Rules, with effect from 11th July, 2007.
(iii) With effect from 10th February, 2007, the penalty on pre-
mature withdrawal of deposits under the Post Office
Monthly Income Account (POMIA) scheme has been
rationalized from 3.5% to 2% on withdrawal on or before
expiry of three years and 1% on withdrawal after expiry of
three years.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

64
(iv) The maximum deposit ceilings of 
  3.00 lakh and 
  6.00
lakh under the Post Office Monthly Income Account
(POMIA) Scheme has been raised to 
  4.50 lakh and 
  9.00
lakh in respect of single and joint accounts respectively.
(v) Bonus at the rate of 5% on the deposits made under Post
Office Monthly Income Account (POMIA) Scheme on or after
8th December, 2007 upon the maturity of the deposit, has
been reintroduced.
(vi) The benefit of Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 has
been extended to the investments made under 5-Year Post
Office Time Deposits Account and Senior Citizens Savings
Scheme, with effect from 01.04.2007.
(vii) Measures are also taken to promote and popularize these
schemes through print and electronic media as well as
holding seminars and meetings, providing training to the
various agencies involved in mobilizing collection in Small
Savings Schemes etc.
(viii) A website of the National Savings Institute under
Government of India, Ministry of Finance has also been
launched to facilitate interface with the public through
wider dissemination of information on small savings and
on-line registration and settlement of investors grievances.
The website address is nsiindia.gov.in.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 15 & 16 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para 5)
The Committee further note that the figures of the total amount
mobilised under the Post Office Savings Bank Schemes also showed
a declining trend. They note that the total funds mobilised under
various Schemes declined to 
 119883 crore in the year 2006-07 from
 133498 crore during the year 2005-06. Similar shortfalls are also
noticed in the case of Savings Certificate operations. The number of
certificates issued during the year 2005-06 were 
 7.11 crore and the
amount mobilised was 
  39810.14 crore which declined to 
  6.38 crore
and 
  34534.73 crore respectively during the year 2006-07. The
declining trend in the Post Office savings was attributed to several
factors including the increasing options for the investors in more
promising areas of returns like mutual funds, etc. The Committee,
however, find that an important reason for this phenomenon was that

65
the rates of interest on POSB Schemes have not been increased by
MoF though the commercial banks have been permitted to do so. For
instance, in term Deposit Schemes of one and two years, the leading
bank SBI is offering interest at the rate of 9.50 per cent for general
category whereas POSB are offering interest at the rate of 6.25 per
cent and 6.50 per cent respectively. Besides, for senior citizens, SBI is
offering 10 per cent rate of interest for one year and two year term
deposit schemes which is 0.50 per cent more than the general category
whereas in case of POSB no such extra benefit is being provided to
senior citizens. Although the Department had taken-up the matter
with MoF, which was followed-up at various levels, yet, inexplicably,
no relief has been forthcoming. In the opinion of the Committee, DoP
ought to be provided with a level playing field and their case for
increasing the rates of interest in various Small Savings Schemes at
par with the banks deserves serious consideration. Undoubtedly,
decrease in POSB mobilisation will adversely impact the developmental
activities of the States as well. The Committee, therefore, desire that
without wasting further time DoP should take the matter with MoF
at the highest level to ensure that the matter regarding making the
interest rates on POSB Schemes comparable to Banks is sorted out at
the earliest and the POSB Schemes are restored to their previous role
of the most favoured investment option of the common man.
Reply of the Government
Department of Posts has taken up the matter with Ministry of
Finance at the level of Minister but Ministry of Finance (MoF) has
not agreed to raise interest rates as interest on Small Savings Schemes
are benchmarked to the average yield on Government Securities of
comparable maturity in the secondary market. The interest rates of
various schemes are decided by Ministry of Finance through the
Committee on Administered Interest Rates and the Post Office only
collects the small savings on behalf of the MoF.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paras 15 and 16 of Chapter–I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
RATE OF REMUNERATION FOR AGENCY SERVICES
The Committee note that based on the recommendations of an
Expert Committee set up by MoF in 1993-94, the Department of Posts
were to be paid agency charges by MoF with an annual increase of

66
10 per cent over the preceding year’s remuneration. However, the
Ministry paid agency charges to DoP as per this formula for a few
initial years but have thereafter, failed to adhere to the
recommendations of their very own Committee. Finding merit in the
contention of the plea of DoP , the Committee have been recommending
a positive consideration by MoF in the matter in their successive
Reports. Midway through the examination of the present subject, the
Committee asked DoP and MoF to reconcile their differences in this
regard at the earliest. As a result, MoF have increased the rate of
remuneration for the year 2008-09 by 4.6 per cent over the last year.
The Committee while appreciating this move of MoF still feel that
this increase is nowhere near the 10 per cent benchmark. The Post
Office Savings Schemes with more than 17 crore accounts and a bevy
of services to offer entail a lot of additional workload on DoP . The
massive corpus of these Schemes is a significant contributor to the
developmental efforts. The Committee, therefore, desire that as
recommended in their Fifty-sixth Report on the Demands for Grants
(2008-09), the Department should continue to vigorously pursue with
MoF for securing the annual 10 per cent increase in the rate of
remuneration as per the recommendations of the Expert Committee.
Reply of the Government
After sustained efforts of the Department of Posts, the Ministry of
Finance has constituted a new Expert Committee to review the agency
charges.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 37 of Chapter–I)
    N
EW D ELHI; RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
13 August, 2010 Chairman,
22 Sravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

67
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF MEETING TO DISCUSS ISSUES RAISED BY
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS BEFORE THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON I.T.
Date: 19 April, 2010
Venue: Room No. 131A, North Block, New Delhi-110001
A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary
(FS) to discuss the issues raised by the Department of Posts in the
Standing Committee on IT. Secretary, Department of Expenditure,
Secretary, Department of Revenue (DoR), Secretary, Department of
Posts, other representatives of Department of Post and Joint Secretary,
Department of Financial Services attended the meeting. Joint Secretary
(Budget) and Director National Savings Institute, Nagpur were also
present. Following issues were discussed.
1. Ceiling on Post Office Saving Account (POSA): Secretary,
DoP explained that the there is an existing ceiling of Rs. 1 lakh/
2 lakh for single/joint POSA and this acts as a source of inconvenience
for the account holders. DoR has in the past held the view that since
the interest accrued on the balances in these accounts are exempt
from tax, removal of ceiling will lead to revenue loss. DoP had, in its
response, suggested that while keeping the tax exemption limited to
the interest accrued on the balances upto the existing ceiling, the
administrative ceiling can be removed. Secretary, DoR indicated that
on the condition of Post Offices deducting the tax on the interest on
balances above the ceiling at source, this proposal may be agreed to.
The proposal of DoP to remove the ceiling on maximum balance
and restricting the tax benefit to interest accrued on the balances as
per current ceiling was accepted, subject to the condition that the tax
accrued will be deducted at source as per the existing provisions of
TDS. FS observed that DoP may move a formal proposal for
amendment to relevant law and guidelines/rules.
Action: Department of Post/Budget Division
2. Appointment of Small Savings agents:  Secretary, DoP
explained that currently the agents are appointed by the State
Governments, and in many cases, where the agents are involved in

68
cases of frauds, DoP finds difficult to enforce discipline. Director NSI
explained that this responsibility was originally with the National
Savings Organisation, which after reorganization of the NSO, was
delegated to the States. States being the main stakeholder in the whole
scheme of affair, it may be advisable to leave this activity with the
States.
After discussion, it was felt that the power of State Governments
to appoint/remove agents cannot be taken away . However, FS
suggested that concurrence of DoP may be inserted as one of the
conditions for issue and renewal of license to the agents by State
Government authorities. With this, DoP will gain enough influence to
instill desired discipline amongst the agents. DoP was requested to
move a proposal on these lines.
Action: Budget Division/Department of Posts
3. Delegation of Powers in operating schemes:  Secretary, DoP
explained that currently, for certain relaxation of Rules like premature
closure of accounts, regularisation of irregular accounts etc. the
proposals need to come to Ministry of Finance. She suggested that
some delegation may ease the process and make it quicker. JS (Budget)
explained that most of the important schemes with large base are
also being operated by the Banks. Hence, this proposal has a wider
implication. It was therefore decided that the proposal would be
examined on file. FS requested DoP to send a proposal, accordingly
clearly stating the list of cases for which delegation is being sought.
Action: Department of Post/Budget Division
4. Grant of Loans against NSC/KVP/TD:  Secretary, DoP
explained that currently. subscribers can avail loans against deposits
under Recurring Deposits and Public Provident Funds (PPF). However,
the same facility is not available for other schemes. The proposal of
DoP was accepted and DoP was requested to propose relevant changes
in existing guidelines in this regard. It was acknowledged that this
change would make these schemes more popular and attractive.
Action: Department of Post/Budget Division
5. Starting of New schemes: Department of Posts indicated that
they have sent a proposal for new scheme for women/girl child. It
was explained during the meeting that the Small Saving Schemes are
issued as Rules under the Savings Certificate Act and thus specific
proposal should be sent giving full details and the structure of the
proposed scheme.

69
The suggestion of DoP to start new schemes for women/girl
children was agreed in principle. DoP was requested to formulate the
scheme accordingly and send it to MoF.
Action: Department of Posts
6. Remuneration on Small Savings Accounts and Zero Balance
Accounts: Secretary, DoP mentioned that this has been a long pending
issue. She also mentioned that DoP should also be paid remuneration
on zero balance accounts being maintenance for various government
schemes as maintenance of these accounts entail higher number of
transactions than even a regular savings account. JS (Budget) informed
that the banks are not charging any extra amount for these accounts.
It was also informed that the Committee to decide on the remuneration
has already been constituted.
It was decided that the Committee may be asked to give its
recommendations in 3-4 months and that the issue of remuneration
on zero balance accounts may be referred to the Committee as
additional ToR.
Action: Budget Division
7. Expansion of insurance activities of DoP:  Secretary, DoP
explained that DoP has proposed an expansion of the Life Insurance
scheme offered by it to the IRDA. However, IRDA has opined that it
is not competent to regulate activities of the sovereign. JS, DFS
explained that IRDA has pointed out two issues, viz., the premium
calculations of the DoP are not on actuarial basis and thus may lead
to long term deficit in the scheme and implicit liability on the
Government; and that IRDA is not competent to regulate activities of
the Government. He explained that since the scheme is implicitly
underwritten by the Government, low premium may eventually
devolve upon the Government. Secretary DoP explained that the issue
of IRDA regulating the insurance activity of DoP can be posed to
Law Department for their opinion. DoP expressed that they are not
against corporatization of the insurance business of DoP but it is not
proper to withhold expansion till corporatization. FS felt that in long
run, it may be better for DoP to corporatize the insurance activity
and an in-principle decision needs to be taken and a time bound
road map needs to be prepared, if DoP decides in favour of
corporatization.
It was decided that opinion of Law Department may be sought
on IRDA’s competence to regulate DoP’s insurance activity. DoP may
pro actively examine the issue of corporatization of the insurance
activity in long run and DoP may interact with IRDA on other issues
regarding costing etc. raised by IRDA.
Action: Department of Posts/Department of Financial Services

70
APPENDIX II
F.No.18/1/2008-NS-II
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the 7th June, 2010.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub: Oral evidence on Action Taken Notes relating to Sixty-
second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Management of funds by the Department of Posts
through Banking and Insurance activities’’.
In continuation of Department of Economic Affairs’ OM of even
number dated 26th May, 2010 it is stated that in so far as the issue
relating to ‘‘providing competitive rates of interest for various Small
Savings Schemes’’ is concerned, the Thirteenth Finance Commission
in its report submitted to the President on 30th December, 2009, has
made recommendations to provide debt relief to States in which the
Commission has inter alia recommended that the interest rate on loans
contracted by the States till 2006-07 and outstanding at the end of
2009-10 be reset at a common interest rate of 9 per cent per annum
in place of 10.5 per cent or 9.5 per cent. The Commission has
recommended that all aspects of the design and administration of the
National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) be examined with the aim of
bringing transparency, market linked rates and other much needed
reforms to the scheme.
2. The Government has accepted, in principle , the
recommendations of the Commission relating to interest rate reset on
NSSF loans to the States. However, since the recommendations are
comprehensive and cover other structural aspects like interest rate
mismatch, tenor mismatch and other administrative matters, it was
decided that Ministry of Finance will constitute a Committee to work
out detailed modalities for implementation of this recommendation.
3. The Government has accordingly decided to set up a
Committee with Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor, RBI as
the Chairperson. The other members of the Committee are as under:
(i) Joint Secretary (Budget), Member
Ministry of Finance, DEA

71
(ii) Shri Anil Bisen, Economic Member
Adviser, Ministry of
Finance, DEA
(iii) Dr. Rajiv Kumar, Director & Member
Chief Executive, Indian
Council for Research on
International Economic
Relations (ICRIER)
(iv) Shri J.M. Garg, Chairman Member
& Managing Director,
Corporation Bank
(v) Finance Secretaries of State Members
Governments of Maharashtra
and West Bengal
4. The terms of reference of the proposed Committee will be as
under:
(a) To review the existing parameters for the Small Saving
Schemes in operation, and recommend mechanisms to make
them more flexible and market linked.
(b) To review the existing terms of the loans extended from the
NSSF to the Centre and States and recommend on the
changes required in the arrangement of lending the net
collection of small savings to Centre and States.
(c) To review other possible investment opportunities of the
net collection from small savings and the repayment of NSSF
loans extended to States and Centre.
(d) To review the administrative arrangement including the cost
of operation.
(e) To review the incentives offered on the small saving
investments by the States.
5. While making its recommendations, the Committee would be
requested to consider the following:
(a) The importance of small savings in the overall savings in
the economy especially its contribution in promoting savings
amongst small investors.
(b) The need of NSSF to be a viable fund, ensuring that the
expenditure in form of interest payment to investors and
administrative costs are met by the return on investment
made from the net collections of small savings.

72
6. Orders for setting up the aforesaid Committee will be issued
shortly after receipt of concurrence from the State Governments of
West Bengal and Maharashtra for inclusion of their Finance Secretaries
in the Committee.
(NARESH MOHAN JHA)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
To
Ms. Sudesh Luthra,
Director,
Lok Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

73
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-10)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 7th January, 2010 from 1500 hours
to 1600 hours in Committee Room No. B, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Inder Singh Namdhari— Acting Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Charles Dias
5. Shri Rajen Gohain
6. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
7. Shri Abdul Rahman
8. Shri Prem Das Rai
9. Shri Tufani Saroj
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
11. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji
12. Dr. Bhola Singh
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
14. Shri C. Sivasami
Rajya Sabha
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
16. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal
17. Shri Prabhat Jha
18. Shri P . Rajeeve
19. Shri M.P . Achuthan
20. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot
21. Shri Jesudas Seelam

74
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Deputy Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Members present at the
sitting chose Shri Inder Singh Namdhari under rule 256(3) of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha to preside
over the sitting.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the newly appointed Member
Shri Jesudas Seelam, MP , Rajya Sabha who is nominated w.e.f.
31 December, 2009 and other Members to the sitting of the Committee.
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Action Taken Report
on Sixty-second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Management of funds by the Department of Posts through Banking
and Insurance Activities’ for consideration and adoption. After some
deliberations, the Committee observed that some of the crucial issues
viz. the need for revision of rates of interest on Postal Savings Bank
Schemes comparable with those of the commercial banks, raising the
maximum limit of deposit in postal savings account, starting of some
new Schemes for girl child, working women, rural women etc. and
securing the annual ten percent increase in the rate of remuneration
for agency services, etc. as recommended by the Committee in the
Sixty-second Report are long pending with the Ministry of Finance.
Not only that some of these issues have consistently been
recommended by the Committee in their earlier Reports too. The action
taken replies indicate that these matters are still being considered by
MoF. In view of this, the Committee, decided to take oral evidences
of the nodal Department and the Ministry of Finance before finalizing
the Draft Action Taken Report.
The Committee then adjourned.

75
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-10)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday , 10th February , 2010 from
1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Charles Dias
5. Shri Rajen Gohain
6. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Dr. Bhola Singh
10. Shri Dhananjay Singh
11. Shri C. Sivasami
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Dharam Pal Sabharwal
13. Shri Jesudas Seelam
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P . Rajeeve
16. Shri Shriram Pal
17. Shri N. R. Govindrajar
18. Shri M.P . Achuthan
19. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot

76
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Posts)
1. Ms. Radhika Doraiswamy — Secretary
2. Shri S. Samant — Member (Tech)
3. Dr. Uday Balakrishnan — Member (PLI)
4. Shri S.K. Sinha — CGM (PLI)
5. Ms. Suneeta Trivedi — CGM (BD&MD)
6. Smt. Annie Moraes — JS&FA
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri J. Hari Narayan — Chairman (IRDA)
2. Shri Tarun Bajaj — Joint Secretary (I&P)
3. Shri Lalit Kumar — Director
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Shakti Kanta Das — Joint Secretary (Budget)
2. Shri Alok Chopra — Director (Budget)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. He stated that the sitting was convened to
take oral evidence of the representatives of Department of Financial
Services and Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance and
Department of Posts of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology on Action Taken Notes on Sixty-second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Management of Funds by the
Department of Posts through Banking and Insurance activities” as
decided by the Committee at the sitting held on 7th January, 2010.
He further informed the Members that the Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs of Ministry of Finance in a fax message received on
9th February, 2010 had requested him to postpone the oral evidence
as he was fully preoccupied with the Union Budget preparation, which

77
he did not agree, in the case of Department of Financial Services of
Ministry of Finance, a correspondence was received from the Secretary
today to permit the Joint Secretary to represent the Department on
his behalf. He also informed that the replies to the list of points sent
by the Secretariat in the context of today’s sitting were sent to the
aforesaid Ministries/Departments. The replies of the Department of
Financial Services (Ministry of Finance) and Department of Posts
(Ministry of Communications and Information Technology) were
received and circulated to Members. However, in the case of
Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance) the replies have
been brought by the representatives at the sitting only.
[The representatives of the Department of Posts (Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology) and Departments of Financial
Services and Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance) were then called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Posts
(Ministry of Communications and Information Technology), and
Officers of the Department of Financial Services and Economic Affairs
(Ministry of Finance) to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee
noted that the Departments of Financial Services and Economic Affairs
of the Ministry of Finance have not been represented by their
respective Secretaries even when the Hon’ble Chairman did not agree
to their requests to postpone the sitting/represent the Officers other
than the Secretary to the Meeting. The Committee took the matter
seriously and placed their displeasure on record. The representatives
of the Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial Services
(Ministry of Finance) present were requested to convey this to their
Secretaries. The Committee also decided that the agenda of today’s
sitting would now be taken up on 4th March, 2010.
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

78
APPENDIX V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-10)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th March, 2010 from
1500 hours to 1645 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Milind Deora
5. Shri Charles Dias
6. Shri Rajen Gohain
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Shri Tufani Saroj
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Dr. Bhola Singh
13. Shri Dhananjay Singh
14. Shri C. Sivasami
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
17. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
18. Shri P . Rajeeve
19. Shri M.P . Achuthan

79
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department Of Posts)
1. Ms. Radhika Doraiswamy — Secretary (Posts)
2. Shri S. Samant — Member (Tech)
3. Dr. Uday Balakrishnan — Member (PLI)
4. Shri S.K. Sinha — CGM (PLI)
5. Ms. Suneeta Trivedi — CGM (BD)
6. Smt. Annie Moraes — JS&FA
7. Shri A.S. Prasad — DDG (FS)
8. Shri Ashok Pal Singh — DDG (Tech)
9. Ms. Meera Handa — DDG (PO & I)
10. Ms. Aindri Anurag — DDG (CP)
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri R. Gopalan — Secretary (DFS)
2. Shri J. Hari Narayan — Chairman (IRDA)
3. Shri Tarun Bajaj — Joint Secretary (I&P)
4. Shri Lalit Kumar — Director
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla — Finance Secretary
2. Shri Shaktikanta Das — Joint Secretary (Budget)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services of the Ministry of Finance and Department of Posts of the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology on Action

80
Taken Notes as received from the Department of Posts on Sixty-second
Report on the subject ‘Management of funds by the Department of
Posts through Banking and Insurance Activities’. Before the witnesses
were called in for oral evidence, he informed that the Committee
during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2009-10)
had decided to select the subject ‘Allocation of Spectrum’ for
examination and report to Parliament. Since some of the issues related
to the matter are sub judice, the matter was placed before the Hon’ble
Speaker in the light of the extant rules and procedure. As per the
orders of Hon’ble Speaker, the Committee can formally select the
subject ‘Allocation of Spectrum’ except the issues which are currently
before the Hon’ble Court.
3. About examination of the subject ‘Growth of Television Channels
in India and Content Regulation Mechanism’, as selected by the
Committee for examination and report to Parliament, the Committee
decided that for wider consultations, the views of the experts, interest
groups and public at large should be invited by giving advertisement
in the print and electronic media through DAVP . About another subject
‘Progress of Implementation of National e-Governance Plan’, the
Committee observed that consultations with the State Governments
was necessary since various e-Governance projects are being
implemented by the State Governments. As such it was decided that
the written views of the State Governments might be obtained by the
Committee followed by evidence of the officials of the State
Governments after seeking the permission of the Hon’ble Speaker as
per Direction 60 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
[The witnesses were then called in]
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Posts of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology and Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services of the Ministry of Finance to the sitting of the Committee. At
first instance, the Secretary, Department of Posts explained about the
initiatives taken by them to pursue with the Ministry of Finance with
regard to various recommendations made by the Committee in their
Sixty-second Report on ‘Management of funds by the Department of
Posts through Banking and Insurance Activities’. The issues
recommended inter alia include providing autonomy to the Department
of Posts on the issues of rates of interest provided by DoP for various
Small Savings Schemes, increasing the ceiling of Deposits in Single
and Joint Accounts of the Postal Savings Bank, starting of new schemes
under Small Savings Schemes, in terms of policy matters with regard

81
to insurance activities of DoP and positive consideration in fixing the
rate of remuneration provided to DoP for various agency services,
etc. Thereafter, the Secretaries of the two Departments of the Ministry
of Finance placed their views on the matter. The Committee deliberated
at length on various issues. However, decision on the aforesaid issues
could not be arrived at. As such the Committee requested the
Secretaries of the Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial
Services and Posts to sort out various long pending issues. The
Committee also decided that after a month, the representatives of the
two Departments of the Ministry of Finance and the Department of
Posts would again be called after giving due intimation to them.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

82
APPENDIX VI
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th June, 2010 from
1100 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Charles Dias
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
7. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
8. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Dr. Bhola Singh
11. Shri Dhananjay Singh
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri P . Rajeeve
16. Shri M.P . Achuthan
17. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director

83
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS &
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
1. Ms. Radhika Doraiswamy Secretary (Posts)
2. Shri S. Samant Member (Tech.)
3. Dr. Uday Balakrishnan Member (PLI)
4. Shri S.K. Sinha CGM (PLI)
5. Smt. Annie Moraes JS&FA
6. Shri A.S. Prasad DDG (FS)
7. Ms. Aindri Anurag DDG (CP)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
1. Shri R. Gopalan Secretary (DFS)
2. Shri J. Hari Narayan Chairman (IRDA)
3. Shri Tarun Bajaj Joint Secretary (I&P)
4. Shri Lalit Kumar Director (Ins.)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla  Finance Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee convened to take further oral evidence of
the representatives of the Department of Posts (Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology) and the Departments
of Economic Affairs and Financial Services (Ministry of Finance) on
the long pending issues contained in the Sixty-second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Management of funds by the
Department of Posts through Banking and Insurance Activities’.
[The witnesses were then called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Posts (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology)
and Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial Services (Ministry
of Finance) to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Secretary,
Department of Posts informed the Committee that in the meeting

84
held on 19th April, 2010 with the Finance Secretary a number of
issues have been resolved which inter-alia include enhancement of
ceiling of deposits in single and joint accounts in Post Office and
starting of new scheme by the Department of Posts. The rate of
remuneration on small savings scheme and zero balance account,
which is a long pending issue of the Department of Posts, has been
referred to the expert Committee. Regarding insurance activities by
the Department of Posts, the matter has been taken up with the
Department of Financial Services which has made a reference to the
Ministry of Law. The Chairman, IRDA also informed the Committee
about the proposal of the Department of Posts on insurance activities.
The members also sought certain clarifications on various issues
relating to the subject and the representatives of the respective
Ministries/Departments responded to the same.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

85
APPENDIX VII
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th August, 2010 from
1600 hours to 1800 hours in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Milind Deora
4. Shri Charles Dias
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Prem Das Rai
10. Shri Tufani Saroj
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Dr. Bhola Singh
13. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Prabhat Jha
16. Shri M.P . Achuthan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director

86
***** ***** *****
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up first item on
the agenda i.e. consideration and adoption of two draft Action Taken
Reports (i) Draft Action Taken Report on Sixty-second Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Management of Funds by the Department
of Posts through Banking and Insurance activities’; and (ii) *** **** .
After deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft reports
without any modification.
***** ***** *****
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

87
APPENDIX VIII
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THEIR SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Paragraph Nos:- 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 & 29
Total 19
Percentage 65.52
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of
the Government
Paragraph No:- Nil
Total Nil
Percentage 0
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and require reiteration
Paragraph Nos:- 10, 11, 18, 19, 20 & 23
Total 06
Percentage 20.69
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are of interim nature:-
Paragraph Nos:- 3, 4, 5 & 12
Total 04
Percentage 13.79