16
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-11)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11)]
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2010/Kartika, 1932 (Saka)


SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-11)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.11.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.11.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2010/Kartika, 1932 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 217
Price : Rs. 77.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art
India,  New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ..................... 24
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies of the Government ............................. 42
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration .................................................................... 44
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are of interim in natur e .............. 60
APPENDICES
I. Extra Departmental Sub-Offices (EDSO)
downgraded into Extra Departmental Branch
Offices (EDBO) (Information as on 30.6.2010) ..... 65
II. State/Circle-wise details of requests received
from various quarters for setting up/upgradation
of Post Offices (As on January 2008) ................ 66
III. State/Circle-wise details of requests received
from various quarters for setting up/upgradation
of Post Of fices ........................................................... 67
IV . Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2010-11)
held on 27th October , 2010 ................................... 68
V. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in their Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee ..................................................... 70

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-11)
   Shri Rao Inderjit Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Milind Deora
5. Dr. Charles Dias
6. Shri Rajen Gohain
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Abdul Rahman
13. Shri Prem Das Rai
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti
17. Dr. Bhola Singh
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri C. Sivasami
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M.P . Achuthan
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb
24. Shri Salim Ansari
*25. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
*26. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
27. Shri Prabhat Jha
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
29. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
30. Shri P . Rajeeve
31. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2010-11) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
relating to Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts).
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. The Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts)
furnished their Action Taken Notes on 4 August, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 27 October, 2010.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-V .
    N
EW D ELHI; RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
15 November, 2010 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their
Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relating to Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications &
Information Technology).
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. It
contained 31 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorized as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 14, 15, 17, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29 & 31
Total 15
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Para No: 10
Total 01
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration:
Para Nos: 3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 18, 19, 21, 26 & 30
Total 10
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos: 13, 16, 20, 22 & 28
Total 05
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action T aken replies to the
Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
A. Revenue Receipts
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that there is slow growth in the Revenue
Receipts during each year of the Eleventh Plan. During the year
2008-09 Revenue Receipts were Rs. 5862.33 crore as compared to
Rs. 5494.90 crore during the previous year. For the year 2009-10,
Revenue Receipts upto January, 2010 are for Rs. 5730.32 crore.
The data with regard to the trend of the Revenue Receipts further
indicates that the Actuals during the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 are
marginally lower than the projections made at Revised Estimates
stage which were increased slightly as compared to BE during
the year 2007-08 and reduced marginally during the year 2008-09
as compared to BE. The Revenue Receipts from total Postal
Operations during the year 2008-09 were for Rs. 3059.87 crore
which is only Rs. 73.27 crore more than the previous year. During
the year 2009-10 upto February, 2010, Revenue from total Postal
Operations is Rs. 2810.44 crore as compared to Rs. 3059.87 crore
during the previous year. The item-wise analysis of the Revenue
Receipts indicates that under the head ‘Postage realized in cash
for Ordinary Post’, the Revenue Receipts have declined
considerably as compared to the previous year. Besides there is
slight decline under the head ‘Commission on Money Orders,
IPOs’. Under the head ‘Others’, again the decline is apparent
during the year 2009-10. Considering the status of Revenue
Receipts during the year 2009-10, the Committee feel that the
Department would at best be able to achieve Revenue Receipts

3
targets to the level of the year 2008-09. The Committee have
persistently been recommending to take the desired action to
ensure that all the working expenses of the Department are met
from the Revenue earned by the Department. In spite of that,
there is not much improvement. Year after year under some of
the items the Revenue Receipts are declining. The Committee
strongly recommend to analyze the position and take the effective
steps to increase the Revenue Receipts particularly when the
working expenses of the Department are increasing year after year.
The Committee should also be kept apprised about the details of
the action taken/proposed to be taken in this regard.”
7. The Department has replied as under:—
(Mail Business):
“The decrease in revenue receipts in terms of postage realized in
cash for ordinary mail is due to decline in the mail traffic over
the last few years (2003-04 to 2007-08). The trend of declining in
the mail traffic has, however, been reversed of late and during
the year 2008-09 there was an increase of 2.34% in the mail traffic
compared to that in 2007-08.
During the 11th Plan period, the Department has undertaken new
initiatives to improve the quality of mail operations, which includes
automation of mail processing activities, induction of dedicated
freighter aircraft for transmission of mail, restructuring of the
existing mail network, popularization of Pin Codes, creation of
National Address Database Management System and introduction
of RFID in mail offices. During the year 2009-10, the Department
has placed the orders for setting up of Automated Mail Processing
Systems at Delhi and Kolkata. The Department has also appointed
a Consultant for the Mail Network Optimization Project and
initiated the process of redesigning the existing mail network.
Initiatives have also been taken to introduce RFID Technology in
mail processing for the purpose of tracking of mail bags and
articles during the current financial year. These initiatives are
expected to result in better quality of service which in turn, would
help the Department in increasing the mail traffic and revenue.
(Global Business):
The efforts are also being made to fetch revenue from marketing
and promotion of International Parcels. A new international parcel
product called “Flat Rate Boxes” in three standard sizes has been

4
introduced apart from a new international money remittance
product called “MO Videsh” during the year 2009-10. Possibility
of introducing a sub-2kg segment in international parcels is being
explored, since such a segment is seen to hold business potential.
(Business Development & Marketing):
The following major steps have also been taken to increase the
revenue from BD (Business Development) products:
(i) Under Speed Posts, 25 new National Speed Post Centres
have been opened during the year 2008-09 to expand the
business network.
(ii) T echnological support was provided to the 41 existing
National Speed Post Centres during 2008-09 and 18 NSPCs
during the year 2009-10.
(iii) During the year 2008-09, 17 Premium delivery centres were
established whereas 22 Premium delivery centres have been
established during 2009-10.
(iv) Logistics Post Centres have been established across India
with 45 National LTL routes.
(v) Express Parcel Post Retail Service has been introduced to
provide premium Parcel services to customers. 60 Parcel
Post Centres have been established.
(vi) Under Retail Post, we have been providing Railway
Reservation Services, Sale of Gold Coins, Sale of Foreign
Exchange, Sale of Application Forms and other utility
services.
(vii) 8449 Post Offices are offering e-payment services to the
customers.
(viii) Effecting from January, 2010, e-Post Corporate Services have
been introduced to enable the businesses to send block mail
through e-Post.
(ix) Under Business Post, we have expanded the pre-mailing
services to Head Post Offices and Mail Business Centres.
(x) Under Logistics Post, India Post functions as a logistics
solution provider to the Registrar General and Census
Commission of India for 2011 Census. Under this project,

5
more than 16,000 MT of Census material will be booked,
transmitted and delivered to more than 12,000 locations
across the country.
This is a major initiative taken by the Department to provide
supply chain management to RGI. Similarly, we have also been
providing distribution solutions to various pharmaceuticals
products for Government Medical Stores Depot.
(Financial Services):
All out efforts are made to increase the Revenue Receipts of the
Department pertaining to Financial Services. The issue of increase
in Rate of Remuneration on account of POSB/CC work was taken
up with the Min. of Finance (DEA) at the highest level and with
these efforts, the Min. of Finance (DEA) has setup an Expert Group
to review the present rate and the yearly escalation rate which is
as 5% at present. Third products are also being marketed
extensively. Workshop at the Circle level are being organized by
the Head Quarter to educate the nodal officers and to help them
in preparing action plan to achieve the desired targets.”
Comments of the Committee
8. The Department in the action taken note has not addressed
to the observation of the Committee with regard to the declining
trend of Revenue Receipts under the item ‘Commission on Money
Orders, IPOs’ and under the head ‘Others’. With regard to the
declining trend under the item ‘Postage realized in cash for ordinary
Post’, the Department has stated that it is due to declining mail
traffic over the last few years. The Department has also stated that
the declining trend has been reversed of late and during the year
2008-09, there was an increase of 2.34 per cent in the mail traffic as
compared to the year 2007-08. The Department has chosen not to
indicate the status of Revenue Receipts in this regard during the
year 2009-10, even when the said financial year was over by the
time the replies were made. The Committee would like the
Department to find out the reasons for decline in Revenue Receipts
of the aforesaid item and take the desired initiatives to reverse the
declining trend.
The Committee would further like to emphasize that various
proposals to improve the quality of mail operations which include
Setting up of Automated Mail Processing System in Delhi and
Kolkata, redesigning the existing mail network, introduction of RFID

6
Technology in mail processing should be finalized expeditiously so
that these systems are in place. Besides, the issue of increase in
rate of remuneration on account of POSB/CC work should be settled
with the Ministry of Finance in a stipulated time frame as
consistently being recommended by the Committee in their Reports.
The Committee again emphasize that the Department has to work
on a mission mode to ensure that the working expenses are met
out of the Revenue Receipts. The concrete measures on the suggested
line should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
B. Underspending in the Plan Outlay
9. The Committee had recommended as under:
‘‘The Committee note from the data provided by the Department
that against total Outlay of Rs. 4000 crore for the Eleventh Plan,
during the first three years of Eleventh Plan, the amount projected
at BE was Rs. 1535 crore which was subsequently reduced to
Rs. 1035 crore at RE stage and Actual expenditure against this is
submitted as Rs. 684.13 crore which is 44.56 per cent of the BE
and 66.10 per cent of RE allocation. The Committee have repeatedly
been expressing concern over under utilization of resources under
the Plan Schemes. In spite of that, the trend of under utilization
persists during the third year of the Eleventh Plan. The proposed
allocation during the year 2009-10 was Rs. 2100 crore, however the
amount allocated at BE stage was Rs. 620 crore which is less than
one third of the proposed allocation. The allocations made at BE
stage were reduced to Rs. 350 crore at RE stage which is about
50 per cent of the allocations made at BE stage implying
Department could not utilize even the reduced allocations as the
Actual expenditure position upto February, 2010 amounts to
Rs. 318.52 crore. Another point of concern is the tendency of uneven
spending during various quarters of the Annual Plan. During
2009-10, substantial part of the Revenue (Plan) allocation as
provided at RE stage remained unspent during the first three
quarters of the year, as only 78.54 crore i.e. 24.66 per cent of
allocation was utilized, leaving Rs. 239.97 crore i.e. 75.33 per cent
of the allocation to be utilized during the last quarter of the year.
The aforesaid scenario indicates that there are serious problems in
implementation of the Plan Schemes of the Department. The
Committee strongly recommend that the analysis of the
implementation of Plan Outlay should be done scheme-wise by

7
the Department and the corrective action taken accordingly. The
Committee should be kept apprised about the detailed strategy of
the Department to improve the status of implementation of the
Plan Schemes which will impact on overall performance of the
Department.”
10. The Department has replied as under:
“The Department of Posts has a wide network of Post Offices
spread across the whole country and all Plan Schemes are being
implemented across the country. Although the Schemes are
approved and finalized at the Directorate level, actual
implementation of schemes is being done at Circle/State level.
Funds are released to the Circles in May or June of the Financial
Year. Only thereafter, Circle will start implementing the schemes
after following all codal formalities which is time consuming.
Further, in many cases expenditure is being incurred during the
first half of the financial year, but actual expenditure is reflected
in the Books only after the bills are submitted by the DGS&D,
other vendors and Civil/Electrical Wings and are adjusted. There
is a gestation period between the expenditure incurred and
reflection of expenditure in the books thereby indicating lesser
utilization in the first half and the apparent utilization of the
majority of funds during the second half of financial year. Effective
monitoring is being undertaken by the Department with the
Divisions and also at Circle level through regular Video
Conferencing in order to ensure uniform utilization of funds
allocated under various Plan Schemes.”
Comments of the Committee
11. The Committee observe that instead of taking the corrective
action, time consuming codal formalities by the Circles, gestation
period between the expenditure incurred and reflection of
expenditure in the books have been cited by the Department as the
reason for underspending of the Plan outlay. So far as the issue of
time consuming codal formalities by the Circles is concerned, the
Committee emphasize to simplify the procedure so that actual
implementation starts from day one of the financial year. With regard
to the argument of the Ministry regarding the gap of time between
the expenditure incurred and reflected in books, the Committee feel
that if the amount is not reflected in a particular year, it would
definitely be reflected in the expenditure of the following year.
With the persistent trend of underutilization of Plan Outlay in every

8
fiscal since Tenth Plan, the argument of the Department is not
tenable. The Committee disapprove the way the Department has
tried to justify the underspending under the Plan Schemes. The
Committee find that the Plan outlay is earmarked for various
projects/programmes of the Department like IT Induction which
when implemented would change the entire working of Posts and
would help in competing with the private sector as well as
improving the financial health of the Department. The Department
need to review the implementation of Projects/Programmes and take
the desired corrective action. The desired initiatives as suggested
should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
C. Status of approval of various schemes of the Department
12. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants of the previous year had been informed that out of
14 Schemes which were pending for approval, only 4 Schemes
could be approved. Further, 2 Schemes viz. Infrastructural
Equipment for Material Management and Linkages of SB, EFT,
ECS of Domestic Sector with International System have been
dropped by the Department. Thus, 8 Schemes are still under
consideration and the final approval is awaited. The Committee
have repeatedly been expressing concern over the planning process
of the Department whereby substantial part of the Plan period is
wasted in getting merely approvals for various activities/Schemes
from the Competent Authorities. The Committee express serious
concern over this sorry state of affairs that even after completion
of three precious years of the Eleventh Plan period, as many as
8 Schemes which include some of the important activities like
Computerization and Networking of Post Offices, Special Purpose
Vehicle, Building Component for Mail Business Units, etc. are still
awaiting approval. The Committee recommend that the
Department should retook its procedures for getting approval of
the different Schemes and a specific time limit for getting approval
at each of the stage should be fixed, since the preparation for
Twelfth Plan would start shortly, the Committee emphasize that
the Department should take care that the Schemes are approved
well before the start of the Twelfth Plan so that the disconcerting
scenario of much avoidable delay in taking approvals which affects
the implementation aspects of the Schemes, is not repeated during
the Twelfth Plan. Besides, the Committee would also like to be
apprised the reasons for dropping two of the Schemes, the details
of which have been given above.”

9
13. The Department has replied as under:
“Action for obtaining the approval/appraisal of the schemes can
be initiated only after the approved outlays have been
communicated by Planning Commission. During 11th Plan,
approved outlays were communicated only in September, 2007
for various Plan Schemes. Thereafter, approval process was initiated
by the Department and approval of most of the schemes was
obtained during the second year of the 11th plan period and most
of the schemes are under implementation stage.
Department has already initiated action for formulating proposal
for Twelfth Plan. All the Divisional Heads and Circles have been
advised to formulate concrete proposal for inclusion of the schemes
during the Twelfth plan. Department is ensuring to finalise the
approval/appraisal of all plan schemes before the commencement
of Twelfth plan provided the plan outlays are communicated by
Planning Commission within the stipulated time.
The proposal of the Department for the IT Modernisation Project
(Phase-II) for computerization and networking of the remaining
departmental Post Offices and all Branch Post Offices,
establishment of datacenter and disaster recovery center and
development of integrated scalable modular software has been
recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to
the CCEA for approval”.
Comments of the Committee
14. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants (2010-11) had been informed that 8 schemes which include
some of the important activities like computerisation and networking
of Post Offices, Special Purpose Vehicle, Building Component for
Mail Business Units were still awaiting approval during the Eleventh
Plan. The Committee had also been informed that two schemes viz.
Infrastructural Equipment for Material Management and Linkages
of SB, EFT, ECS of Domestic Sector with International System had
been dropped. Even when the Committee expressed serious concern
over the delay in approval of the Schemes, the action taken note
does not indicate the clear cut status of the approval of the schemes
which could have helped the Committee to understand the progress
made in this regard. The Department even did not bother to indicate
the reasons for dropping of the aforesaid two schemes as desired
by the Committee. The awaited approval of the schemes during the

10
fourth year of Eleventh Plan is a matter of serious concern. The
Committee again express unhappiness over the whole planning
process and the way the Department has responded to the concerns
expressed by the Committee. The Committee reiterate to expedite
approval of the schemes at least now. Besides, the reasons for
dropping of two schemes should be informed to the Committee.
The Committee again emphasize that process of approval of various
Plan Schemes should be further streamlined so as to avoid the
undesirable delay in approval of schemes during the Twelfth Plan.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 11 & 12)
D. Access to Postal Network
15. The Committee had recommended as under:
“India has the largest Postal Network in the world with 1,55,015
Post Offices out of which 1,39,144 Post Offices are in rural areas.
Only 1,37,508 out of 5,95,113 inhabited villages have Post Offices
and only 1,15,881 Gram Panchayats out of a total of 2,34,755 have
Post Offices. It speaks volume of the monumental tasks before
the Department to achieve efficient and time bound delivery of
postal services to the people of the Country in general and the
rural population in particular. The Committee are surprised to
note that although almost three-fourth of the villages in the
Country still do not have Post Offices, the Department considered
the postal services in the Country as satisfactory. Not only that
the Committee’s suggestion to open Mobile Post Offices and
weekly Postal Bazars though agreed to by the Secretary during
the course of deliberations on Demands for Grants of the previous
year, has now been straightaway rejected by the Department. The
Committee disapprove the way the issue of providing postal
services to the last person of the society has been addressed by
the Department. In spite of the fact that there is a Plan Scheme
of the Department viz. Opening of Branch Post Offices and
Opening of Sub Post Offices and a lot of relocation of Post Offices
are being done, the Department seems contended with the existing
number of Post Offices in the Country. Even when the Economic
Survey 2008-09 and the Hon’ble President’s address to Parliament
on 4th June, 2009 have emphasized on revamping of Post Offices
to become outreached units for financial inclusion, the Department
is not interested in opening new Post Offices in the areas not
covered so far. The Committee express serious concern over the
way the Department is addressing one of the important issue.

11
The Committee strongly recommend that all the desired initiatives
should be taken so that new Post Offices are opened as per the
proposals given by various State Governments/UTs. Besides the
suggestions of the Committee to open Mobile Post Office and
Weekly Postal Bazars should be considered. The Committee should
be informed about the concrete action taken in this regard”.
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
“The Department’s casual attitude towards the issue of opening
of new Post Offices is further reflected in the fact that apart from
relocation of Post Offices, increasing number of Extra Departmental
Post Offices are being downgraded to Branch Offices which
appears contradictory to the Department’s stand that it is
envisaging an increasing role for the India Post. Not only that,
two Schemes viz. Opening of Branch Post Offices and Opening of
Sub Post Offices could be approved only during the last quarter
of the Financial Year 2009-10, which means that precious three
years of the Plan period were lost in getting approvals/clearances.
Now when the Scheme has been approved, the Department should
take desired initiatives so that the Branch Post Offices/Sub Post
Offices are opened as per the proposals of various State
Governments/UTs. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the number of proposals with regard to opening of Branch
Post Offices/Sub Post Offices from the various State Governments/
UTs during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan as well as
the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department in this
regard. The Committee would also to be apprised of the number
of cases where Extra Departmental Post Offices have been
downgraded to Branch Post Offices and the reasons behind taking
such steps by the Department”.
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
16. The Department has replied as under:
“India has the largest Postal Network in the world with 1,55,015
Post Offices, out of which 1,39,144 Post Offices are in rural areas.
Only 1,38,861 out of 6,17,145 inhabited villages have Post Offices
and only 1,20,541 Gram Panchayats out of total 2,40,436 have
Post Offices. 89% of the Post Offices are functioning in rural areas.
Average areas and population served per post office is 21.21 sq.km
and 7,175 respectively. This compares favourably with other
countries, including advanced countries.

12
Postal facilities in terms of regular delivery of mail at the doorstep
of every customer, collection of letters from letter boxes and selling
of stamps from/stationery is provided by the Department in every
village irrespective of terrain through delivery agents while on
their regular visit to respective beats.
The Department is constantly in the process of providing postal
facilities through various means like opening of new BOs,
alternative means of providing basic postal facilities through PSSKs,
relocation of Post Offices to needy areas etc. Licensed Stamp
Vendors and Licensed Postal Agents are also functioning in some
places.
It is, therefore, clear that extensive postal facilities are available
throughout the country including remote and far flung areas.
Opening of new Post Offices is an ongoing Plan activity of the
Department. Proposals for opening of Post Offices received from
State Governments/UTs are examined as per prescribed norms
and postal facilities are provided as per justification. During the
year 2009-10, 124 SOs and 54 BOs were opened in new locations
through out the country. The proposal for providing Mobile Post
Offices and weekly Postal Bazaars was considered in consultations
with the Circles. In view of the facts detailed above,
implementation of the recommendation of the Committee was not
feasible.
Financial inclusion of rural areas has been effected by disbursal
of wages to beneficiaries under the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Indira
Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS)”.
Reply to Recommendation Para No. 11
“Government of India constituted one-man Committee with
Shri R.S. Natraja Murti as Chairman for examining Extra departmental
system, wage structure, facilities provided at various extra
departmental offices etc. The Committee recommended that the Extra
Departmental Sub Post Offices (EDSOs) be deleted from the category
of Post Offices, and further observed that, there is no much distinction
between the functioning of the Extra Departmental Sub Post Offices
and Branch Post Offices (BOs) and the public will not be deprived of
any Postal facilities, by the down gradation of EDSOs.
2. Department of Posts after careful examination, accepted the
recommendation of the Committee and accordingly decided that all

13
the existing Extra Departmental Sub Post Offices in Urban and Rural
areas will be down graded as Branch Post Offices.
3. Resultantly, 2026 EDSOs have been downgraded to EDBOs
throughout the country, till 30.6.2010. State/Circle-wise details are
annexed. (Annexure I)
4. Opening of new Post Offices is a ongoing Plan activity of the
Department. Proposals for opening of Post Offices received from State
Governments/Union Territories and other quarters are examined in
accordance with the prescribed norms and Postal facilities are provided
as per justification. Circle wise details of proposals received from
various quarters during the last three years are annexed (Annexure II
& III). During the year 2009-10, 124 Sub Post Offices and 54 Branch
Post Offices were opened in new locations throughout the country by
redeployment of existing posts. There is also a proposal for creation
of 400 new Posts of Gramin Dak Sewaks (GDS) required for opening
of 400 new BOs in rural areas. For creation of new GDS posts,
approval of Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) is
required. The matter is presently under consideration within the
Department.
Reply to Recommendation Para No. 12
Comments of the Committee
17. The Committee had made a series of observations on the
issue of providing postal facilities to the last person of the society.
While observing that the important schemes of the Department viz.
opening of Branch Post Office and opening of Sub Post Offices
would be approved during Eleventh Plan in the last quarter of the
financial year 2009-10 i.e. after three precious years have been lost,
the Committee had emphasized to take desired initiatives so that
the Post Offices are opened as per the proposals of various State
Governments/Union Territories. The Committee had also
recommended to furnish the data with regard to number of proposals
for opening of Branch Post Offices and Sub Post Offices as received
from various State Governments/Union Territories during the first
three years of Eleventh Plan as well as the action taken/proposed to
be taken in this regard. The Department has furnished the data
with regard to the last two years only i.e. 2008-09 and 2009-10. The
data indicated that out of 707 proposals received during these two
years, only 142 proposals were found justified. The Committee are
unable to comprehend such a huge gap between the proposals and

14
the requests found justified by the Posts. The particular reasons for
rejecting the requests of the State Governments/Union Territories
for setting up of Post Offices may clearly be informed to the
Committee.
The Committee are further concerned to note the complacency
of the Department with regard to the reach of Posts in the country.
Even when almost three-fourth of the villages of the country still
do not have Post Offices, the Department considers the postal
services in the country as satisfactory and has furnished the data
already made available to the Committee. The Department has tried
to substantiate that average area and population served per Post
Office compares favourably with other countries including advanced
countries. The Committee feel that there is no justification in
comparing the accessibility of Post Office in our country and in
advanced countries as the financial and the postal services would
have been made available in those countries by private institutions.
As such the Committee would like to emphasize to take the desired
initiative so that the postal and financial services are made available
in every nook and corner of the country.
On the concerns expressed by the Committee with regard to
downgrading of Extra Departmental Post Offices to Branch Post
Offices, the Committee find that the initiatives in this regard were
taken on the recommendation made by one-man Committee who
had observed that there was not much distinction between the
functioning of the Extra Departmental Sub Post Offices and Branch
Post Offices. The data furnished by the Department indicates that
as many as 2026 Extra Departmental Sub Post Offices have been
downgraded to Branch Post Offices throughout the country. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the impact of the
down gradation on the staff strength as well as services made
available to the public so as to understand the concept of down
gradation.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 18 & 19)
E. Wet Leasing of Aircraft
18. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants have been informed that 5 aircraft were wet leased by
the Department for carrying mails. The Committee have further
been informed that the objective to improve the quality of mail
transmission and delivery services through the use of dedicated

15
freighter aircraft was adversely affected on account of the inability
of Air India to ensure on time performance of the freighters.
Accordingly, the Department has decided to discontinue the
freighter operations on the Metro routes w.e.f. 1st April, 2010.
However, the North East freighter operations would continue
which has shown better results and the capacity utilisation from
Kolkata to destinations in the North-East has been very good.
With regard to using the aircraft of private airlines for the purpose
of carrying mails, the Committee have been informed that Private
Operators were not in a position to offer dedicated chartered
freighters to the Department. The Committee’s further examination
has revealed that Rs. 62.04 crore was spent during the year 2009-10
on account of wet leasing of aircraft. The Department has clarified
that the aforesaid amount included outstanding dues pertaining
to the North-East Freighter operations during 2008-09 and
combined operations upto July, 2009. The Committee are unable
to understand the reason for the inability of Air India to ensure
on-time performance of the freighters even after signing an
agreement with the Department. The Committee are further
surprised to note the refusal by Air India to accept any penalty
clause even after signing the agreement. The Committee are also
unable to understand how the North-East freighter for which the
services have been provided by Air India is working successfully,
whereas, the other three freighters for the metros where the load
capacity are substantially more when compared to North-East
could not show results. The Committee would like the Department
to clarify further in this matter. The Committee would also like to
be apprised how the Department would manage the work load
after the freighter operations on the Metro routes are discontinued
w.e.f. 1st April, 2010 as stated by the Department. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the specific reasons due to
which private carriers have not shown interest in this regard.”
(Recommendation Para No. 18)
“The Committee further observe that now when Department has
decided to discontinue the freighter operations on the Metro routes
w.e.f. 1st April, 2010, the Department is planning to buy their
own aircraft. In this connection, the Committee have also been
informed that National Aerospace Laboratory made a presentation
to the Department about the ‘SARAS Aircraft Development
Programme’. In this regard, the Committee would like to
emphasize that before taking the decision to have their own
aircraft, the Department should ensure that the option is cost

16
effective. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
detailed reasons due to which Air India could not ensure on-time
performance and the reluctance by private carriers in wet leasing
of aircraft, so as to understand the viability of purchasing their
own aircraft by the Department.”
(Recommendation Para No. 19)
19. The Department has replied as under:
“The Department had entered into an agreement with National
Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL) for combined
freighter operations on metro sector as well as the North-East
Region on 23rd July, 2009. Regular freighter operations commenced
on 27th July, 2009. It was expected that the Air India would
provide a reliable service. However, freighter operations were
adversely effected on account of cancellation of one leg or the
other of the schedule due to technical snags in the aircraft or non
availability of adequate number of pilots for Boeing 737-200
aircraft. The issue was repeatedly taken up at the highest level in
Air India with a request to ensure availability of the pilots. It was
also requested that adequate attention be given to the issues
relating to the maintenance of the aircraft so that the instances of
technical snags were minimal. However, Air India could not take
adequate remedial action in time and the continued cancellation
of flights led to erratic transmission of mail. As a result, the
Department was constrained to review the operations and
discontinued the metro component with effect from 1st April, 2010.
During finalization of the agreement, the Department had
emphasized the need to incorporate sufficient penalty clauses for
the deficiency in the services and accordingly, had put such
provisions in the draft agreement. At that stage the Air India,
however, assured that on-time performance would be provided
and had requested the Department not to incorporate the penalty
clauses. Accordingly , the request from Air India was considered
and penalty clauses were not made part of the Agreement.
The freighter operations on metro routes were not effected on
account of lack of sufficient mail, parcel or logistics. In fact the
Department had visualized an immense potential in the launch of
its own dedicated freighter network on the metro routes, and
accordingly , had introduced products such as, Logistics Post Air
on this sector. However, Air India failed to resolve the problems

17
associated with the shortage of pilots for freighter operations.
While they could provide pilots for the North-East operations
involving one aircraft, they struggled with the problem of ensuring
availability of sufficient number of pilots for the combined
operations with four aircraft. Due to continued inability of
Air India to provide adequate number of pilots as well as resolve
the maintenance issues, mail transmission was adversely effected
and quality of mail delivery suffered badly.
The Department uses, in addition to the regular passenger flights
of Air India, private airlines such as—Blue Dart, Indigo, Kingfisher,
Jet Airways and Spice jet for carriage of mail on various routes
across the country. Mail arrangements have been revised with effect
from 1st April, 2010 and the services of the airlines mentioned
above are being utilized for transmission of mail.
The Department had explored the option of charter of freighter
aircraft from the only two other players (apart from Air India)
registered with the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA),
India. While Blue Dart is a relatively well established firm in this
sector, Deccan 360 is a new entrant. While both the firms have
shown keen interest in offering a limited capacity on their
freighters (as a majority of space is occupied by their own
consignments), neither of them could offer complete charter due
to lack of the capacity or non-availability of adequate number of
freighter aircraft with them for dedicated operations for the
Department of Posts.’’
Reply to Recommendation Para No. 18
‘‘The Department has no proposal at this stage to buy its own
aircraft. National Aerospace Laboratory had made a presentation
to the Department about the ‘SARAS Aircraft Development
Programme’. However, the Department has not shown any interest
to pursue the matter further.
The reasons for the inability of Air India to ensure on time
performance and the reluctance by the private carriers in wet
lease of aircraft have been discussed in reply to Recommendation
No. 18.’’
Reply to Recommendation Para No. 19
Comments of the Committee
20. The Committee are concerned to note the way the issue of
freighter operations on metro routes has been dealt with by the

18
Department. The Department had entered into an agreement with
National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL) for combined
freighter operations on metro sector as well as the North-East Region
on 23 July, 2009 followed by commencement of freighter operations
on 27 July, 2009. Due to continued cancellation of flights, non-
availability of pilots and maintenance of aircraft, the Department
discontinued the metro component w.e.f . 1 April, 2010. The
Committee are surprised to note that during finalization of the
agreement, the incorporation of sufficient penalty clause was
proposed. However, on the behest of Air India, the penalty clause
was not included in the agreement. The unprofessional way the
deal was made with Air India led to discontinuation of freighter
services on metro routes which led to erratic transmission of mail.
To handle the problem, the Department had explored the option of
charter of freighter aircraft from the other two players viz .
Blue Dart and Deccan 360 registered with Directorate General of
Civil Aviation (DGCA) of India, but neither of them could offer
complete charter due to lack of the capacity or non-availability of
adequate number of freighter aircraft with them for dedicated
operations of the Posts. In these circumstances, the Committee feel
that the only option available with the Posts is to buy its own
aircraft. The Committee find that National Aerospace Laboratory
had made a presentation to the Department about the Saras Aircraft
Development Programme. The Committee are surprised to note that
even when the Department is facing serious problems on the issue
of freighter services, no interest was shown to pursue the matter
further. While private companies like Blue Dart and Deccan 360 are
able to maintain their own freighter, it is surprising to note that
Posts with more than 150 years of experience in the field, does not
seem serious in owning its own freighter aircraft. The Committee
while expressing serious concern over the unprofessional way the
issue of freighter operations has been dealt with by the Department
would like the Department to take the desired action to have its
own aircraft. In this connection, the Committee would also like to
be apprised about the specific reasons for not showing any interest
in Saras aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
F. Banking and Money Transfer operations
21. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in the First Report had recommended for adding
the word ‘Bank’ with India Post so that public will be aware that

19
Post Offices also provide banking facilities. The Committee have
now been informed that the Department has not consented to the
suggestion of the Committee as their mandate is limited to the
collection and disbursement of the money deposited in savings
accounts and maintenance of records. To the surprise of the
Committee, the Department has stated that the matter was not
consulted with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee find that
even on the small issue related to banking operations the
Department has been frequently expressing their limitations due
to issues regarding autonomy. On such a vital suggestion of the
Committee, the Department did not feel the necessity of consulting
the Ministry of Finance and outrightly rejected the suggestion of
the Committee. This explains the callous attitude of the Department
to the important suggestions given by the Committee. The
Committee emphasize that the Department should reconsider their
suggestion and concrete action should be taken in consultation
with the Ministry of Finance and the Committee apprised
accordingly .”
22. The Department has replied as under:
‘‘As per directions of the Committee, the issue was referred to
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs whose
Schemes are being operated by the Department of Posts. Reply
has been received from the Ministry and the gist of the reply is
as under:
The Post Offices are providing the Financial Services and not the
Banking Services. Post Offices do not come under the purview of
Banking Regulation Act and it would not be proper to use the
word ‘Bank’ for these institutions. The purpose of these institutions
and instruments provided by them is to promote savings. In the
existing legal and regulatory framework, it would not be proper
to use the word ‘Bank’ with India Post.”
Comments of the Committee
23. The Committee have consistently been recommending for
adding the word ‘Bank’ with India Posts so that public may be
aware that Post Offices also provide banking facilities. Initially, the
Department had outrightly rejected the suggestion of the Committee.
The Committee in Fifth Report recommended to reconsider this
suggestion in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. Again the
Ministry of Finance do not seem to agree with the suggestion of

20
the Committee and has stated that it would not be proper to use
the word ‘Bank’ for posts in the existing legal and regulatory
framework. The purpose of these institutions and instruments is to
promote savings. The Committee find that even when the
Department has ambitious plans of setting up of Post Bank and the
Government is emphasizing Posts to be instrument in financial
inclusion, particularly in rural areas, in the existing legal framework,
the simple suggestion of the Committee to add the word ‘Bank’ is
not acceptable to the Government. The Committee are of the view
that the foremost quality that an organization like India Post should
possess to survive and grow in this era of cut throat competition is
the ability to adapt to changing environment. As such, the
Committee while reiterating the earlier recommendation would like
the Department to again consider their recommendation and take
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
G. Support for Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands of
Grants of the previous year had made an important suggestion to
introduce mobile services for the disbursement of wages to the
workers at worksites. When asked about the action taken in this
regard, the Committee have been informed that as part of its
modernization effort, the Department of Posts is planning to put
in place a ICT solution to cover 1,30,000 Rural Branch Offices.
One key feature of this solution will be the possibility to disburse
NREGS wages to workers at appropriate places. The detailed
analysis of the aforesaid issue has further indicated that the system
of payment of wages to NREGS workers at worksites would be
possible only after equipments are supplied to Branch Post Offices
and Branch Post Offices networked. The Department has further
stated that there was a proposal for this activity in the EFC of the
Project Management Unit of DoP which is under circulation to
different Ministries. With the pace of implementation of
IT-Induction, the detailed analysis of which has been done in the
previous part of the Report, the Committee feel that it would
take years together for the Department to introduce the system of
payment of wages at the worksite. The aforesaid situation clearly
indicates the insensitive and unprofessional attitude of the

21
Department. The Committee are apprehensive that if such attitude
persists the Department would further lose its share in
disbursement of wages under NREGS to workers. The Committee
again emphasize that the practical solution to the suggestion made
by the Committee to introduce mobile services for disbursement
of wages to NREGS workers should be worked out and the
Committee informed accordingly .”
25. The Department has replied as under:
“Generally, pay orders/wage list along with cheques for a
particular work are received at post offices after lapse of
considerable time, mostly after completion of work. In the
meantime, the worksite shifts to some other location. Therefore, it
does not appear to be feasible to make payments to NREGS
beneficiaries at the worksite.”
Comments of the Committee
26. The Committee find that the Department has expressed
inability to implement the recommendation of the Committee to
disburse wages to labourers under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) on the pretext that pay
orders/wage list along with the cheques for a particular work
received at Post Offices after lapse of considerable time mostly after
completion of work. This clearly indicates the inordinate delay in
disbursement of wages to labourers under MGNREGA. The
Committee emphasize to coordinate with the State Governments/
Union Territory Administration and nodal Ministry/Department in
the Union Government i.e. Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development). The Department should take all
the desired initiatives to ensure that labourers get the wages timely
and the wages are disbursed at the worksite.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
27. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee would further like to recommend that an official
working in a Post Office Branch involved for the purpose of
disbursement of wages under NREGS should be nominated as a
nodal officer to whom the NREGS workers can contact for the
redressal of their grievances. The nominated official should be
provided a mobile phone, and his phone number displayed on
the display board erected at the worksite. Such a system would

22
definitely help in getting the feedback from the NREGS workers.
The concrete action on the suggested lines should be taken and
the Committee informed accordingly.”
28. The Department has replied as under:
‘‘Divisional Superintendents of Postal Divisions have been made
nodal officers for the purpose of disbursement of wages under
MGNREGS, who can be contacted by MGNREGS workers for
redressal of the grievances. Contact details of Divisional
Superintendents (including land line/mobile no.) will be notified
to local authorities.’’
Comments of the Committee
29. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Department has made Divisional Superintendent of Postal Division
as nodal officers for the purpose of disbursement of wages under
MGNREGA. The Department has also assured that the contact details
of Divisional Superintendent (including landline and mobile
number) would be notified to the local authorities. The Committee
desire that while making the contact details of nodal officers
available to the local authorities, it should also be emphasized that
the phone numbers are displayed on the display board erected at
the work site so that the labourers can contact these officers to
express their grievances.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
30. The Committee had recommended as under:
‘‘The Committee would further like to recommend that there is
an urgent need to make monitoring mechanism more effective. In
this connection, the Committee may like to highlight the
mechanism of Telephone Advisory Committee prevalent at District
and Zonal Levels in the sister Department i.e. Department of
Telecommunications and the mechanism of District and Block Level
Vigilance Committees with the Ministry of Rural Development. In
the case of Telephone Advisory Committee, the sitting local
Member of Parliament is a Co-Chairman. However, in case of
District and Block Level Vigilance Committee of the Ministry of
Rural Development, the local MP is the Chairman of the
Committee. The Committee strongly recommend that the
Department should think of having the mechanism of Vigilance
Committee of DoP at District and Zonal Level on the lines of the
mechanism presently available with the Department of

23
Telecommunications and the Ministry of Rural Development. While
devising the suggested mechanism, the Department should ensure
that the local sitting MP is the Chairman of the proposed
Committee. The Committee are of the firm view that the proposed
mechanism would certainly help the Department in expanding its
customer base as it would address the grievances of the public at
large and would also act as an important link between the
customers and the implementing agencies.’’
31. The Department has replied as under:
“Department of Posts had introduced a Post forum in 1990, a
venture to foster better relationship with clients and to create a
ready responsiveness to the public needs. Post forum is a
representative body of the users of the Post Office to advise the
Post Office on matters of its service in public interest conceived
in the widest sense. It consists of not more than seven members
who are the users of Post Offices. It meets once in three months
and also advises the Post Office for streamlining the existing
procedures and speedy disposal of complaints.
In the circumstances, it may not be necessary to constitute District
and Block Level Committees under the Chairmanship of the
Member of Parliament.”
Comments of the Committee
32. The Committee in the Fifth Report had strongly
recommended to set up the mechanism of Vigilance Committee at
District and Zonal levels under the Chairmanship of local M.P . on
the lines of the mechanism presently available with the Department
of Telecommunications and the Ministry of Rural Development.
Instead of taking the concrete action in this regard, the Department
has tried to sidetrack the matter by giving reference to the existing
mechanism of Post Forum, a representative body of the users of the
Post Offices. The Committee while disapproving the way the
Department has dealt with one of the important recommendations
emphasize to take the concrete action on the suggested line and
inform them accordingly.

24
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Department of Posts (DoP) under the Ministry of
Communication & Information Technology is entrusted with the task
of fulfilling Universal Service Obligation for providing basic postal
services throughout the Country, irrespective of terrain at an affordable
price. To fulfill this obligation, the Department operate through
mammoth network of 1,55,015 Post Offices, out of which 1,39,144
Post Offices  i.e around 89 per cent are in rural areas and 15,871 are
in Urban areas. The Department constitutes of 2,10,000 Departmental
Employees and 2,73,000 Gramin Dak Sevaks to successfully carry out
the entrusted task. Besides providing basic postal services, Post Offices
also perform certain agency functions on behalf of other Ministries/
Departments of the Government of India/other organisations. The
Demands for Grants of the Department of Posts for the fiscal
2010-11 are for Rs. 11658.33 crore  i.e. Rs. 11328.78 crore under the
Revenue Section (inclusive of Rs. 10 lakh charged) and Rs. 329.55
crore under the Capital Section and the projected Deficit for the fiscal
2010-11 is Rs. 3936.59 crore, The earnings of the Department are in
the form of ‘Revenue’ and ‘Recoveries’ and the Deficit of the
Department is met from the budgetary support by the General
Revenues. Similarly, Capital Expenditure of the Department of Posts
is also met from the General Revenues. Various aspects arising out of
examination of the Demands for Grants of DoP for the year 2010-11
by the Committee are dealt within the succeeding paragraphs.
Action T aken by the Government Needs no action
[Department of Posts letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe from the data made available by the
Department that the gross expenditure of the Department under
Revenue Section is increasing over the years. The working expenses
of the Department during the year 2009-10 were proposed to be

25
Rs. 12090.20 crore at Budget Estimates stage which however at Revised
Estimates stage, increased to Rs. 12526.80 crore i.e. an enhancement of
Rs. 336.60 crore. Actuals in this regard upto January, 2010 are to the
tune of Rs. 11063.87 crore. The Committee feel that by the end of the
financial year, the Working Expenses might cross projections of RE.
The Department’s projections for Gross Expenditure during the year
2010-11 has been indicated as Rs. 11328.78 crore at BE stage which is
Rs. 771.42 crore lesser than the RE and Rs. 1198.02 crore lesser than
the BE of the previous year. The detailed examination in this regard
has revealed that the Department appears optimistic to contain the
working expenses to the level of the BE projections inspite of the fact
that Rs. 618.46 crore  i.e. 60 per cent of the total arrears of Time Related
Continuity Allowance (TRCA) to Grameen Dak Sewaks as per the
recommendations of One-man Committee are also payable during the
financial year 2010-11. The Committee hope that the Department would
be able to contain working expenses to the level of BE projections i.e.
11328.78 crore during the year 2010-11 by better management and
taking austerity measures. The Committee in this context feel that
there is an urgent need to review the overall position of the working
expenses of the Department so as to understand the areas of growing
expenditure. This exercise would help the Department to devise
mechanism to contain the expenses in the areas where there is
considerable growth.
Action Taken by the Government
The expenditure (amounting to Rs. 12906.15 crore) during the year
2009-10, of the Department have virtually increased by Rs. 379.35 crore
over the RE 2009-10 (Rs. 12526.80 crore) as viewed by the Committee.
However, the Circles/Units being allotted with the funds during the
current year 2010-11, are invariably instructed to contain their
expenditure within the available Grant so as to ensure the expenditure
within the approved ceiling by observing austerity measures.
[Department of Posts letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee observe from the information made available by
the Department that per person percentage increase in revenue earned
by each employee is 9.66 per cent during the year 2008-09 as against
5.51 per cent during the year 2007-08. The Committee appreciate that
the Department is maintaining the information with regard to revenue
earned per person which can definitely help the Department in

26
maintaining the track of efficiency and productivity of the human
resource of the Department. However, looking at the trend of marginal
increase in the Revenue Receipts, the details of which have been given
above, the Committee are of the view that the hike in revenue earned
per person is not reflected in the position of the Revenue Receipts of
the Department. While acknowledging the aforesaid fact, the
Department in the written note has tried to justify the position by
stating that it is due to hike in pay and allowances of employees and
payment of arrears in pursuance of the implementation of the Sixth
Pay Commission’s recommendations. While noting that the impact of
increase in salary and arrears would be reflected in the gross
expenditure of the Department the statement of the Department that
it has affected the position of Revenue Receipts is not understandable.
The Committee would like to be clarified about the mechanism of
calculating revenue earned per person. The Department also need to
analyze why the percentage hike in revenue earned per person is not
reflected in the earnings of the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
There are two ways of Revenue realization in the Department of
Posts as under:—
(i) Revenue Receipts from Postal Operation and Financial
Services.
(ii) Revenue received by way of Recovery from other
Ministries/Departments for services rendered to them.
The earning per person has been ascertained by taking into account
the both kinds of Revenue realized with reference to the number of
employees of the Department during the year concerned.
Further, it has not been tried to justify that the hike in Pay &
Allowances of the employees due to implementation of sixth pay
Commission’s Report has adversely affected the revenue receipt of
the Department, instead, it has been stated that the increase in gap
between the Revenue Receipt (even after increase) and Working
Expenses was due to increase in expenditure due to implementation
of Pay Commission’s Report.
The above both [(i) & (ii)] kinds of Revenue are taken into
account every where while ascertaining the Financial Result of the
Department.
[Department of Posts letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]

27
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The difference between the Gross Expenditure and Revenue
Receipts is the Deficit of the Department. The data furnished by the
Department indicates that the Revenue Deficit is multiplying over the
years. During the year 2008-09, the Revenue Deficit was Rs. 3593.09 crore as
compared to Rs. 1511.44 crore of the previous year. During the year
2009-10, the Revenue Deficit upto January, 2010 is to the tune of
Rs. 5237.52 crore against Rs. 3593.09 crore during the previous year.
The Committee have consistently been recommending to take the
desired action to contain Revenue Deficit by increasing the Revenue
Receipts and containing the Working Expenses of the Department but
to the displeasure of the Committee, no improvement is seen in this
regard. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants of the previous year had been apprised that the mandate
given to the Department during the previous Plan was that the
Department should become Deficit free. The trend of multiplying of
Revenue Deficit during the first three years of Eleventh Plan indicates
that there are bleak chances of wiping out the Revenue Deficit by the
Department during the current fiscal or in the remaining period of
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee would like to emphasize that the
Department has to take concerted efforts to increase the revenue by
multi pronged strategy which include expanding the business of the
Department by aggressive marketing strategy, by capturing the rural
market, by imparting training to its employees to make them efficient
and by introducing customer friendly and competitive devices to lure
the customers for various services provided by the Department. The
concrete action on the suggested line should be taken by the
Department and the Committee informed accordingly .
Action Taken by the Government
(Mail Business)
During the 11th Plan period, the Department has undertaken new
initiatives to improve the quality of mail operations, which includes
automation of mail processing activities, induction of dedicated
freighter aircraft for transmission of mail, restructuring of the existing
mail network, popularization of Pin Codes, creation of National
Address Database Management System and introduction of RFID in
mail offices. During the year 2009-10, the Department has placed the
orders for setting up of Automated Mail Processing Systems at Delhi
and Kolkata. The Department has also appointed a Consultant for the
Mail Network Optimization Project and initiated the process of

28
redesigning the existing mail network. Initiatives have also been taken
to introduce RFID Technology in mail processing for the purpose of
tracking of mail bags and articles during the current financial year.
These initiatives are expected to result in better quality of service
which in turn, would the Department in increasing the mail traffic
and revenue.
(Business Development & Marketing)
The Department has chalked out an appropriate strategy to face
the challenges and to improve the Postal Services in the country and
has taken a number of steps in this regard so as to ensure the increase
in the revenue receipts. Some major steps taken by the Department of
Posts in this regard are as under:
Customer Care and Competitive Measures
(i) Introduction of Web Based Track and Trace system called
‘Speed Net’ for Speed Post Articles.
(ii) Introduction of One India One Rate in respect of Speed
Articles weighing up to 50 grammes.
(iii) Reduction in local Speed Post charges.
(iv) Web based connectivity of all 1301 National and State Speed
Post Centres spread across the country through Speednet.
(v) Deployment of International Postal System Software at
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Delhi for tracing of
International Speed post Articles.
(vi) Technological up gradation of major Speed Post Centres
for improving the efficiency of operations.
Expansion of Services
• Introduction of Logistics Post Air services. linking North
Eastern Sector.
• Introduction of Warehousing order processing and Logistics
Service providing express distribution facilities to business
customers including Government Text Books Corporations,
Govt. Medical stores, BHEL, SAIL, TI Cycles, HCL
Computers, Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited, Air Force etc.
Introduction of e-Post corporate and e-Payment Services,

29
Reservation of Railway Tickets under PRS System in
association with Indian Railways has provided convenience
to the public.
• Introduction of forex services at selected Post Offices has
provided convenience to the public for getting foreign
exchange.
•W e have introduced Print to Post Services for providing
printing services, mailing services, distribution and collection
of bills as a total package to the business.
• The first Print to Post Hub has already been established in
Kolkata and the second one will be in operation in Delhi
soon.
• The Department has plans to introduce flat rate parcel boxes
for sending parcel within the country and outside India
with a view to develop parcel business.
Marketing
• Branding exercise of Project Arrow Post Offices in a phase-
wise manner.
• The Brand identity of India Post was enhanced with the
launch of New Logo. Wide publicity through various media
was given to the event.
• New products/schemes like Sale of Gold Coins through Post
Offices, Electronic Money Order, World Net Express,
International Flat rate Box, Freighter Service and MO Videsh
were advertised effectively.
•A  month long nation-wide AV campaign was released on
17 National/Regional TV Channels across India to promote
India Post as a Brand.
•R elease of various campaigns of Premium Services of
Department of Posts on Radio/web etc.
Training
The training programmes under the Plan Scheme—HRD for 2010-
11 include development Programmes for Managers, Refresher Training
on Financial Services, Technology Training for Managers, Supervisors,
Operators and System Administrators, Business Orientation

30
Programmes for Gramin Dak Sewaks and Soft Skill Programmes for
Postmen and frontline Staff.
Trainers are also being trained to ensure quality training at local
level. Further, Training Needs Analysis is also being taken up through
reputed institutions for major cadres like Postmen, Gramin Dak Sewaks
and frontline staff.
Financial Services
Financial Services products are being marketed and a variety of
products are being offered to the customers in the Post Office Savings
Bank and the remittance sectors. Technological upgradation and
training are a constant endeavour so as to increase customer
satisfaction. The Post Office is also trying to introduce innovative
schemes such as a Girl Child Development Account Scheme with the
approval of Ministry of Finance.
PLI
Further, there has been a substantial growth in PLI/RPLI business
procured in terms of number of policies, sum assured, corpus and
revenue to the DoP during the year 2009-10 over the previous years
2006-07, 2007-08 & 2008-09 increasing thereby the revenue of the
Department. The Statistics are as under:—
Year PLI (Postal Life Insurance)
No. of Policies Sum Assured Corpus of Fund
in Force Rs. in Crore Rs. in Crore
2006-07 32,97,825 26,753.17 10,342.61
2007-08 35,50,084 31,469.00 12,081.71
2008-09 38,41,539 38,403.00 14,152.59
2009-10 43,98,613 50,707.83 Under preparation
RPLI (Rural Postal Life Insurance)
2006-07 52,46,673 2284.92
2007-08 61,67,928 3003.78
2008-09 73,56,446 3994.36
2009-10 1,35,87,051 Under preparation

31
Details of Revenue to DoP from PLI and RPLI are as under:
Schemes 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
PLI 130.32 Cr. 130.37 Cr. 176.85 Cr.
RPLI 67.27 Cr. 92.03 Cr. 120.98 Cr.
Total 197.57 Cr. 222.40 Cr. 297.83 Cr.
Premium Income of PLI and RPLI during 2007-08 o/w are as under:
Schemes 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
PLI 1480.34 Cr. 1860.52 Cr. 2301.24 Cr.
RPLI 664.70 Cr. 879.24 Cr. 1262.11 Cr.
The following activities were taken to increase the business and
to improve the technical and professional efficiency of the staff:
(i) Rural PLI Micro Insurance drive was launched in November,
2009 and till 31.03.2010 more than million policies were
procured.
(ii) Publicity of PLl and RPLI products through Print and
Electronic Media, All India Radio across the Circles.
(iii) Training of 10068 PLI/RPLI marketing personnel including
Gramin Dak Sewaks to improve their selling Skills.
(iv) Insurance Marketing and interactive workshop for HAG/
SAG/JAG officers at PLI Directorate/I.I.M. Shillong.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee observe that the Capital Expenditure of the
Department was 39.02 per cent of BE during 2007-08, 53.98 per cent
during 2008-09 and 43.8 per cent (considering Actuals till January,
2010) of BE for 2009-10. However, BE for 2010-11 is Rs. 329.55 crore
which is Rs. 53.25 crore less than the fiscal 2009-10. The Committee
are concerned to observe the consistent shortfalls on the part of the
Department throughout the Eleventh Plan period despite the
Department’s efforts for judicious utilisation of the allocations. Further,
the Committee observe that due to alarming pattern of under spending

32
in all years of the Eleventh Plan, the Department are getting a reduced
allocation in successive years and that too is drastically pruned down
at RE stages. The Committee are perturbed with this reduction of
Outlay at RE stage which is negatively affecting various important
Schemes of the Department. Expressing serious concern over this
alarming situation hindering the effective implementation of various
Schemes and gross under utilisation of the Capital Outlay during the
ongoing fiscal and in previous years, the Committee strongly
recommend that at least now the Department should take the desired
initiatives for effective utilisation of Capital expenditure particularly
when the performance under the Capital Section has direct impact on
the overall working of the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
During the first two years of the plan period, funds could not be
utilized as anticipated as some of the schemes got approved only
during the last quarter of the first year and most of the schemes got
approved only during the second year. Thus the schemes were ready
for implementation in full swing only during the third year  i.e.
2009-10. During the year 2009-10, the Department has been able to
utilize Rs. 252.81 (March 2010 SYIA/C) crore under Capital segment
against the allotment of Rs. 214.77 crore at RE 2009-10 stage which
amounts to 117.71% utilisation under capital segment and 72.23%
utilization of RE Outlay of Rs. 350 crore allocated. Thus there can be
seen a considerable improvement in utilization of funds. The
Department is making all out efforts for utilization of the allocated
funds. Regular monthly monitoring is being taken up with all the
plan divisions at the Directorate level and also through video-
conferencing with all the Circles’ Heads. During 2010-11, the
Department is emphasizing on release of funds to the Circles at the
earliest in order to ensure that the funds allocated are proportionately
utilized before the RE stage. The Department is confident of fuller
utilization of funds allocated during the Annual Plan 2010-11 as almost
all the Plan Schemes are ready for implementation.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the Department have been able to spend,
31.48 per cent of the BE Outlay during 2008-09, 9.39 per cent
(till January, 2010) of BE Outlay during 2009-10 and BE projected for
2010-11 is Rs. 66 crore. Further, unspent amount to the extent of

33
Rs. 15.52 crore for 2007-08 and Rs. 27.40 crore for 2008-09 has been
deposited in the non-lapsable pool of resources. This is the sorry
state of affairs. The Committee strongly recommend that all the
initiatives should be taken to ensure effective implementation of the
Plan Schemes in the North East Region.
Action Taken by the Government
Due to adverse climatic condition, environmental and
developmental condition, there is a limited scope for implementing
the schemes in N.E. Region. The Department has, however, undertaken
and completed “Computerisation and Networking of Post Offices”,
Upgradation of Speed Post Centres, Setting up of Postal Finance Marts,
Training of officials to the full extent in all POs. In spite of all the
constraints, efforts have been made by the Department for
implementation of all Plan Schemes.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee further note that 40 per cent of the total arrears
of Time Related Continuity Allowance (TRCA) as agreed to by
One Man Committee have already been paid to GDS employees.
60 per cent of the arrears are still payable during the year 2010-11 for
which an Outlay of Rs. 618.46 crore has already been allocated. The
Committee strongly recommend that the arrears should be paid to
GDS employees expeditiously. The Committee are of the firm opinion
that all these initiatives would certainly raise the morale of GDS
employees and would act as an incentive for them to perform their
duties more efficiently.
Action Taken by the Government
The funds for payment of 60% arrear of Time Related Continuity
Allowance to the GDS employees have been released to the Circles
for effecting payment of the same.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee note that the target of opening 10,000 Franchisee
Outlets were initially set during the Eleventh Plan. The targets were

34
then scaled down to 8,100 in the SFCs Memo. The Committee during
the course of oral evidence have been apprised that so far 943
Franchisee Outlets could be set up under the Non-Plan Scheme. From
the data made available by the Department, the Committee observe
that these Outlets are performing well and the business transacted in
respect of various items has increased considerably. In spite of the
fact that these Outlets are performing well, there was significant delay
in getting approval for the Plan scheme with regard to opening of
Franchisee Outlets during the Eleventh Plan. During the year 2009-10,
the target of opening 500 Outlets was fixed. However, the Scheme
could be approved only in the last quarter of 2009-10. As per the
documents furnished by the Department, the achievement against this
has been shown as ‘Nil’. The Committee strongly recommend that all
the initiatives should be taken now when the Scheme has been
formally approved so that the target of opening 500 Outlets during
2009-10 are achieved.
Action Taken by the Government
The SFC have approved targets for opening of 8100 Franchisee
Outlets during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. During the Financial Year
2009-10, 272 Franchisee Outlets were opened in various Circles out of
a target of 300. At present there are 1122 Franchisee Outlets operating
in the country.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that initially Rs. 470.88 crore was allocated
for the scheme during the Eleventh Plan. The Outlay was later
enhanced to Rs. 614.28 crore. During the first three years of the
Eleventh Plan Rs. 158.67 crore were allocated, but the financial
achievement upto January, 2010 was Rs. 102.52 crore. Looking at the
trend of allocation and utilisation, the Committee find that only about
one sixth of the allocation provided during the Eleventh Plan could
be utilized during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan. Keeping
in view the fact that Mail Operations is an important scheme the
objective of which is to further streamline Mail Operations, the
Committee strongly recommend that all out efforts should be made
for the effective implementation of the scheme at least during the last
two years of the Eleventh Plan.

35
Action Taken by the Government
The Plan Schemes pertaining to Mail Operations are at different
stages of implementation. The Department is making all efforts for
their effective implementation during the remainder of the current
Plan period.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that 50 Post Offices were selected for Project
Arrow in Phase-I, 450 in Phase-II and 500 Post Offices in Phase-III.
The Committee have further been informed that with the launch of
Phase IV in April, 2010, all Head Post Offices in the Country would
be covered. The Committee note that the findings of the survey done
by TUV India Private Limited have been quiet encouraging with
respect to certain parameters relating to customer satisfaction,
modernization, infrastructure, delivery performance, etc., in respect of
50 Post Offices covered under Phase I of Project Arrow. Now the
Department proposes to conduct External Audit for Post Offices
covered under Phase II and III. While appreciating the success of the
Project Arrow, the Committee would like to emphasize that financial
performance should also be a parameter while conducting the audit
review under Phase II and III. The audit should be done expeditiously
and the Committee apprised about its findings.
Action Taken by the Government
The scope of the proposed External Audit of Project Arrow Phase
II and III Post Offices will also cover audit of the financial performance
of these offices. Request for proposal (RFP) for external audit of Project
Arrow Post Offices Phase II and III is under preparation.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The proposal to set up AMPCs has long been pending with the
Department of Posts. While it is possible to sort only 1000 articles per
hour manually, the AMPCs can sort 36,000 articles per hour. As has
been stated by the Secretary, Department of Posts during the course
of oral evidence that Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata generate about

36
20 crore pieces in a day, manually sorting such huge mails must have
become a serious odd for the Department. The setting up of AMPCs
will have a great impact on the way people send and receive their
mails in the Country. The Committee are of the firm view that setting
up of AMPCs will effectively enable the Department in quicker
delivery of mail articles in the Country. As such, the Committee
recommend that sincere efforts should be made by the Department
for achieving the Plan target of replacing existing AMPCs at Mumbai
and Chennal, installations of new system at Delhi and Kolkata and
medium size machines at Bengaluru and Hyderabad and the
Committee informed accordingly .
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has initiated the process for setting up of AMPCs
in Delhi and Kolkata and orders have been placed to the selected
vendor for supply, installation and commissioning of the AMPCs in
these cities. Action has also been initiated for preparation of Request
for Proposal (RFP) with respect to setting up of AMPCs in four other
metro Cities. The Department would make all efforts to achieve the
plan target in this respect.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note that the Department is involved in the
disbursement of wages to labourers under one of the flagship
programmes of the Government i.e. NREGS. The Committee during
the course of examination of Demands for Grants have been informed
that the total number of NREGS accounts opened till February, 2010
are 4.07 crore. The Committee during the course of examination
of Demands for Grants of the previous year in the month of
October-November, 2009 have been informed that the share of
Department in the disbursement of wages all over the Country was
46.14 per cent. The Committee are unhappy to note that the aforesaid
share has now declined to 40.32 per cent within a span of less than
six months. The Committee find that great opportunities are being.
provided through various centrally sponsored schemes particularly
through NREGS. The Department can capture the rural market
particularly when it has the advantage of its reach to the last person
of the society because of its vast network and the support given by
the Government in the form of budgetary support. The aforesaid
declining share of the Department in disbursement of wages under
NREGS clearly indicates that the Department is losing its share to
banks. The Committee would like the Department to explain the

37
reasons for such decline. The Committee also emphasise that the
concrete action should be taken to arrest the declining share of Posts
in disbursement of wages under NREGS.
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts is involved in the disbursement of wages to
beneficiaries under one of the flagship programme of the Government
i.e.  Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Disbursement of wages under
MGNREGS is done through the accounts of the beneficiaries opened
either in banks or in post offices. Individual beneficiary has the choice
to open NREGS account either in bank or in post office depending
on the location of the bank/post office and convenience of the
beneficiary. In places where disbursement of wages through post offices
is low, disbursement is done through nationalised banks, local
co-operative banks or through cash. Therefore, the prime concern of
Department of Posts is to disburse wages to the beneficiaries within
the prescribed time limit and not the number of MGNREGS accounts
opened in post offices.
The information relating to number of MGNREGS accounts opened
in post offices and disbursement of wages to MGNREGS beneficiaries
are furnished below:—
(i) Number of MGNREGS accounts as on 01.04.2009: Rs. 2.92 crores
(ii) Number of MGNREGS accounts as on 01.04.2010: Rs. 4.25 crores
(iii) Number of MGNREGS accounts as on 01.06.2010: Rs. 4.41 crores
(iv) Amount disbursed through post offices in financial Rs. 3863 crores
year 2008-09:
(v) Amount disbursed through post offices in financial Rs. 7900 crores
year 2009-10:
(vi) Amount disbursed through post offices in financial
year 2010-11:
(April and May 2010) Rs. 2039.96 crores
(vii) Monthly average disbursement for 2008-09: Rs. 306.91 crores
(viii) Monthly average disbursement for 2009-10: Rs. 658.33 crores
(ix) Monthly average disbursement for 2010-11: Rs. 1019.05 crores
Thus, it is clear that number of MGNREGS accounts opened in
post offices as well as amount disbursed through these accounts show
an increasing trend.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]

38
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee would further like to recommend that an official
working in a Post Office Branch involved for the purpose of
disbursement of wages under NREGS should be nominated as a nodal
officer to whom the NREGS workers can contact for the redressal of
their grievances. The nominated official should be provided a mobile
phone, and his phone number displayed on the display board erected
at the worksite. Such a system would definitely help in getting the
feedback from the NREGS workers. The concrete action on the
suggested lines should be taken and the Committee informed
accordingly .
Action Taken by the Government
Divisional Superintendents of Postal Divisions have been made
nodal officers for the purpose of disbursement of wages under
MGNREGS, who can be contacted by MGNREGS workers for redressal
of the grievances. Contact details of Divisional Superintendents
(including land line/mobile no.) will be notified to local authorities.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.29 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee from the observations of C&AG observe serious
irregularities and lapses committed by the Department of Posts. In
this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that there should
be effective grievance redressal mechanism with the Department to
get the feedback from the customers with regard to the various
schemes and to take the corrective actions. In this regard, the
Committee would also like the Department to organize Lok Adalats
whereby the complaints of the customers can be addressed on the
spot. The proposed mechanism would certainly help the Department
in increasing their customer base for the various services.
Action Taken by the Government
The system of acceptance/receipt of complaints in the Department
of Posts is readily accessible to the Public. Each Post Office works as

39
a receiving point for the complaints. The Department has also
introduced the facility for customers to register complaints online at
its website www.indiapost.gov.in from the year 2001.
The Department has a well laid out procedure for handling public
grievances for its services. A monitoring mechanism to ensure the
quality of services and prompt redressal of public grievance is in
place. Steps have been taken to strengthen the customer care
infrastructure in the Department by adopting modern technology.
Complaints are looked into at all levels—Head Post Offices, Divisions,
Regions, Circles and the Directorate. An enquiry is initiated to redress
the grievances and if the loss has occured due to improper handling
by an employee, action under the Departmental Rules is taken against
the employee at fault. During such enquiry, shortcoming in the service
is also examined.
During 2003, the Department has developed a web-based system
to interconnect its customer care centres to redress the grievances.
The main objective of public grievance redressal machinery is to ensure
systematic handling and quick redressal to public grievances. The web-
based operation has been able to ensure better interactive control and
monitoring besides providing data access at all levels of administration
for an effective management of customer grievance redressal system.
Presently, 3304 Computerised Customer Care Centers (CCCCs) have
been established in the NSPCs, Project Arrow CCCs, other CCCs,
Postal Divisions, RMS Divisions, Regions, Circles and the Directorate
across the country for online exchange of information amongst all the
units for speedy redressal of public grievances. This network covers
all Head Post Offices in the country with the objective of providing
easy and speedy access to the information and help required by the
customer, apart from redressal of grievances.
In addition to the above, regular Dak Adalats are held at Regional
and Circle level every six months, wherein, complaints cases received
are settled on the spot. Review of service norms is also carried out
to remove the shortcomings notices in mail delivery or any other
deficiency in service, which gave rise to the complaints.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee observe that some of the issues recommended by
the Committee in the various Reports are long pending with the

40
Ministry of Finance for implementation. Such issues include providing
autonomy to the Department of Posts on the issues of rates of interest
provided under various Small Savings Schemes, increasing the ceiling
of Deposits in Single and Joint Accounts of the Postal Savings Bank,
starting of new schemes under Small Savings Schemes, policy matters
with regard to insurance activities of the Department, and positive
consideration in fixing the rate of remuneration provided to the
Department for various agency services, etc. While examining the
Action Taken Notes on the Sixty-second Report on ‘Management of
funds by the Department of Posts through banking and insurance
activities’, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of
Department of Posts and Departments of Economic Affairs and
Financial Services of the Ministry of Finance at their sitting held on
4th March, 2010. The Secretaries of the said Departments at the
aforesaid sittings were requested to settle the issues within one month.
The Secretary, Department of Posts have now informed the Committee
that the points for discussion have been identified and the Secretaries
of the Departments of Posts, Financial Services and Economic Affairs
would be meeting shortly. Since, the period of one month provided
by the Committee for the purpose is already over, the Committee
emphasize that the issues should be sorted out without any further
delay. Further, the Committee are of the view that most of the long
pending issues are of inter-Ministerial in nature. In the absence of a
permanent mechanism to sort out the differences between the
Departments/Ministries, a considerable time is generally lost for
arriving at any conclusion. In this regard, the Committee would like
to recommend for having a structured inter-ministerial mechanism
which would definitely help in sorting out the issues pending with
the Ministry of Finance. The concrete actions on the suggested lines
should be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
A meeting of Secretary Posts with Finance Secretary and the
Secretaries of the Department of Financial Services as well as
Department of Revenue was held on 19.4.2010 where Finance Secretary
agreed to the proposals of the Department in principle and asked for
detailed proposals on all the issues. Accordingly , the proposals were
sent to Min. of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for removing
ceiling of investment in Post Office Savings Accounts, allow grant of
loan against NSC/KVP and TD Accounts and start of new schemes
like Girl Child Development Account and Female Flexi RD Account.
As regards increase in rate of Remuneration, the Ministry of Finance
has already setup an Expert Group to examine the issue in which
there are two representatives of the DoP .

41
There is periodic interaction with the Ministry of Finance for
sorting out various issues concerning operation of Savings Bank.
However the suggestion for having structured inter-ministerial
mechanism for sorting pending issues with the Ministry of Finance
has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. In Pursuance to
62nd Report of the Standing Committee on IT with regard to removal
of conditionalities for extension of clientele and introduction of new
products without coming under IRDA being the schemes managed by
the Govt. of India and exempted under Section 118(c) of Insurance
Act 1938 and Section 44(d) of LIC Act 1956, the developments for
reaching an amicable settlement is as follows:
A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary
on 19.04.2010 and the case was referred to the Deptt. of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law for seeking its opinion about competence of IRDA to
regulate the activities of Government (DoP), the Postal Life Insurance.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]

42
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had observed that Actual expenditure
position in respect of the Outlay provided to North-East is not
indicated in all the Budget documents and against the column
expenditure, the position is stated as ‘Nil’. When enquired about the
reasons for that the Committee had been informed that Circles are
booking expenditure under the common head 3201 and 5204 for
Revenue and Capital Outlay respectively which is not bifurcated at
the final compilation stage. While taking note of the existing practice,
whereby, it is difficult to analyse position of Outlay and Expenditure
at a particular period of time during a Financial Year, the Committee
in the First Report had strongly recommended that the Department
should issue suitable instructions to Circles to maintain Outlay and
Expenditure position separately which may be monitored and reflected
as such in the Budget documents. During the year 2009-10 although
the Actual position with regard to Outlay and Expenditure has not
been indicated in the Budget documents yet the Department has
informed that all the budgeting units have been directed to compile
the monthly statement showing expenditure under different heads.
Further the Department propose to take up the matter with CGA for
approving the Major head 2552 and 4552 for accommodating the
expenditure of North-East Region. While noting the steps taken by
the Department in pursuance of the recommendation, the Committee
emphasise that this matter should be pursued further so that the Actual
expenditure and Outlay with regard to North-East is reflected separately
atleast in the Budget documents for the next year i.e. 2011-12.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts apprised the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee on IT to the Ministry of Finance and
sought, vide letter No. 20-2/NE/2010-BGT(PA) dated 08.03.2010, their
guidance for suitable necessary action to be taken in this regard so as
to maintain the expenditure under the Heads 2552 and 4552 separately.

43
The Ministry of Finance in turn, vide their O.M. No. 2(16)-B(CDN)/
2010 dated 21st April, 2010, intimated that:
(i) This system is not unique to the Department of Posts alone
but applicable to all the Ministries/Departments across the
board and therefore, there is no need to change the existing
system of provision of lump sum amount for NE Region
initially and incurring expenditure under the functional
Major Heads after necessary re-appropriation.
(ii) The Department of Posts may continue the existing system
of budgeting accounting in so far as the budget provision
for NE Region is concerned and maintain the expenditure
figures against the budget provisions in lump sum for NE
Region separately for reporting the same to the Standing
Committee on IT.
(iii) The classification of provisions for relating to the North-
East separately in budget/account is not feasible in the
present function based classification system.
Thus the expenditure against the provisions of funds for the North-
East Region may not be maintained separately in the Budget/
Accounting documents of the Department.
However, the Circles in allotment of Grants under the Heads 2552
and 4552 have been instructed to maintain their expenditure against
these heads separately also from the year 2010-11 to monitor the
utilization of the Grants vis-a-vis achievement of targets.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]

44
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that there is slow growth in the Revenue
Receipts during each year of the Eleventh Plan. During the year
2008-09 Revenue Receipts were Rs. 5862.33 crore as compared to
Rs. 5494.90 crore during the previous year. For the year 2009-10,
Revenue Receipts upto January, 2010 are for Rs. 5730.32 crore. The
data with regard to the trend of the Revenue Receipts further indicates
that the Actuals during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are marginally
lower than the projections made at Revised Estimates stage which
were increased slightly as compared to BE during the year 2007-08
and reduced marginally during the year 2008-09 as compared to BE.
The Revenue Receipts from total Postal Operations during the year
2008-09 were for Rs. 3059.87 crore which is only Rs. 73.27 crore more
than the previous year. During the year 2009-10 upto February, 2010,
Revenue from total Postal Operations is Rs. 2810.44 crore as compared
to Rs. 3059.87 crore during the previous year. The item-wise analysis
of the Revenue Receipts indicates that under the head ‘Postage realized
in cash for Ordinary Post’, the Revenue Receipts have declined
considerably as compared to the previous year. Besides there is slight
decline under the head ‘Commission on Money Orders, IPOs’. Under
the head ‘Others’, again the decline is apparent during the year
2009-10. Considering the status of Revenue Receipts during the year
2009-10, the Committee feel that the Department would at best be
able to achieve Revenue Receipts targets to the level of the year
2008-09. The Committee have persistently been recommending to take
the desired action to ensure that all the working expenses of the
Department are met from the Revenue earned by the Department. In
spite of that, there is no much improvement. Year after year under
some of the items the Revenue Receipts are declining. The Committee
strongly recommend to analyze the position and take the effective
steps to increase the Revenue Receipts particularly when the working
expenses of the Department are increasing year after year. The
Committee should also be kept apprised about the details of the action
taken/proposed to be taken in this regard.

45
Action Taken by the Government
Mail Business
The decrease in revenue receipts in terms of postage realized in
cash for ordinary mail is due to decline in the mail traffic over the
last few years (2003-04 to 2007-08). The trend of declining in the mail
traffic has, however, been reversed of late and during the year
2008-09 there was an increase of 2.34% in the mail traffic compared
to that in 2007-08.
During the 11th Plan period, the Department has undertaken new
initiatives to improve the quality of mail operations, which includes
automation of mail processing activities, induction of dedicated
freighter aircraft for transmission of mail, restructuring of the existing
mail network, popularization of Pin Codes, creation of National
Address Database Management/System and introduction of RFID in
mail offices. During the year 2009-10, the Department has placed the
orders for setting up of Automated Mail Processing Systems at Delhi
and Kolkata. The Department has also appointed a Consultant for the
Mail Network Optimization Project and initiated the process of
re-designing the existing mail network. Initiatives have also been taken
to introduce RFID Technology in mail processing for the purpose of
tracking of mail bags and articles during the current financial year.
These initiatives are expected to result in better quality of service
which in turn, would the Department in increasing the mail traffic
and revenue.
Global Business
The efforts are also being made to fetch revenue from marketing
and promotion of International Parcels. A new international parcel
product called “Flat Rate Boxes” in three standard sizes has been
introduced apart from a new international money remittance product
called “MO Videsh” during the year 2009-10. Possibility of introducing
a sub-2kg segment in international parcels is being explored, since
such a segment is seen to hold business potential.
Business Development and Marketing
The following major steps have also been taken to increase the
revenue from BD (Business Development) products:
(i) Under Speed Posts, 25 new National Speed Post Centres
have been opened during the year 2008-09 to expand the
business network.

46
(ii) T echnological support was provided to the 41 existing
National Speed Post Centres during 2008-09 and 18 NSPCs
during the year 2009-10.
(iii) During the year 2008-09, 17 premium delivery centres were
established whereas 22 premium delivery centres have been
established during 2009-10.
(iv) Logistics Post Centres have been established across India
with 45 National LTL routes.
(v) Express Parcel Post Retail Service has been introduced to
provide Premium Parcel Services to customers. 60 Parcel
Post Centres have been established.
(vi) Under Retail Post, we have been providing Railway
Reservation Services, Sale of Gold Coins, Sale of Foreign
Exchange, Sale of Application Forms and other utility
services.
(vii) 8449 Post Offices are offering e-payment services to the
customers.
(viii) Effecting from January, 2010, e-Post Corporate Services have
been introduced to enable the businesses to send block mail
through e-Post.
(ix) Under Business Post, we have expanded the pre-mailing
services to Head Post Offices and Mail Business Centres.
(x) Under Logistics Post, India Post functions as a logistics
solution provider to the Registrar General and Census
Commission of India for 2011 census. Under this project,
more than 16,000 MT of Census material will be booked,
transmitted and delivered to more than 12,000 locations
across the country. This is a major initiative taken by the
Department to provide supply chain management to RGI.
Similarly, we have also been providing distribution solutions
to various pharmaceuticals products for Government
Medical Stores Depot.
Financial Services
All out efforts are made to increase the Revenue Receipts of the
Department pertaining to Financial Services. The issue of increase in
Rate of Remuneration on account of POSB/CC work was taken up
with the Ministry of Finance (DEA) at the highest level and with
these efforts, the Ministry of Finance (DEA) has set up an Expert

47
Group to review the present rate and the yearly escalation rate which
is 5% as at present. Third products are also being marketed extensively.
Workshop at the Circle level are being organized by the Head Quarter
to educate the nodal officers and to help them in preparing action
plan to achieve the desired targets.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note from the data provided by the Department
that against total outlay of Rs. 4000 crore for the Eleventh Plan, during
the first three years of Eleventh Plan, the amount projected at BE was
Rs. 1535 crore which was subsequently reduced to Rs. 1035 crore at
RE stage and Actual expenditure against this is submitted as Rs. 684.13
crore which is 44.56 percent of the BE and 66.10 percent of RE
allocation. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing concern
over underutilization of resources under the Plan Schemes. In spite of
that, the trend of underutilization persist during the third year of the
Eleventh Plan. The proposed allocation during the year 2009-10 was
Rs. 2100 crore, however, the amount allocated at BE stage was
Rs. 620 crore which is less than one-third of the proposed allocation.
The allocations made at BE stage were reduced to Rs. 350 crore at RE
stage which is about 50 per cent of the allocations made at BE stage
implying Department could not utilize even the reduced allocations
as the Actual expenditure position upto February, 2010 amounts to
Rs. 318.52 crore. Another point of concern is the tendency of uneven
spending during various quarters of the Annual Plan. During
2009-10, substantial part of the Revenue (Plan) allocation as provided
at RE stage remained unspent during the first three quarters of the
year, as only 78.54 crore i.e. 24.66 per cent of allocation was utilized,
leaving Rs. 239.97 crore i.e. 75.33 per cent of the allocation to be
utilized during the last quarter of the year. The aforesaid scenario
indicates that there are serious problems in implementation of the
Plan Schemes of the Department. The Committee strongly recommend
that the analysis of the implementation of Plan Outlay should be
done scheme-wise by the Department and the corrective action taken
accordingly. The Committee should be kept apprised about the detailed
strategy of the Department to improve the status of implementation
of the Plan Schemes which will impact on overall performance of the
Department.

48
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts has a wide network of Post Offices
spread across the whole country and all Plan Schemes are being
implemented across the country. Although the Schemes are approved
and finalized at the Directorate level, actual implementation of schemes
is being done at Circle/State level. Funds are released to the Circles
in May or June of the Financial Year. Only thereafter, Circle will start
implementing the schemes after following all codal formalities which
is time consuming. Further, in many cases expenditure is being
incurred during the first half of the financial year, but actual
expenditure is reflected in the Books only after the bills are submitted
by the DGS&D, other vendors and Civil/Electrical Wings are adjusted.
There is a gestation period between the expenditure incurred and
reflection of expenditure in the books thereby indicating lesser
utilization in the first half and the apparent utilization of the majority
of funds during the second half of financial year. Effective monitoring
is being undertaken by the Department with the Divisions and also
at Circle level through regular Video Conferencing in order to ensure
uniform utilization of funds allocated under various Plan Schemes.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had been informed that out of 14 Schemes
which were pending for approval, only 4 Schemes could be approved.
Further, 2 Schemes viz., Infrastructural Equipment for Material
Management and Linkages of SB, EFT, ECS of Domestic Sector with
International System have been dropped by the Department. Thus,
8 Schemes are still under consideration and the final approval is
awaited. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing concern over
the planning process of the Department whereby substantial part of
the Plan period is wasted in getting merely approvals for various
activities/Schemes from the Competent Authorities. The Committee
express serious concern over this sorry state of affairs that even after
completion of three precious years of the Eleventh Plan period, as
many as 8 Schemes which include some of the important activities
like Computerization and Networking of Post Offices, Special Purpose

49
Vehicle, Building Component for Mail Business Units, etc. are still
awaiting approval. The Committee recommend that the Department
should relook its procedures for getting approval of the different
Schemes and a specific time-limit for getting approval at each of the
stage should be fixed, since the preparation for Twelfth Plan would
start shortly, the Committee emphasize that the Department should
take care that the Schemes are approved well before the start of the
Twelfth Plan so that the disconcerting scenario of much avoidable
delay in taking approvals which affects the implementation aspects of
the Schemes, is not repeated during the Twelfth Plan. Besides, the
Committee would also like to be apprised the reasons for dropping
two of the Schemes, the details of which have been given above.
Action Taken by the Government
Action for obtaining the approval/appraisal of the schemes can
be initiated only after the approved outlays have been communicated
by Planning Commission. During XI Plan, approved outlays were
communicated only in September, 2007 for various Plan Schemes.
Thereafter, approval process was initiated by the Department and
approval of most of the schemes was obtained during the second
year of the 11th Plan period and most of the schemes are under
implementation stage.
Department has already initiated action for formulating proposal
for twelfth Plan. All the Divisional Heads and Circles have been
advised to formulate concrete proposal for inclusion of the schemes
during the twelfth plan. Department is ensuring to finalise the
approval/appraisal of all Plan Schemes before the commencement of
Twelfth Plan provided the plan outlays are communicated by Planning
Commission within the stipulated time.
The proposal of the Department for the IT Modernisation Project
(Phase-II) for computerization and networking of the remaining
departmental Post Offices and all Branch Post Offices, establishment
of datacenter and disaster recovery center and development of
integrated scalable modular software has been recommended by the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to the CCEA for approval.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I)

50
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
India has the largest Postal Network in the world with
1,55,015 Post Offices out of which 1,39,144 Post Offices are in rural
areas. Only 1,37,508 out of 5,95,113 inhabited villages have Post Offices
and only 1,15,881 Gram Panchayats out of a total of 2,34,755 have
Post Offices. It speaks volume of the monumental tasks before the
Department to achieve efficient and time bound delivery of postal
services to the people of the country in general and the rural
population in particular. The Committee are surprised to note that
although almost three-fourth of the villages in the country still do
not have Post Offices, the Department considered the postal services
in the country as satisfactory. Not only that the Committee’s suggestion
to open Mobile Post Offices and weekly Postal Bazaars though agreed
to by the Secretary during the course of deliberations on Demands
for Grants of the previous year, has now been straightaway rejected
by the Department. The Committee disapprove the way the issue of
providing postal services to the last person of the society has been
addressed by the Department. In spite of the fact that there is a Plan
Scheme of the Department viz., Opening of Branch Post Offices and
Opening of Sub-Post Offices and a lot of relocation of Post Offices,
are being done, the Department seems contended with the existing
number of Post Offices in the Country. Even when the Economic
Survey 2008-09 and the Hon’ble President’s address to Parliament on
4th June, 2009 have emphasized on revamping of Post Offices to
become outreached units for financial inclusion, the Department is
not interested in opening new Post Offices in the areas not covered
so far. The Committee express serious concern over the way the
Department is addressing one of the important issue. The Committee
strongly recommend that all the desired initiatives should be taken so
that new Post Offices are opened as per the proposals given by various
State Governments/UTs. Besides the suggestions of the ‘Committee to
open Mobile Post Office and Weekly Postal Bazaars’ should be
considered. The Committee should be informed about the concrete
action taken in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
India has the largest Postal Network in the world with
1,55,015 Post Offices, out of which 1,39,144 Post Offices are in rural
areas. Only 1,38,861 out of 6,17,145 inhabited villages have Post Offices
and only 1,20,541 Gram Panchayats out of total 2,40,436 have Post
Offices. 89% of the Post Offices are functioning in rural areas. Average
areas and population served per post office is 21.21 sq.km and

51
7175 respectively. This compares favourably with other countries,
including advanced countries.
Postal facilities in terms of regular delivery of mail at the doorstep
of every customer, collection of letters from letter boxes and selling of
stamps/stationery is provided by the Department in every village
irrespective of terrain through delivery agents while on their regular
visit to respective beats.
The Department is constantly in the process of providing postal
facilities through various means like opening of new BOs, alternative
means of providing basic postal facilities through PSSKs, relocation of
Post Offices to needy areas etc. Licensed Stamp Vendors and Licensed
Postal Agents are also functioning in some places.
It is, therefore, clear that extensive postal facilities are available
throughout the country including remote and far flung areas. Opening
of new Post Offices is an ongoing Plan activity of the Department.
Proposals for opening of Post Offices received from State
Governments/UTs are examined as per prescribed norms and postal
facilities are provided as per justification. During the year 2009-10,
124 SOs and 54 BOs were opened in new locations throughout the
country. The proposal for providing Mobile Post Offices and weekly
Postal Bazaars was considered in consultations with the Circles. In
view of the facts detailed above, implementation of the
recommendation of the Committee was not feasible.
Financial inclusion of rural areas has been effected by disbursal
of wages to beneficiaries under the Mahatma Gandhi Rural National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Indira Gandhi
National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS).
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Department’s casual attitude towards the issue of opening of
new Post Offices is further reflected in the fact that apart from
relocation of Post Offices, increasing number of Extra Departmental
Post Offices are being downgraded to Branch Offices which appears

52
contradictory to the Department’s stand that it is envisaging an
increasing role for the India Post. Not only that, two Schemes viz.,
Opening of Branch Post Offices and Opening of Sub-Post Offices
could be approved only during the last quarter of the Financial Year
2009-10, which means that precious three years of the Plan period
were lost in getting approvals/clearances. Now when the Scheme has
been approved, the Department should take desired initiatives so that
the Branch Post Offices/Sub-Post Offices are opened as per the
proposals of various State Governments/UTs. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the number of proposals with regard to
opening of Branch Post Offices/Sub-Post Offices from the various State
Governments/UTs during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan as
well as the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department in
this regard. The Committee would also to be apprised of the number
of cases where Extra Departmental Post Offices have been downgraded
to Branch Post Offices and the reasons behind taking such steps by
the Department.
Action taken by the Government
Government of India constituted One-man Committee with
Shri R.S. Natraja Murti as Chairman for examining Extra departmental
system, wage structure, facilities provided at various extra
departmental offices etc. The Committee recommended that the Extra
Departmental Sub-Post Offices (EDSOs) be deleted from the category
of Post Offices, and further observed that there is no much distinction
between the functioning of the Extra Departmental Sub-Post Offices
and Branch Post Offices (BOs) and the public will not be deprived of
any Postal facilities, by the downgradation of EDSOs.
2. Department of Posts after careful examination, accepted the
recommendation of the Committee and accordingly, decided that all
the existing Extra Departmental Sub-Post Offices in urban and rural
areas will be downgraded as Branch Post Offices.
3. Resultantly, 2026 EDSOs have been downgraded to EDBOs
throughout the country, till 30.6.2010. State/Cirde-wise details are
annexed. (Annexure I)
4. Opening of new Post Offices is an ongoing Plan activity of the
Department. Proposals for opening of Post Offices received from State
Governments/Union Territories and other quarters are examined in
accordance with the prescribed norms and Postal facilities are provided
as per justification. Circle-wise details of proposals received from

53
various quarters during the last three years are annexed (Annexure II
& III). During the year 2009-10, 124 Sub-Post Offices and 54 Branch
Post Offices were opened in new locations throughout the country by
redeployment of existing posts. There is also a proposal for creation
of 400 new Posts of Gramin Dak Sewaks (GDS) required for opening
of 400 new BOs in rural areas. For creation of new GDS posts,
approval of Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) is
required. The matter is presently under consideration within the
Department.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants have been informed that 5 aircraft were wet leased by the
Department for carrying mails. The Committee have further been
informed that the objective to improve the quality of mail transmission
and delivery services through the use of dedicated freighter aircraft
was adversely affected on account of the inability of Air India to
ensure on time performance of the freighters. Accordingly , the
Department has decided to discontinue the freighter operations on
the Metra routes w.e.f. 1st April, 2010. However, the North-East
freighter operations would continue which has shown better results
and the capacity utilisation from Kolkata to destinations in the North-
East has been very good. With regard to using the aircraft of private
airlines for the purpose of carrying mails, the Committee have been
informed that private operators were not in a position to offer
dedicated chartered freighters to the Department. The Committee’s
further examination has revealed that Rs. 62.04 crore was spent during
the year 2009-10 on account of wet leasing of aircraft. The Department
has clarified that the aforesaid amount included outstanding dues
pertaining to the North-East freighter operations during 2008-09 and
combined operations upto July, 2009. The Committee are unable to
understand the reason for the inability of Air India to ensure on-time
performance of the freighters even after Signing an agreement with
the Department. The Committee are further surprised to note the
refusal by Air India to accept any penalty clause even after signing
the agreement. The Committee are also unable to understand how
the North-East freighter for which the services have been provided

54
by Air India is working successfully, whereas, the other three freighters
for the metros where the load capacity are substantially more when
compared to North-East could not show results. The Committee would
like the Department to clarify further in this matter. The Committee
would also like to be apprised how the Department would manage
the work load after the freighter operations on the Metro routes are
discontinued w.e.f. 1st April, 2010 as stated by the Department. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the specific reasons due
to which private carriers have not shown interest in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department had entered into an agreement with National
Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL) for combined freighter
operations on metro sector as well as the North-East Region on
23rd July 2009. Regular freighter operations commenced on 27th July,
2009. It was expected that the Air India would provide a reliable
service. However, freighter operations were adversely effected on
account of cancellation of one leg or the other of the schedule due to
technical snags in the aircraft or non availability of adequate number
of Pilots for Boeing 737-200 aircraft. The issue was repeatedly taken
up at the highest level in Air India with a request to ensure availability
of the pilots, It was also requested that adequate attention be given
to the issues relating to the maintenance of the aircraft so that the
instances of technical snags were minimal. However, Air India could
not take adequate remedial action in time and the continued
cancellation of flights led to erratic transmission of mail. As a result,
the Department was constrained to review the operations and
discontinued the metro component with effect from 1st April, 2010.
During finalization of the agreement, the Department had
emphasized the need to incorporate sufficient penalty clauses for the
deficiency in the services and accordingly , had put such provisions in
the draft agreement. At that stage the Air India, however, assured
that on-time performance would be provided and had requested the
Department not to incorporate the penalty clauses. Accordingly , the
request from Air India was considered and penalty clauses were not
made part of the Agreement.
The freighter operations on metro routes were not effected on
account of lack of sufficient mail, parcel or logistics. In fact the
Department had visualized an immense potential in the launch of its
own dedicated freighter network on the metro routes, and accordingly,
had Introduced products such as, Logistics Post Air on this sector.

55
However, Air India failed to resolve the problems associated with the
shortage of pilots for freighter operations. While they could provide
pilots for the North-East operations involving one aircraft, they
struggled with the problem of ensuring availability of sufficient
number of pilots for the combined operations with four aircraft. Due
to continued inability of Air India to provide adequate number of
pilots as well as resolve the maintenance issues, mail transmission
was adversely effected and quality of mail delivery suffered badly.
The Department uses, in addition to the regular passenger flights
of Air India, private Airlines such as—Blue Dart, Indigo, Kingfisher,
Jet Airways and Spice Jet for carriage of mail on various route across
the country. Mail arrangements have been revised with effect from
1st April, 2010 and the services of the Airlines mentioned above are
being utilized for transmission of mail.
The Department had explored the option of charter of freighter
aircraft from the only two other players (apart from Air India)
registered with the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), India.
While Blue Dart is a relatively well established firm in this sector,
Deccan 360 is a new entrant. While both the firms shown keen interest
in offering a limited capacity on their freighters (as a majority of
space is occupied by their own consignments), neither of them could
offer complete charter due to lack of the capacity or non-availability
of adequate number of freighter aircraft with them for dedicated
operations for the Department of Posts.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee further observe that now when Department has
decided to discontinue the freighter operations on the Metro routes
w.e.f. 1st April, 2010, the Department is planning to buy their own
aircrafts. In this connection, the Committee have also been informed
that National Aerospace Laboratory made a presentation to the
Department about the ‘SARAS Aircraft Development Programme’. In
this regard, the Committee would like to emphasize that before taking
the decision to have their own aircraft, the Department should ensure
that the option is cost effective. The Committee would like to be

56
apprised about the detailed reasons due to which Air India could not
ensure on-time performance and the reluctance by private carriers in
wet leasing of aircraft, so as to understand the viability of purchasing
their own aircraft by the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has no proposal at this stage to buy its own
aircraft. National Aerospace Laboratory had made a presentation to
the Department about the “SARAS Aircraft Development Programme”.
However, the Department has not shown any interest to pursue the
matter further.
The reasons for the inability of Air India to ensure on time
performance and the reluctance by the private carriers in wet lease of
aircraft have been discussed in reply to recommendation number 18.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee in the First Report had recommended for adding
the word ‘Bank’ with India Post so that public will be aware that
Post Offices also provide banking facilities. The Committee have now
been informed that the Department has not consented to the suggestion
of the Committee as their mandate is limited to the collection and
disbursement of the money deposited in savings accounts and
maintenance of records. To the surprise of the Committee, the
Department has stated that the matter was not consulted with the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee find that even on the small issue
related to banking operations the Department has been frequently
expressing their limitations due to issues regarding autonomy. On
such a vital suggestion of the Committee, the Department did not
feel the necessity of consulting the Ministry of Finance and outrightly
rejected the suggestion of the Committee. This explains the callous
attitude of the Department to the important suggestions given by the
Committee. The Committee emphasize that the Department should
reconsider their suggestion and concrete action should be taken in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Committee apprised
accordingly .

57
Action Taken by the Government
As per directions of the Committee, the issue was referred to the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs whose Schemes
are being operated by the Department of Posts. Reply has been
received from the Ministry and the gist of the reply is as under:
The Post Offices are providing the Financial Services and not the
Banking Services. Post Offices do not come under the purview of
Banking Regulation Act and it would not be proper to use the word
“Bank” for these institutions. The purpose of these institutions and
instruments provided by them is to promote savings. In the existing
legal and regulatory framework, it would not be proper to use the
word ‘‘Bank” with India Post.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands of
Grants of the previous year had made an important suggestion to
introduce mobile services for the disbursement of wages to the workers
at worksites. When asked about the action taken in this regard, the
Committee have been informed that as part of its modernization effort,
the Department of Posts is planning to put in place a ICT solution to
cover 1,30,000 Rural Branch Offices. One key feature of this solution
will be the possibility to disburse NREGS wages to workers at
appropriate places. The detailed analysis of the aforesaid issue has
further indicated that the system of payment of wages to NREGS
workers at worksites would be possible only after equipments are
supplied to Branch Post Offices and Branch Post Offices networked.
The Department has further stated that there was a proposal for this
activity in the EFC of the Project Management Unit of DoP which is
under circulation to different Ministries. With the pace of
implementation of IT-Induction, the detailed analysis of which has
been done in the previous part of the Report, the Committee feel that
it would take years together for the Department to introduce the
system of payment of wages at the worksite. The aforesaid situation
clearly indicates the insensitive and unprofessional attitude of the
Department. The Committee are apprehensive that if such attitude

58
persists the Department would further lose its share in disbursement
of wages under NREGS to workers. The Committee again emphasize
that the practical solution to the suggestion made by the Committee
to introduce mobile services for disbursement of wages to NREGS
workers should be worked out and the Committee informed
accordingly .
Action Taken by the Government
Generally, pay orders/wage list along with cheques for a particular
work are received at post offices after lapse of considerable time,
mostly after completion of work. In the meantime, the worksite shifts
to some other location. Therefore, it does not appear to be feasible to
make payments to NREGS beneficiaries at the worksite.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee would further like to recommend that there is an
urgent need to make monitoring mechanism more effective. In this
connection, the Committee may like to highlight the mechanism of
Telephone Advisory Committee prevalent at District and Zonal Levels
in the sister Department  i.e. Department of Telecommunications and
the mechanism of District and Block Level Vigilance Committees with
the Ministry of Rural Development. In the case of Telephone Advisory
Committee, the sitting local Member of Parliament is a Co-Chairman.
However, in case of District and Block Level Vigilance Committee of
the Ministry of Rural Development, the local MP is the Chairman of
the Committee. The Committee strongly recommend that the
Department should think of having the mechanism of Vigilance
Committee of DoP at District and Zonal Level on the lines of the
mechanism presently available with the Department of
Telecommunications and the Ministry of Rural Development. While
devising the suggested mechanism, the Department should ensure that
the local sitting MP is the Chairman of the proposed Committee. The
Committee are of the firm view that the proposed mechanism would
certainly help the Department in expanding its customer base as it
would address the grievances of the public at large and would also
act as an important link between the customers and the implementing
agencies.

59
Action Taken by the Government
Department of Posts had introduced a Post forum in 1990, a
venture to foster better relationship with clients and to create a ready
responsiveness to the public needs. Post forum is a representative
body of the users of the Post Office to advise the Post office on
matters of its service in public interest conceived in the widest sense.
It consists of not more than seven members who are the users of Post
Offices. It meets once in three months and also advises the Post Office
for streamlining the existing procedures and speedy disposal of
complaints.
In the circumstances, it may not be necessary to constitute District
and Block Level Committees under the Chairmanship of the Member
of Parliament.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter I)

60
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Out of the total Postal employees of 4,83,000 the total number of
Grameen Dak Sewaks who are mainly posted in rural areas stands at
2,73,000. Besides out of the total Post Offices of 1,55,015 under the
Department of Posts, only 25,531 are Departmental Post Offices and
the rest which accounts to 1,29,484 Branch Post Offices mainly in
rural areas are manned by Grameen Dak Sewaks. The aforesaid data
clearly indicates the important role of Grameen Dak Sewaks in the
functioning of Post Offices. The Committee observe that Grameen
Dak Sewaks are the main employees managing workload of the Post
Offices. As such there is an urgent need to use the workforce of the
Department more efficiently. Above all, there is an urgent need to
boost the morale of such a huge workforce of the Department. The
Committee during the course of examination on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) have been informed that the Grameen Dak Sewak’s
Committee had recommended that the Grameen Dak Sewaks should
be given the Social Security Scheme more or less on the lines of the
Departmental employees. The Department has informed the Committee
that in this regard action has already been initiated and Pension
Regulatory Authority has been requested for formulating proposals
and evolving detailed Guidelines. The scheme is being taken up with
the Ministry of Finance for formal approval. While taking note of the
status of Pension Scheme, the Committee emphasize that the scheme
should be finalized expeditiously and the Committee informed
accordingly .
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation in respect of Social Security Scheme examined
in consultation with Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority
of India and approved by the Hon’ble Minister of Communications &
IT. The Scheme has been formulated and sent to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) for their approval.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]

61
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has informed
that the department can look into the commission rates that are being
paid to the Franchisees for various transactions they perform to attract
more people. The Committee recommend that the final decision in
this regard should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The task of looking into the various alternative schemes for
providing postal facilities in urban areas has been taken in hand. The
Department is considering to provide a viable consolidated,
comprehensive and attractive scheme for providing commission based
outlets in rural areas in addition to existing Departmental Post Offices.
The outlets will be provided in those locations where the Department
is not in a position to open the new Post Offices. The rates of
commission being provided to Franchisees will also be looked into
simultaneously. The Committee will be apprised of the outcome in
due course.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had been informed that Pilot Project with
regard to Centralised Banking for POSB would start in the next
financial Year. On further examination by the Committee, it has been
found that the Pilot Project is yet to see the light of the day . On the
issue of setting up of Post Bank of India, no headway has been made.
The Post Bank of India is still at conceptualization stage. The
Committee express unhappiness over the way various plans with
regard to Banking and Money Transfer operations are being
implemented. The Committee emphasize that today’s customer has
vast choices. Therefore, for the continuous growth of the Savings
Schemes of the Department, there is an urgent need to think and act
professionally. All the constraints being faced with regard to setting
up of Post bank should be addressed. The Pilot Project on Centralised
Banking for POSB which would make ‘Anytime Any Branch Anywhere
Banking’ of DoP a reality should be started expeditiously followed by
full scale implementation of the Programme. The desired initiatives to
make the Savings Schemes of the Department attractive and
competitive should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.

62
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has already sent proposals to the Ministry of
Finance (DEA) to remove the ceiling of investment in Post Office
Savings Account, allow grant of loan against NSC/KVP and TD
Accounts, to start new schemes like Girl Child Development Account
and Female Flexi RD Account. All these efforts will attract more
customers to Post Office Savings Bank Schemes. Request for Proposal
(RFP) for Core Banking Solution (CBS) is at Final stage. The
Administrative Staff College of India has been selected to study and
make recommendations on a road map on setting up the Post Bank
of India.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Upto 31.03.2009 a total of 12604 Departmental Post Offices have
been computerized. EFC phase II for computerization and networking
includes remaining Departmental Post Offices (10841) and all branch
Post Offices (129553). Out of the Eleventh Plan Outlay of Rs. 4000
crore, an amount of Rs. 2700 crore has been allocated for this Scheme.
The amount thus allocated speaks volumes about the importance this
Scheme entails for the modernization of the Department of Posts. The
Committee are dismayed to observe that out of the total number of
Post Offices of 1,55,015, only 12604 Post Offices as on 31.03.2009 have
been computerized. Out of this only 11,835 Post Offices have been
networked as per the information provided by the Department to the
Committee. The Committee are of the view that the success of all
other Schemes, especially relating to financial services, Banking
operations and Mail operations which are the core activities of the
Department are greatly contingent upon the success of the Scheme
Information Technology Induction—Postal Operations. The information
provided by the Department that EFC for the project (Phase-II) is
under the process of obtaining administrative approval clearly indicates
that proper planning with a sense of urgency for the completion of
the Scheme is missing. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Department to obtain the required administrative approval
expeditiously so that the Scheme is implemented and the modernized
postal operations becomes a reality. The Committee are also of the
view that the proposal contained in the EFC and the DPR to empower
the Project Management Unit for better monitoring and utilisation of
the allocated funds proposed under the EFC Phase-II is a step in the

63
right direction. The Committee would like the Department to pursue
the matter of getting administrative approval for EFC Phase-II on a
regular basis with the concerned authorities and the Committee
informed accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The proposal of the Department for the IT Modernisation Project
(Phase-II) for computerization and networking of the remaining
departmental Post Offices and all Branch Post Offices, establishment
of datacenter and disaster recovery center and development of
integrated scalable modular software has been recommended by the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).
The Expenditure Finance Committee, while recommending the
proposal has also directed to examine in consultation with the
Department of Information Technology whether the requirements of
its data can be met by the Department of Information Technology
(DIT) before the proposal is submitted to the CCEA for approval.
Accordingly, this Department has requested the DIT for their
considered views on the matter. The proposal for approval of the IT
Project (Phase-II) will be placed before the CCEA for approval
expeditiously after the considered views of the IT are received.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
Besides, the remuneration received from the Ministry of Finance
for NREGS, the Department also gets funds from the Planning
Commission under the Plan Scheme for additional work which
includes arrangement for cash conveyance, incentive to staff and
training etc. The Plan Scheme was introduced during the year 2008-
09. The Department during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants have informed the Committee that Memo for consideration
of EFC was approved by the Ministry of Finance wherein approval of
Finance Minister was conveyed with the observation that the entire
fund of Rs. 100 crore will come from the administrative expenses part
of the Budget of Ministry of Rural Development under NREGS.
Therefore, nil allocation was made in the RE of Annual Plan 2009-10.
With regard to the status of release of Outlay during the year 2009-
10, under the scheme, the Department has informed that the position
may be indicated by PAF Division. With regard to the proposed
allocation during 2010-11, the Department has informed that against

64
the proposed allocation of Rs. 250 crore no amount has been approved
by the Planning Commission. The Department has also informed that
the matter of providing budgetary support is being taken up with the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee express serious concern over the
way the allocations for such an important scheme are being dealt
with by the Ministry of Finance. The issue of the allocation of requisite
fund for the scheme should be sorted out expeditiously with the
Ministries of Finance and Rural Development. The concerns of the
Committee should be conveyed to the Ministries of Finance and Rural
Development and the Committee be kept informed about the progress
in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry of Finance has been requested to issue necessary
instructions to the Ministry of Rural Development to act in accordance
with the directions issued by the Ministry of Finance to provide funds
to the Department of Posts from their Administrative Expenditure.
However, the response from the Ministry of Rural Development is
awaited as yet.
[Department of Posts, letter No. 20-2/2010-BGT(PA)/5th Report,
dated 2.08.2010]
    N
EW D ELHI; RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
15 November, 2010 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

65
APPENDIX I
EXTRA DEPARTMENTAL SUB-OFFICES (EDSO) DOWNGRADED
INTO EXTRA DEPARTMENTAL BRANCH OFFICES (EDBO)
(INFORMATION AS ON 30.06.2010)
Sl. No. Circle EDSO downgraded to EDBO
1. Andhra Pradesh 31
2. Assam 35
3. Bihar 95
4. Chhattisgarh 0
5. Delhi 19
6. Gujarat 32
7. Haryana 14
8. Himachal Pradesh 17
9. Jammu and Kashmir 22
10. Jharkhand 28
11. Karnataka 29
12. Kerala 461
13. Madhya Pradesh 59
14. Maharashtra 119
15. North East 5
16. Orissa 50
17. Punjab 9
18. Rajasthan 17
19. Tamil Nadu 199
20. Uttar Pradesh 372
21. Uttarakhand 76
22. West Bengal 337
Total 2026

66
APPENDIX II
STATE/CIRCLE-WISE DETAILS OF REQUESTS RECEIVED FROM
VARIOUS QUARTERS FOR SETTING UP/UPGRADATION OF
POST OFFICES (AS ON JANUARY 2008)
Sl.No. Name of Circle No. of requests No. of requests
received for setting found justified
up/upgradation of
Post offices
1. Andhra Pradesh 47 nil
2. Assam 22 15
3. Bihar 21 4
4. Chhattisgarh 7 2
5. Delhi 12 2
6. Gujarat 10 10
7. Haryana 4 4
8. Himachal Pradesh 8 4
9. Jammu and Kashmir 37 3
10. Jharkhand 5 5
11. Karnataka 22 16
12. Kerala 34 12
13. Madhya Pradesh nil nil
14. Maharashtra 12 12
15. North East 235 45
16. Orissa 32 9
17. Punjab 9 9
18. Rajasthan 2 2
19. Tamil Nadu 66 27
20. Uttar Pradesh 33 10
21. Uttarakhand 7 7
22. West Bengal 9 9
Total 634 207

67
APPENDIX III
STATE/CIRCLE-WISE DETAILS OF REQUESTS RECEIVED
FROM VARIOUS QUARTERS FOR SETTING UP/
UPGRADATION OF POST OFFICES
Sl.No.     Name of the Circle No. of requests received No. of requests found
for setting justified
2008-09 2009-10 2008-09 2009-10
1. Andhra Pradesh 22 13 9 4
2. Assam 12 2 5 0
3. Bihar 57 23 8 2
4. Chhattisgarh 2200
5. Delhi 14 7 0 0
6. Gujarat 31 3 7 1
7. Haryana 25 3 2 0
8. Himachal Pradesh 33 14 0 0
9. Jammu and Kashmir 4512
10. Jharkhand 3000
11. Karnataka 42 19 24 15
12. Kerala 10 1 1 0
13. Madhya Pradesh 49 7 12 0
14. Maharashtra 24 14 3 4
15. North East 4 11 2 0
16. Orissa 10 8 3 0
17. Punjab 31 6 4 0
18. Rajasthan 17 15 4 5
19. Tamil Nadu 36 18 9 2
20. Uttar Pradesh 34 12 6 1
21. Uttarakhand 29 15 4 0
22. West Bengal 15 5 2 0
Total 504 203 106 36

68
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-11)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th October, 2010
from 1500 hours to 1720 hours in Committee Room No. ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Dr. Charles Dias
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
8. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji
9. Shri Dhananjay Singh
10. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri M.P . Achuthan
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb
13. Shri Salim Ansari
14. Shri P . Rajeeve
15. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director

69
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
2. The Committee then took up the following three draft Reports
for consideration and adopted the same without any modifications:—
(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Fifth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology);
(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft Reports and present the same to the House on the date
convenient to him.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*****Matter not related to this report.

70
APPENDIX V
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THEIR FIFTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations  which  have been
accepted by the Government
Paragraph Nos:—1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 14, 15, 17, 23,  24,
25, 27, 29 & 31
Total 15
Percentage 48.39
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies  of
the Government
Paragraph No:—10
Total 01
Percentage 3.23
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not  been accepted
by the Committee and require reiteration
Paragraph Nos:—3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 18, 19, 21, 26 & 30
Total 10
Percentage 32.26
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which
replies are of interim in nature:—
Paragraph Nos:—13, 16, 20, 22 & 28
Total 05
Percentage 16.12