 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
48 


2 
 
 
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government……… 
 
17 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government……………………………………………………………………………. 
 
35 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Gover nment have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration…………………………………. 
 
36 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in nature… 
 
40 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 6th November, 2013……………..  
 
44 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………………………………… 
46 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                      

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
10. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
11. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
27. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
28. Dr. Kunwar Deep Singh 
29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
30. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
31.  Vacant 
  
 
  
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupta - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary  
4. Mrs. Rinky Singh - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(ii) 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2013 -14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -eighth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty -fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2013 -14)’ of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Forty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
30th April, 2013. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology furnished their 
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty -fourth 
Report on 24th July, 2013.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on                                  
6th November, 2013. 
 
4. For fa cility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Forty-fourth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                   Chairman, 
13 December, 2013                                                                               Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Reco mmendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‗Demands 
for Grants (2013 -14)‘ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Forty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 30 April, 2013. It contained 24 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 23 and 24  
 Total 15 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2, 9, 13 and 22   
 Total 04 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl y of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  11, 15, 16, 19 and 20   
 Total 05 
 Chapter V 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee furt her desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies to the Recommendations/ Observations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
A. Overall Analysis of DeitY Budget (Twelfth Plan and Financial Year                    
2013-14 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee note that during Eleventh Plan (2007 -12) against the 
proposed outlay of Rs. 21,835.89 crore, the Department was allocated a 
sum of Rs. 11,370 crore whereas the actual expenditure was to the tune 
of Rs. 9,481.04 crore (i.e. 83.38 per cent of the fund allocated). The 
Committee are astonished to see that for the whole of Twelfth Five year 
Plan the Department had proposed an Outlay to the tune of Rs. 81,378.45 
crore which is almost ten times more than the sum utilized during 
Eleventh Plan . However, the approved GBS for this period is Rs. 
36,078.00 crore. For the first year of Twelfth Plan (i.e. 2012 -13) the 
Department had proposed a demand of Rs. 10,491.33 crore against which 
Rs. 3,000 crore was approved at BE stage and Rs. 2,000 crore was  
allocated at RE stage. The Committee note with great concern that the 
Department could utilize only 61.77 per cent of the BE allocation and 
17.66 per cent of the outlay proposed by the Department. The Committee 
further note that for the second year of the  Plan (2013 -14), the 
Department has sought an allocation of Rs. 6,927.84 crore against which 
Rs. 3,000 crore has been allocated by the Planning Commission. The 
aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that the projections made by the 
Department are far from re alistic and the Department‘s programmes 
lacked credibility or not found feasible otherwise why the Planning 
Commission would curtail the Department‘s projections drastically. The 
Committee also note that the Department is caught in a vicious circle of 
poor implementation of the schemes – non-utilization of fund – non 
submission of UCs—lesser allocation of fund.  
 
While acknowledging that there is substantial enhancement in the Twelfth 
Plan outlay, the Secretary during the course of evidence stated that this is 
to give a fillip to the electronic manufacturing sector and manpower 
development in IT sector. The Committee‘s analysis of Department‘s 
budget shows that indeed these two important sectors are lagging behind 
in their scheduled targets. The Department h as, however, assured that 
this year the Schemes will see a breakthrough and with that they would 
ensure effective utilization and might even need more funds.  
On the initiatives/measures for better implementation of various 
schemes/programmes, the Department has assured the Committee that it 

3 
 
would review all the Schemes/Programmes keeping in view the priorities 
and objectives which will be defined in the coming years of the Twelfth 
Plan with a view for optimal and judicious utilization of funds. Considering  
the vision of the Government for e -Development of the country and the 
fact that IT is touching all spheres of life rapidly, the Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the Department has to rise to the occasion and 
meet the growing needs of IT Sector . While deploring the way the 
schemes under DeitY have been lagging behind their targets and the way 
considerable mismatch between budgetary allocation and actual utilization 
has become a common feature in the budgetary exercise of the 
Department, the Comm ittee exhort the Department to take necessary 
steps for more near realistic projections. The Committee desire that the 
Department should also monitor implementation of its 
schemes/programmes efficiently so as to meet both the physical and 
financial targets. The Department should take the desired action on the 
suggested lines and inform the Committee accordingly.‖ 
 
7. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note has stated as under:- 
―The observations of the Committee hav e been noted. The Department‘s 
proposal to Planning Commission during Twelfth Five Year Plan was based 
on the recommendations made by the Working Group on Information 
Technology for the Twelfth Plan constituted by the Planning Commission. 
The approvals for  the Policies took time. As the Policy framework is in 
place, department is now focusing on actual implementation.  The 
Department is in the process of submitting the new EFC/SFC proposal for 
the Twelfth Plan to the Planning Commission for its approval to give a fillip 
to the electronic manufacturing sector, manpower development in IT and 
also other schemes.‖ 
 
8. While deploring  the way the schemes under DeitY  have been lagging 
behind their targets and the way mismatch between budgetary allocation and 
actual utilization is becoming a common feature in the budgetary exercise of 
the Department, the Committee had recommended t he Department to take 
steps for realistic projections . However, the Department in their action taken 
reply, i nstead of spelling out the m easures taken to make their projections 
more realistic in future, has tried to put the entire onus on the Working Group 
on IT for the Twelfth Plan. The Committee are not at all convinced by the  
submission of the Department that approvals for policies took time and they 
are in the process of submitting new EFC/SFC proposal for Twelfth Plan to the 
Planning Commission. The Committee are of the opinion that the Department 
should have proactively engaged in getting clearances for their policies much 
before the start of the budgetary exercise as the priority areas of the 
Department such as prominence to the hardware                                                   
sector, electronic manufacturing sector etc . were already clear , thus leaving 
no scope for losing crucial time. The schemes are already running into the fifth 
month of the budget and if the Department is still in the process of submitting 

4 
 
EFC/ SFC proposals, the Committee wonder as to how it is going to utilize the 
funds under various schemes during the rest of the current financial year.  The 
Committee express their displeasure over the sad state of affairs with regard 
to approvals and caution the Department to be more careful particularly when 
approvals for crucial schemes are to be undertaken well in a dvance. 
Considering the Department’s past record of repetitive mismatch between 
budgetary allocation and actual utilization of fund s under various schemes 
followed by missing of targets under various schemes for several years , the 
Committee would like to r eiterate their concern and recommend the  
Department to take urgent necessary steps to  avoid any further delay in 
seeking approvals for various scheme s under DeitY.  Needless to emphasize  
the Department should expedite the process of in-house approval for all its 
schemes, strictly monitor the actual implementation of the policies/schemes  
so as to meet both the physical and financial targets  and avoid time and cost 
over run for the projects/Schemes.  
 
B. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee are happy to note that with Department‘s continuous 
efforts the number of UCs, which was 892 (amounting to Rs. 1509.66 
crore) as on 1st April, 2012, has reduced to 281 (amounting to Rs. 460.86 
crore). However, with addition of 300 UCs on 1 st April, 2013 the total 
number of UCs have gone up to 581 (amounting to Rs. 937.41 crore). The 
Committee observe that the Department of Expenditure has issued a 
Circular  that Grants -in-Aid shou ld not be released to any autonomous 
body or NGO or any other organization (other than State Governments) if 
it has not submitted all utilization certificates due. With this restriction, 
the situation of pending UCs would become all the more alarming. As p er 
information furnished to the Committee three agencies viz. ICCC -ICCC; 
NCHSE, Bhopal and CII -Bhopal, who were sanctioned fund in 2002 have 
still not furnished single UCs since then. The Committee find it strange 
that the Department is silent on the actio n taken against these three 
agencies and no deadline has been fixed nor any concrete action taken for 
removing pendency of UCs.  
 
Though the Department have expressed their happiness  about their 
efforts in liquidation of pending UCs, the Committee feel th at the efforts 
made so far in this direction are not enough especially in view of the fact 
that  because of non-submission of UCs several major/significant schemes 
of DeitY are lagging behind their financial and physical targets. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to intensify 
their efforts and give standing instructions to each group 
coordinator/programme division to comply with the Ministry of Finance‘s 
OM dated 14 th November, 2012 so as to get the Utilisation Certificates 
well in time and to ensure that such huge pendency of UCs do not occur in 

5 
 
future. The Committee would like the Department to review and monitor 
the position on monthly basis with a view to take necessary corrective 
measures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
10. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note has stated as under:- 
 
―The concerns of the Committee regarding liquidation of pending 
utilization certificates (UCs) have been taken seriously by the Department 
and concerted effort s are being made to ensure that huge pendency of 
UCs do not occur in future. The action taken by the Department include: 
All concerned Group Coordinators/Programme Divisions have been 
informed about the concerns of the Committee and requested to take 
immediate steps for liquidation of pending UCs. 
 
The concerned Group Coordinators have also been requested specifically 
to take necessary action in respect of ICCC-ICCC, CII-Bhopal and NCHSE-
Bhopal. Meetings have been held with concerned GCs to request them to 
take action against these defaulting agencies as per provisions of GFR 
212(1) which stipulates that if UC is not received from the grantee within 
the prescribed time, the Ministry or Department will be at liberty to 
blacklist such Institution or Organisation from any future grant, subsidy or 
other type of financial support from the Government. 
 
Programme Divisions have requested the implementing agencies for 
submission of all the pending UCs without which no further grant would be 
released by this Department. 
 
A meeting with Chief Secretaries/IT Secretaries of States has been 
organized by the Electronic Governance Group (which has maximum 
number of pending UCs) to request them to give direction to the 
implementing agencies for submission of UCs urgently. 
 
The pending UCs status is being monitored on regular basis in the 
monthly review meetings of Secretary with all the Group Coordinators. 
 
As a result of the vigorous efforts taken by DeitY, the number of pending 
UCs as on 01.04.2013 have been reduced by 33% within a period of three 
months. The status of pending UCs as on 01.07.2013 is as under: 
 
 Number of 
Pending 
UCs 
Amount 
Rs. in 
crore) 
As on 01.04.2013 581 937.41 
As on 01.07.2013 397 630.85 
Liquidation during the period April to 
June, 2013  
184 306.56 
Liquidation percentage 32% 33% 
 
Besides the above, an amount of Rs. 265.01 crore have been liquidated 
for which UCs are not due (grants released during the FY 2012 -13). 
Hence, the total amount liquidated during the above period is Rs. 571.57 
crore (Rs. 306.56 crore + Rs. 265.01 crore).‖ 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 
2(1)/2013-Budget (Vol. II) dated 24th July, 2013] 
 

6 
 
11.  The Committee note that the Department is making concerted efforts for 
liquidation of pending utilization certificates (UCs) and as a result of vigorous 
efforts made by DeitY, the number of pending UCs as on 01.04.2013 have been 
reduced by 33% within a period of three months  bringing it down to 397  
amounting to Rs. 630.85 crore as on 1 st July, 2013.  While ap preciating the  
efforts made in the direction, the Committee recommend the Department to 
continue their endeavor in the right earnest so as to further bring down the 
number of pending UCs. 
 
C. Issue of power and connectivity for various components of NeGP  viz. 
SWAN,  SDC,  CSC 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―The Committee had found it disquieting that though the Department had 
set a target of 1000 locations by March 2013 to implement the proposal of 
establishing solar power in North Eastern States and hilly States (with a 
total cost of Rs. 320 crore) so far they have received agreement from only 
3 States viz. Tripura, Manipur and Assam. While expressing their 
unhappiness over such a dismal situation related to a maj or initiative, the 
Committee had recommended the Department to act immediately to 
address all the issues related to power shortage and impediments coming 
in the way in implementing the proposal of establishing solar power in 
coordination with Ministry of N ew and Renewable Energy (MNRE). The 
Committee had also endorse d the Department‘s suggestion for use of 
laptops by CSCs operators as it can provide power backup for 6 to 8 hours 
after power breakdown. The Committee further  recommended the 
Department to reso lve the connectivity issue on priority by coordinating 
with BSNL/DoT. Action may be taken on each of above observation and 
Committee apprised accordingly.‖ 
 
13. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note has stated as under:- 
―The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action 
taken note ha s stated that they are focusing on the issue of the 
connectivity for SWAN and CSC scheme and regular meetings of the BSNL 
Working group are being held to address the connectivity related issues.‖ 
 
14. While observing that the issue of power and connectivity continue d to 
be major impediments in way of implementation of NeGP, the Committee had 
recommended the Department t o resolve the issues by coordinating with 
BSNL/DoT. The Department’s course of action  in this regard that regular 
meetings of the BSNL working group are being held to address the 
connectivity related issues  appears to be an endless process without any 

7 
 
conclusive outcome. The action taken reply of the Department is also silent on 
their coordination with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) in 
the establishment of  solar power. Wh ile greater coordination and synergy 
between all the concerned Ministries/ Departments/ agencies are required to 
resolve the impediments, t he Committee are of the firm view that holding 
routine meetings with DoT/ BSNL without concrete  initiatives/ action on the 
ground and time specific targets/ agenda , will not improve the situation . This 
is also amply clear from the fa ct that in spite of the need for urgent action in 
the area of solar power on the part of State Governments, the Department 
could manage getting response from only three States for their proposal. The 
Committee find it very disturbing that even after lapse of more than 7 years 
since NeGP was initiated on 18 May, 2006, the issue of the connectivity for 
various components of NeGP viz. SWAN, CSC, SDC etc. has not been addressed 
till date. The Committee,  while reiterating their concern once again 
recommend the D epartment to identify, sort out and address all the issues 
related to power shortage and impediments coming in the way of 
implementation of proposals for solar power at the earliest.  
 
D. National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
―Taking cognizance of the acute shortage of manpower in NIC, the 
Committee in their Thirty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants                  
(2012-13) had recommended the Department to take up the issue with 
concerned Ministries/Departments for getting requisite approvals for 
increasing the manpower of NIC. The Committee note that as a follow -up 
action the NIC is taking necessary action for conversion of temporary 239 
posts (by Ministry of Finance) to permanent posts for eligible officers. NIC 
has also initiated a professional study on the requirement of additional 
manpower (based on the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship 
of Shri Nandan Nilekani). The Committee are unhappy to note that even 
after a considerable lapse of time no tangible progress has been made on 
the issue of increasing the manpower of NIC and lack of adequate 
manpower is affecting the day -to-day functioning of the organization. 
Keeping in view the crucial role of NIC in the implementation  of various 
National/State level ICT enabled initiatives on behalf of the Government, 
the Committee strongly recommend that all the issues with regard to 
providing additional manpower for NIC should be resolved within a 
specified time frame.‖ 
 
16. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note has stated as under:- 

8 
 
―The proposal for regularization of 265 posts of Scientific Officer/Engineer-
SB created for National Data Centre has been approved by Department of 
Expenditure as per instructions issued vide D/o Expenditure O.M. dated 
24th March, 1976. As per this O.M, 90% of temporary posts that the 
Ministry considers necessary for work of a permanent nature, can be 
converted into permanent ones.  Accordingly, D/o Expenditure has agreed 
for conversion of 90% of these 265 posts, i.e. total of 239, into 
permanent posts. 
 
Besides this, two other proposals for creating 144 posts and 355 posts for 
(i) End -to-End computerization of Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS) Operations  and (ii) Enhancing manpower for cyber security 
respectively are being processed.‖ 
 
17. Keeping in view the crucial role of NIC  in the implementation of various 
National/State level ICT enabled initiatives, the Committee had recommended 
that all issues with regard to providing additional manpower for NIC should be 
resolved within a specified timeframe. The Government has now informed that 
239 posts have been converted into permanent. Additionally,  two other 
proposals for creation of 144 posts and 355 posts are being processed. The 
Committee have also been apprised that a Committee under Chairmanship of  
Shri Nandan Nilekani is studying manpower needs of NIC. The Committee 
would like the Department to impress upon and sensitize the Nilekani 
Committee of the s eriousness of the issue and the need for expediting the 
Report for its early implementations so as to ensure that NIC’s capacity is 
raised to required level. 
 
 
 
 
 
E. National Knowledge Network 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that inspite of full utilization of allocated funds 
under National Knowledge Network Scheme, there has been gross 
mismatch between the proposed and allocated GBS for this scheme since 
inception. The Committee note that their earlier recommendation made in 
Thirty-fourth Report with regard to certainty of allocations at BE stage 
itself and ending ad -hocism in allocation has not yielded any result. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that due to inadequate funds, out of 
targeted 600 additional institutions, connectivity could be provided to only 
307 institutions as on 31st March, 2013. The Committee are also unhappy 
to note that though the Department had projected 1500 institutions to be 
connected under NKN yet  upto March, 2013 only 988 institutions are 

9 
 
connected and of these only 287 are in Tier III and IV cities. Apart from 
inadequacy of fund, the implementation of scheme is also suffering 
because some of the educational institutions do not have internal 
networks (LAN‟s) to ope rationalise NKN connectivity. In addition to these 
existing hindrances, the Committee are concerned to note that during 
2012-13 the Department could not utilize the fund under the Scheme 
because of the restriction imposed by the Ministry  of Finance‟s Circu lar 
dated 14th November, 2012. 
 
The Committee take serious note of the response of the Ministry of 
Finance regarding supplementary Grants wherein they have stated that it 
would not be possible to give such a huge additionality during middle of 
the Financial Year and DeitY may identify likely savings within the grant 
for giving additional funds to NKN. In their earlier reports, the Committee 
have been disapproving the ad -hocism of the Government in allocating 
fund to such an important programme and consisten tly been 
recommending for adequate allocations at the BE stage itself. In view of 
lesser allocation of funds under the Scheme, the Committee feel that the 
Department has not been able to convince and put forward their case 
before the Planning Commission an d the Ministry of Finance backed by 
perfect plans and pleas for allocation of funds at BE stage only.  The 
Committee once again like the Department to impress upon the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance the need for more allocation of 
funds under this flagship scheme. The concern of the Committee should 
also be placed before the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission 
regarding adequate and timely allocation of funds for the Scheme. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to fix specific pe rcentage of 
the number of connectivity to institutions in tier III and IV cities in rural 
and backward areas where the sharing of knowledge resources is more 
required. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this 
regard.” 
 
19. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note have stated as under:- 
“ (i) Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to Government of 
India and Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Communications and IT have addressed 
letters ( dated 10 th April 2013 and 18 th April 2013 respectively) to   Shri P. 
Chidambaram, Finance Minister with the request to make available funds to the 
tune of Rs. 1240 cr in the FY 2013 -14 for NKN. PSA in his letter has also 
requested the Finance Minister to consider special dispensation for NKN (which is 
multi-department and multi -institution project) to ensure timely availability of 
funds for smooth implementation of NKN. DeitY has been following up the matter 
with Ministry of Finance.  
(ii) Following discussion at the 13th meeting of High Level Committee (HLC) to 
establish NKN held on 19.11.2012, the following may kindly be noted, which was 
in response to the query “whether the NKN institutes are distributed across all 
districts as per the mandate of inclusiveness in the 12th plan”:  
“… out of 640 districts about 550 districts level NKN PoP would be setup.... 
NKN would reach all districts once there are such institutions demanding 
NKN connectivity…” 
Creation of LAN at institution level has not been envisaged under the NKN.” 
 
20. Taking a serious note of ad-hocism of the G overnment in allocating 
funds to the flagship programme of National Knowledge Network (NKN) and 
the response of Ministry of Finance regarding grant of additionality of funds at 

10 
 
the supplementary  budget stage, the Committee had recommended the 
Department to take up the matter of grant of adequate fund at the BE stage 
itself with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance .  From the 
reply of the Department , the Committee note that the Mini stry has taken up 
the matter with  Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance regarding 
availability of  additional funds for smooth implementation of National 
Knowledge Network  programme. The Committee desire that Department 
should vigorously pursue the matter with Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance for allocation of more funds for NKN programme so that the past trend 
of repetitive ad -hocism being witnessed under NKN come to an  end and the 
Department gets adequate funds for NKN in 2013-14 and assured funds at BE 
stage during the next Financial Year. The Committee observe that with regard 
to hindrances being faced by NKN, the Department itself had stated that some 
of the educational institutions do not have internal networks (LAN) to 
operationalise NKN connectivity. Now in the action taken note the Department 
has furnished a v ague reply that creation of LAN at institution level has not 
been envisaged under NKN. The Committee would like the Department to 
clarify as to how they propose to achieve th e target of connecting 1500 
institutions in the absence of availability of LAN institutional circles.   
 
F. E-INDUSTRY (ELECTRONIC HARDWARE) 
Promotion of electronic /IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that out of reported global electronics hardware 
production of USD 1750 billion Indian electronics hardware production is 
only 1.3 per cent. It is estimated that demand of electronics products and 
systems in India would grow  to USD 400 billion by 2020 at Compound 
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 22 per cent, however, the demand of about 
USD 100 billion would be possible to be met by 2020. Recognizing that 
sustained growth in IT/Telecom sector is hugely dependant on the 
indigenous electronic hardware manufacturing and the challenge posed by 
the growing security concerns, the Committee have been recommending 
the Department to attach priority to this sector since beginning of the 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that, inspite of their observation made 
in Fifty -eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) that IT/Software production has been increasing and the 
electronic hardware sector is lagging, it is only after a lapse of 5 years the 
Department has now acce pted that for a decade they had been focusing 
on the software side and hardware/electronic side was not being given any 
prominence. 
 
  The Committee also note that to promote electronics/IT hardware 
sector in the Country, the Department has not only rename d the 
Department of Information Technology as the Department of Electronics 

11 
 
and Information Technology (DeitY) but has also coined the slogan 
„Electronic India - Billion Needs, Million Chips‟. The Committee also note 
from the Department‟s submission  that substantial increase in Twelfth 
Plan outlay is to give fillip to the electronic sector. 
 
 The Committee, however, note with concern that even after 
realizing the significance of this sector nothing concrete has been done to 
implement the initiatives for at tracting industrial houses in the country 
and have indigenous manufacturing of electronic hardware. The 
Committee note that the Department‟s approach to boosting this sector 
has been only in piecemeal. Though a Task Force has been formed which 
has given 19 8 recommendations the Department is acting only on 6 key 
issues that too the action in these areas are not complete. Similarly, under 
SIP Scheme announced in 2007, even though 26 applications have been 
received, only 4 are being considered by the Appraisal  Committee. The 
Committee strongly condemn the extremely slow pace of implementation 
of the recommendations of the Task force and poor performance under SIP 
Scheme. The Committee expect the Department to clear the pendency of 
all the approvals on a priorit y basis so that the country becomes secured  
and self reliant in the field of electronic hardware and immense potential 
of intellectuals and workforce in this sector is positively channelized and 
utilized.” 
 
22. The Department of Electronics and Informatio n Technology in the action taken 
note have stated as under:- 
 
“Apart from the action being taken on the six key issues, the National 
Policy on Electronics (NPE) 2012 was approved on October 25, 2012 by the 
Union Cabinet.  The vision of the policy is to cre ate a globally competitive 
electronics design and manufacturing industry to meet the country's 
needs and serve the international market.  The policy has taken into 
consideration the various recommendations of the Task Force.  The policy 
is expected to crea te an indigenous manufacturing eco -system for 
electronics in the country. It will enable India to tap the great economic 
potential that this knowledge sector offers. Several schemes such as 
Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC), Modified Special Incenti ve 
Package Scheme (M -SIPS) and policy for providing preference to 
domestically manufactured electronic products, in procurement of those 
electronic products which have security implications for the country and in 
Government procurement have been notified. In order to curb inflow of 
sub-standard and unsafe electronic products by mandating technical and 
safety standards which conform to international standards, DeitY has also 
notified the “”Electronic and Information Technology Goods (Requirement 
for Compulso ry Registration) Order, 2012” on the 3rd  October 2012 
mandating compulsory Registration of 15 electronics items with the 
Bureau of Indian Standards based on their compliance to Indian safety 
Standards under the Compulsory Registration Scheme of the Depart ment 
of Consumer Affairs.  The order has come into effect from 3rd July 2013.  
The Policy provides a clear road map for the development of electronics 
sector in the country for the coming decade.  The NPE also proposes to 
facilitate setting up of semiconductor wafer fab facilities and to create and 
sustain a vibrant research and development and innovation eco -system in 
the ESDM sector. Another important objective of the policy is to 
significantly upscale high -end human resource creation to 2500 PhDs 
annually by 2020 in the sector.  
 
The Policy also envisages various initiatives such as aggressively 
marketing India as an investment destination; facilitation of FDI in the 

12 
 
ESDM sector; promotion of exports; promotion of manufacturing capacities 
for sourcing ESDM in strategic and core infrastructure sectors; etc.  
  
The Modified Special Incentive Scheme has already been notified on 27th 
July, 2012  and published in the official Gazette of India. As per para 6.1 of 
the notification, an appraisal Committee has been  constituted vide order 
dated 30-10-2012. As per para 6.2 of the notification,  the guidelines for 
operationalising the scheme have been announced on 07 -11-2012 after 
consultation with Ministry of Finance, Department of Commerce and 
Department of Industria l Policy and Promotion.   As per para 5.1 of the 
MSIPS guidelines, Nodal officer   has been appointed  vide order dated 27 -
11-2012. As per para 3.10 and 4.7 of the MSIPS guidelines, the application 
fee has been notified vide order dated 31.12.2012.  An EOI  has been 
floated for engagement of an agency to act as Programme Management 
Unit (PMU) for appraisal of applications. As per para 8.1 of the MSIPS 
guidelines, three Technical Evaluation Committees(TECs) for different 
electronic verticals have been constit uted  vide orders dated 25.03.2013, 
26.04.2013  and 24.05.2013. As per para 6.6 of the MSIPS guidelines, 
Industry Advisory Committee for advising the Department on issues 
related to MSIPS verticals has been constituted vide order dated 11 -03-
2013.  The awa reness advertisement for attracting applications was 
published on 20 -03-2013, 08 -06-2013 and 09 -06-2013 in leading 
Newspapers.  The online portal for online submission of MSIPS applications 
is being developed by C -DAC.  The first phase of the development i s 
completed.  The second phase of online scrutiny of MSIPS applications is 
under development.  The investment proposals worth around Rs. 3800 
crore are under evaluation and the proposals worth Rs. 817 crore have 
already been recommended by Appraisal Committee. 
 
The Electronics Manufacturing Cluster Scheme (EMC) was notified  on 
22nd October 2012.  Under the EMC Scheme, the guidelines for 
identification and notification of  Brownfield clusters  were issued on 14th 
January 2013.   The guid elines for operation lization of the scheme were 
notified on 15.4.13.    Application fee for the EMC has been notified on 7th 
May 2013. The notifications for identification of 18 Brownfield Clusters 
have been issued by June  2013. The guidelines for formation of Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) have been sent to Department of Economic Affairs 
for seeking concurrence.  The seven preliminary applications with 
approximate investment of Rs. 2100 crore for setting up of Greenfield 
clusters are undergoing appraisal process in the Department.” 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 
2(1)/2013-Budget (Vol. II) dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
23. The Committee note, from the Department’s submission, that to promote 
electronics/IT hardware sector in the country, substantial initiative has been 
taken which inter-alia include action on six key issues of the Task Force which 
had given 198 recommendations, approval of the National Policy on 
Electronics (NPE) 2012 on 25 th October, 2012 by the Union Cabinet                      
(This policy has taken into consideration the various recommendations of the 
Task Force), notification of Modified Special Incentive Scheme on                     
27th July, 2012, notification of The Electronics Manufacturing Cluster Scheme 
(EMC) on 22nd October 2012. The Committee also note that the first phase of 
the development of MSIP Scheme is completed and the second phase of online 
scrutiny of MSIPS applications is under development. Besides, the investment 

13 
 
proposals worth around Rs. 3800 crore are under evaluation and the proposals 
worth Rs. 817 crore have already been recommended by Appraisal Committee. 
Under EMC Scheme  seven preliminary applications  with approximate 
investment of Rs. 2100 crore for setting up of Greenfield clusters are 
undergoing appra isal process in the Department. While appreciating he 
Department’s effort s in promoting  electronics/IT hardware sector in the 
country, the Committee recommend the Department to have an aggressive 
strategy for implementing all the objectives of the National  Policy on 
Electronics (NPE) 2012 and for making India as an investment destination in 
the ESDM sector at the earliest. 
G. Media Lab Asia 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the scheme of Med ia Lab Asia aims to bring 
benefits of the Information and Communication Technologies and other 
advanced technologies to the common man. It is operating through 
collaborations with other organizations and experts (Government, NGO 
sector, academia, individua ls and industry) for development and 
deployment of ICT tools. Media Lab Asia is working presently in the areas 
of ICT for empowerment of the differently abled, healthcare, livelihood 
enhancement and education and has taken up the Project ITRA. NeGD has 
also been created as an autonomous business division within Media Lab 
Asia. The Committee also note that Media Lab Asia is also focusing on 
facilitating and supporting the process of taking technologies from „Lab to 
Land‟. The Committee find that the persiste nt problem of under utilisation 
of funds as noticed in other schemes of DeitY has also been noticed under 
this Scheme. What surprises the Committee is that when the Committee 
queried about the damage caused to the project due to under utilization, 
the Department stated that only some of the identified projects/activities 
could be taken up during 2012 -13 under the core activities of Media Lab 
Asia.  Other identified projects would be taken up in the Financial Year 
2013-14.  Other than some time delay, there is no other major loss in the 
project. In view of the fact that this Scheme has already suffered delays in 
implementation during Eleventh Plan (as observed in Fifty-eighth Report of 
the Committee during Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee are amused 
at th e Department‟s submission that other than time delay, there is no 
other major loss. The Committee are of strong view that IT sector is an 
evolving and ever changing sector and loss of time in this sector is huge 
loss. While deploring the Department‟s callo us attitude towards loss of 
time, the Committee recommend the Department to identify the 
constraints and address the issues under scheme so that the motto of the 
Scheme to take the technologies from „Lab to Land‟ is achieved in letter 
and spirit.”  
 
25. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology in the action taken 
note has stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.” 
 
 
 

14 
 
26. Taking note of the damage caused under the Media Lab Asia (MLA) in 
which only some identified projects/activities could be taken up resulting in 
under utilization of funds, the Committee had cautioned the Department 
towards loss of time and recommended to identify the constraints and address 
the issues.  However, the Department i n their action taken reply, apart from 
merely taking note of the recommendations for compliance have not 
suggested/outlined any remedial action being taken to avoid the situation in 
future. The Committee expect that Government replies are specific and 
comprehensive. Keeping in view the fact that Media Lab Asia is working for 
empowerment of differently abled, livelihood enhancement and education, the 
Committee would like to emphasize that the Department needs to take the 
projects under this Scheme seriously and take necessary steps for full 
utilization of funds. While reiterating their  recommendation, the Committee 
again strongly recommend the Department to identify the constraints and 
overcome them so that all the identified projects for the year 2013 -14 are  
taken up under the scheme.   
 
  
 
 

15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Statement of the Minister under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that Demand No. 15 pertaining to the Department of Electronics 
and Information Technology (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology) for 
the year 2013 -14 was laid in Lok Sabha on 18 th March, 2013. The Demands provides for a 
budgetary provision of   Rs. 3052.00 crore with Rs. 2872.50 crore in Revenue and Rs. 
179.50 crore in Capital Section. The total Outlay, including IEBR of Rs. 742.59 crore, 
however, stands at  Rs. 3742.59 crore.  
 
 Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), has  identified six 
thrust areas for the Twelfth Five Year Plan viz. e-Government, e -Learning, e -Security, e -
Industry (Electronics Hardware), e -Industry (IT -ITES) and  e -Innovation/R&D to fulfill its 
vision of e -Development of India. The Committee note that in  order to achieve its 
mission/objectives the Department has taken several far reaching initiatives viz. e-Pramaan, 
E-TAAL, Beyond the fibre, Rapid replication initiative, HR policy for e -Governance, ICT 
capacity building, semiconductor wafer fabs, standard s in electronics products, IT 
investment Regions (ITIRs), supercomputing, National Cyber Security Policy, etc. The 
Committee further note that the Department  has woken up to a very promising agenda for 
the year 2013 (January to December) which inter-alia include National roll out of Mobile 
Service Delivery Gateway (MSDG); National Information Infrastructure (NII 2.0); National 
Cloud Computing Initiatives; Setting up of a National e -Governance Academy; Setting up of 
Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMCs) ; Mobilizing Modified Special Incentive Package 
Scheme (MSIPs) Units, Setting up of Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication (Fab) Manufacturing 
facilities in the country; etc. The Committee find that some of the initiatives are ongoing 
agenda and are a continuation from the Eleventh Plan, whereas few other are new initiatives 
in keeping pace with time and need of the hour. Considering the fact that Information 
Technology (IT) initiatives are the pulse of present times, advancement in IT is  yardstick 
for a nation‘s  technological progress and also keeping in view the promising agenda ahead 
of the Department, the Committee fully endorse the Demands for Grants of DeitY for the 
year 2013-14. The Committee desire that the Department should act with right earnest on 
all t he recommendations/observations of the Committee that are detailed in succeeding 
paragraphs so as to do justice to the allocations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations /observations of the Committee have been noted. The Department 
would make all efforts to achieve its mission and the agenda proposed for the year 2013 -
14. As per the Departmental Working Group Report for 12 th Plan (2012-17), the six thrust 
areas are e -Government, e -Learning, e -Security, e -Industry (Hardware & Software), e -
Innovation/R&D and e-Inclusion. 
 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
Internal and External budgetary Resources 

16 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that the approved IEBR fo r the Twelfth Five Year Plan is Rs. 
3,944.29 crore. The Committee also note that for the first year of the plan (2012 -13) the 
proposed and approved IEBR was Rs. 2,362.80 crore. However, as against the above 
approved IEBR the Department could generate only Rs. 579.40 crore which comes out to be 
a mere 24.32 per cent. What is more disappointing to note is that despite the shortfall in 
IEBR generation the Department has projected an increase in IEBR  during 2013 -14 taking 
it to  Rs. 742.58 crore. One of the re asons cited by the Department for not achieving the 
IEBR target at BE stage as well for revising the targets at RE stage during 2012 -13 is 
withdrawal of the work of biometric capture of NPR project from NIELIT (worth Rs. 1685.5 
crore). Further, the Committ ee have been informed that the Department has attributed 
significant increase in IEBR projection to receipt of fund of Rs. 70 crore under NeGD Project 
under Media Lab Asia during 2012 -13. The Committee, however, note that the above 
justification still does not explain the massive increase in proposed as well as approved IEBR 
for  2012 -13. In light of abo ve discrepancies and mismatch, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Department to strengthen their planning mechanism and set realistic IEBR 
targets with re spect to schemes/projects of the Department. The Committee desire the 
Department to sensitize the societies/organizations under its administrative control so that 
such situation is avoided in future.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Commit tee have been noted for compliance please. For 2012 -13, 
Media Lab Asia (MLA) had projected an IEBR of Rs. 3.00 crore out of total allocation of               
Rs. 14.30 crore. For 2013 -14, MLA has not projected any IEBR and the entire allocation of 
Rs. 26.27 crore is budgetary grants. 
 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 
Budgetary Allocation by DeitY for the North Eastern Region 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 As far as utilization of funds for the North Eastern region is concerned the Committee 
have been noticing and expressing their serious concern over the repetitive under utilization 
since the Eleventh Plan. Not only this, non-achievement of targets under various schemes of 
DeitY in North Eastern region has also been a matter of great concern. Against a budget of 
Rs. 1137 crore for North Eastern region in Eleventh Plan utilization was Rs. 853.27 crore. 
The Committee observe that in spite of their continuous insistence on fuller u tilization of 
funds, out of Rs. 200 crore allocated at RE stage during 2012 -13 to this Region only 84 per 
cent (Rs. 168.18 crore) could be utilized. Going by the financial and physical achievement 
during Eleventh Plan in North Eastern region, the Committee  are apprehensive about 
Department‘s contention that capacity building and construction of physical infrastructure 
for NIELIT Centres will enhance the pace of expenditure. Considering that this region is 
already witnessing challenges related to connectivit y and power, the Committee feel that 
lack of interest by executing agencies and poor response to tendering process will add on to 
the hindrances already being witnessed in implementation of Schemes in the Region. Now 
that the Department has already identif ied the bottlenecks, the Committee recommend the 
Department to make concerted efforts and pursue the matter with various executing 
agencies to complete the work in time so that the funds allocated are fully utilized and 
targets laid down are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 

17 
 
Instructions/directions have been issued to all concerned to make concerted efforts 
and pursue the matter with various executing agencies to complete the work in time so that 
funds allocated are fully utilized and targets laid down are achieved. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that with Department‘s co ntinuous efforts the 
number of UCs, which was 892 (amounting to Rs. 1509.66 crore) as on 1st April, 2012, has 
reduced to 281 (amounting to Rs. 460.86 crore). However, with addition of 300 UCs on 1st 
April, 2013 the total number of UCs have gone up to 581 ( amounting to Rs. 937.41 crore). 
The Committee observe that the Department of Expenditure has issued a Circular  that 
Grants-in-Aid should not be released to any autonomous body or NGO or any other 
organization (other than State Governments) if it has not s ubmitted all utilization 
certificates due. With this restriction, the situation of pending UCs would become all the 
more alarming. As per information furnished to the Committee three agencies viz. ICCC -
ICCC; NCHSE, Bhopal and CII -Bhopal, who were sanctione d fund in 2002 have still not 
furnished single UCs since then. The Committee find it strange that the Department is silent 
on the action taken against these three agencies and no deadline has been fixed nor any 
concrete action taken for removing pendency of UCs.  
 
 Though the Department have expressed their happiness  about their efforts in 
liquidation of pending UCs, the Committee feel that the efforts made so far in this direction 
are not enough especially in view of the fact that  because of non -submission of UCs several 
major/significant schemes of DeitY are lagging behind their financial and physical targets. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to intensify their efforts 
and give standing instructions to each group coordinator/programme division to comply with 
the Ministry of Finance‘s OM dated 14th November, 2012 so as to get the Utilisation 
Certificates well in time and to ensure that such huge pendency of UCs do not occur in 
future. The Committee would like the Department to re view and monitor the position on 
monthly basis with a view to take necessary corrective measures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee regarding liquidation of pending utilization certificates (UCs) 
have been taken seriously by the Depar tment and concerted efforts are being made to 
ensure that huge pendency of UCs do not occur in future. The action taken by the 
Department include: 
 All concerned Group Coordinators/Programme Divisions have been informed about 
the concerns of the Committee and requested to take immediate steps for liquidation 
of pending UCs. 
 
 The concerned Group Coordinators have also been requested specifically to take 
necessary action in respect of ICCC -ICCC, CII-Bhopal and NCHSE -Bhopal. Meetings 
have been held with concern ed GCs to request them to take action against these 
defaulting agencies as per provisions of GFR 212(1) which stipulates that if UC is not 
received from the grantee within the prescribed time, the Ministry or Department will 
be at liberty to blacklist such  Institution or Organisation from any future grant, 
subsidy or other type of financial support from the Government. 
 

18 
 
 Programme Divisions have requested the implementing agencies for submission of all 
the pending UCs without which no further grant would be released by this 
Department. 
 
 A meeting with Chief Secretaries/IT Secretaries of States has been organized by the 
Electronic Governance Group (which has maximum number of pending UCs) to 
request them to give direction to the implementing agencies for submi ssion of UCs 
urgently. 
 
 The pending UCs status is being monitored on regular basis in the monthly review 
meetings of Secretary with all the Group Coordinators. 
 
As a result of the vigorous efforts taken by DeitY, the number of pending UCs as on 
01.04.2013 have been reduced by 33% within a period of three months. The status of 
pending UCs as on 01.07.2013 is as under: 
 
 Number of 
Pending UCs 
Amount 
Rs. in crore) 
As on 01.04.2013 581 937.41 
As on 01.07.2013 397 630.85 
Liquidation during the period April to June, 2013  184 306.56 
Liquidation percentage 32% 33% 
 
Besides the above, an amount of Rs. 265.01 crore have been liquidated for which 
UCs are not due (grants released during the FY 2012 -13). Hence, the total amount 
liquidated during the above period is  Rs. 571.57 crore (Rs. 306.56 crore + Rs. 265.01 
crore). 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  11 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
E-GOVERNMENT 
National e-Governance Plan 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that National e -Governance Plan approved in May, 2006 is the 
flagship programme of the Department with a vision to make all Government services 
accessible to the Common man through c ommon service delivery outlets and ensure 
efficiency, transparency and reliability of such services at affordable costs.  The Committee 
note that against the total allocation of Rs. 975.00 crore in 2012 -13 the actual expenditure 
under the Scheme has been m ere Rs. 283.68 crore (till 31.12.2012). The Committee find 
that this sorry state of utilization of fund under this flagship programme of the Department  
has been continuing for last few years, so much so that since 2009 -10 the Department has 
not utilized e ven 30 per cent of the BE allocations. Even though this persistent problem of 
under utilization has been observed and commented upon repeatedly by the Committee 
since inception of scheme nothing concrete has been done to improve the utilization of 
funds. The Committee are not at all convinced by the Department‘s submission that because 
of the restriction imposed by the Ministry of Finance‘s Circular dated 14th November, 2012 
DeitY could not utilize the fund allocated under the Scheme, as in the opinion of t he 
Committee if that was the case, the Department should have achieved satisfactory level of 
allocations much before the Circular came into effect. The Committee strongly feel that it is 

19 
 
high time the Department instead of merely citing reasons of under ut ilization year after 
year, should take remedial steps so as to achieve laid down financial and physical targets. 
In view of the great importance of Direct Benefit Transfer Programme (DBT) under NeGP, 
the Committee recommend the Department to do away with t he pendency of UCs under the 
scheme and address all the challenges on priority basis. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the action taken along with their outcome as well with the details of the DBT 
initiatives of DeitY. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Electronic Governance (EG) Group has informed all implementing agencies to submit 
UCs urgently and UCs are insisted before release of further installment for any project of the 
Department.  A meeting of Chief Secretaries/IT Secretaries of  States  was he ld and they 
were requested to  direct the implementing agencies to submit UC urgently.  Chief 
Secretaries of States were  also informed  as per Office Memorandum of Ministry of Finance 
dated 14.11.2012, the Grant-in-Aid to any Nodal Agency should not be re leased if it has not 
submitted all Utilisation Certificates due for rendition for Grant -in-Aid released by the 
Central Government in respect of all Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry/Department of 
Govt. of India.  EG Group is closely monitering the pending  UC on regular basis. UCs 
amounting to Rs. 559.25 Crs have been liquidated which is substantially   greater than 
previous years. Also, expenditure in FY 2012 -13 in e -Gov Scheme is Rs. 416.95 crs, the 
expenditure in FY 2011 -12 and FY 2010 -11 was Rs.  254.34  Cr.  & Rs. 264.15 Cr., 
respectively. 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) is providing full 
support in implementation of DBT since its inception and is committed to make DBT a 
success. 
 1.  DeitY has provided its inputs and full su pport in all the core areas of DBT namely 
digitization of beneficiary details, Aadhaar seeding, Bank Account Seeding, Payment 
through Aadhar Payment Bridge System. 
2.   DeitY has provided the inputs on Standardized format for collection of basic data 
about beneficiary of Central Scheme or Centrally Sponsored Scheme. This is 
reflected in Planning Commission OM i.e. circulated on 26th Dec, 2012. This enables 
Central Ministry / Department gets data in standard format.  
3.   DeitY has provided step by step guid elines for organic Aadhaar seeding through 
camp based approach and also suggested inorganic Aadhaar seeding through 
demographic matching. This is reflected in Planning Commission OM i.e. circulated on 
8th Jan, 2013. This enables Central Ministry / Departme nt to accomplish Aadhaar 
seeding both through manual as well as through machine. DeitY also shared 
information on NICSI empanelled agencies for Data Entry Operators so that 
concerned Ministry / Departments can leverage them for digitization. 
4.   DeitY has issued guidelines to all State Information Officers (SIO) as well as District 
Information Officers (DIO) of NIC to provide technical support in implementation of 
DBT at State and District level. 
5.   DeitY along with NIC has developed an application calle d DBTApp to help those 
Central Dept. / Ministry, which does not have end -to-end computerized system. This 
application has the provision for data collection, data verification and data 
authroization at State level and it can also link up with CPSMS system f or making 
payment to beneficiary. Already 6 Ministries covering total 22 Central / Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes of DBT are provided demo and hand holdings on DBTApp. 
6.   DeitY along with NIC has helped the Ministry having system in place to integrate with 
CPSMS so that Aadhaar based Direct Cash Transfer can be accomplished. Thus, DeitY 
helped Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Minority Affairs to make 
DCT to their beneficiaries. 
7.  DeitY has also offered VLEs of Common Service Center to be utilized for data entry 
work so that  data entry can be done in a decentralised manner. 
 

20 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee also ob serve that the Department have proposed few new initiatives 
for facilitating National e -Governance Plan, viz. National e -Governance Academy, e -
Pramaan, e -TAAL, National Information Infrastructure (NII 2.0), HR Policy for e -
Governance, Rapid Replication ini tiative, Beyond the Fibre, etc. While appreciating the 
above initiatives as highlighted by the Secretary, DeitY during his deposition before the 
Committee, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to adhere to the projected 
deadlines of each of the above initiatives and apprise the Committee about their outcome 
and functioning.  
Reply of the Government 
 
A Working Group under NII 2.0 has been constituted with reps from the Central 
Government, few State Governments, Organizations under Ministry of Comm unications & 
Information Technology, Industry Associations and from Academia. The working Group on 
NII 2.0 has its first meeting on 18th April 2013. 
The Group recommended 4 Sub Groups on specialized subjects for formulation of 
detailed action plan. These 4  Sub Groups with terms of reference have been formed on 
16.05.2013 and requested to submit their report in a given timeframe 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Performance under various components of NeGP - SWAN/SDC/CSC/MMP 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee express their deep anguish over the repetitive delay in achievement 
of deadlines  under the core components of NeGP, viz. State Wide Area Network Scheme 
(SWANs), St ate Data Centres (SDCs), Common Service Centres (CSCs) , Mission Mode 
Projects (MMP), etc. So far as the State Wide Area Network (SWAN) Scheme is concerned 
though it was approved in March, 2005, as on date SWAN is operational in only 31 States 
and the new deadline proposed for operationlising the Scheme in all State/UTs is now 
March, 2014. Under State Data Centre (SDC) Scheme which was approved way back in 
January, 2008, as on date only 21 SDCs have been declared operational of which only 19 
SDCs are connected and running whereas 2 are undergoing the Final Acceptance Test (FAT). 
5 SDCs have been declared operational in the year 2012 -2013 and 5 are to be made 
operational during 2013 -14, taking it to 26 SDC till March, 2014. Similarly, under the 
Common Service Centre (CSC) Scheme which was approved in 2006, till February, 2013, 
1,26,346 CSCs have been made operational including 23,828 CSCs like kiosks which have 
been integrated within the CSCs network. Out of 1,26,346 CSCs only 88,666 CSCs are 
reported to be co nnected. The new deadline for the project has been shifted to the year 
2017. The Committee also note that under the Scheme of Bharat Nirman Common Service 
Centres (BNCSCs) in view of the Cabinet Secretariat Circular of 25th July, 2012, the 
Department has t aken a decision to review the proposal and take a view with regard to 
expansion of CSC network.  
 
 The Committee also take note of the reasons for lapse in deadlines under various 
components of NeGP viz. inadequate power and broadband connectivity, slow pa ce of work 
at State/UT level, problem associated with bidding process, RFP, availability of suitable site, 
problem of naxal/law and order, lack of awareness and sensitization about NeGP at 
block/village level, etc. The Committee do not consider the hindran ces cited by the 
Department as insurmountable and strongly recommend that suitable ways and means may 

21 
 
be found to remove the above bottlenecks so that the deadlines for 
establishing/operationalising/roll out of all the various components of NeGP and availa bility 
of services under NeGP are achieved as per target. The Committee also recommend the 
Department to continuously monitor the progress of each Scheme under NeGP so as to 
obviate time and cost overrun in their implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Efforts are being made to complete various procedural formalities expeditiously to 
operationalise SWANs in remaining 3 UTs and one State. 
 
It is informed that as on date, 21 SDCs are Operational, with Final Acceptance Test 
(FAT) completed in 20 States. Only  1 State has FAT pending in its SDC. Actions are being 
taken by DeitY to ensure the FAT completion in the remaining State, during the current 
financial year 2013-2014. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Mobile Governance 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that considering the tremendous potential and 
reach of mobile phones DeitY has taken up an initiative to create a Mobile Service Gateway 
(MSDG) which would be integrated with the State Service Delivery Gateway (SSDGs) and 
the National Service Delivery Gateway (NSDG) and e -Governance infrastructure would be 
utilized for delivery of services. The Committee also note that in the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
the mission envisaged to be achieved through m -Governance, is to make public services 
available to all the residents of India through a mobile platform that is available 24X7 on 
any time any where basis. The target set for the year 2013 -14 is to have 100 addit ional 
Central/State Department using Mobile Service Delivery Gateway (MSDG) with a cost of Rs. 
4.5 crore.  The Committee have been informed that mobile applications are platform -
dependent, and currently the applications have been developed for the Android (which is the 
largest/ largest growing platform) and Java platforms. Java based applications work on 
most of the available mobile platforms. The best part of the Scheme as informed by the 
Department is that no special training is required for citizens to u se the mobile governance 
services. To address the apprehension of the Committee regarding security and other issues 
relating to mobile e -Governance, the Committee observe that DeitY proposes to implement 
the project through C-DAC.  
  
 Considering the fact that mobile penetration has increased and the Department has 
already launched m -Sewa portal and 186 Departments are using MSDG and currently the 
transaction is at the rate of 15 lakh message per day which is targeted to reach 30 lakh 
messages per day by Ma rch 2014, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure 
cost-effectiveness of the technology and make it user friendly. Though the Department has 
informed that no special training is required for citizens to use the mobile governance 
services, yet the C ommittee feel that there is an imperative need to motivate more and 
more number of people to make use of the technology which in turn will facilitate greater 
transparency. The Committee recommend the Department to take necessary steps for 
providing training and popularizing the initiative in a big way through media and other social 
networks. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Considering the fact that mobile penetration has increased and the Department has 
already launched m -Sewa portal and 186 Departments are using MSDG and currently the 
transaction is at the rate of 15 lakh message per day which is targeted to reach 30 lakh 

22 
 
messages per day by March 2014, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure 
cost-effectiveness of the technology and make it user friendly.  Though the Department has 
informed that no special training is required for citizens to use the mobile governance 
services, yet Committee feel that there is an imperative need to motivate more and more 
number of people to make use of the technology which in turn will facilitate greater 
transparency. The Committee recommend the Department to take necessary steps for 
providing training and popularizing the initiative in a big way trough media and other social 
networks. 
Draft response: 
 
1. In order to popularize  the initiative DeitY has written to all the States/UTs many 
times. Also sessions on the project are also being included in the series of NeGP 
State Consultation Workshops on e-Governance currently underway. 
2. Within the project, there are plans to conduct a  series of awareness  and training 
workshops in various parts of country for Govt. Departments. CDAC has gone to 
many States and given trainings to the State department‘s technical teams or 
System Integrators (SI). 
3. The mobile-governance portal (www.mgov.go v.in) has been developed to popularize 
the initiative. Citizens, departments and other stakeholders can learn about the 
projects as well as view live status of the project. Departments can self -register for 
MSDG integration on the portal. 
4. To popularize the  mobile-governance initiative amongst the youth, a contest has 
been opened (till 31 -May-2013) for the best mobile -apps for delivery/access of 
public/government services. 
5. The mobile governance initiative is available on facebook, on of the most popular 
social networks (www.facebook. Com/DIT.MGOV). It has been recently make 
available on twitter as well. 
6. The recommendation of also ―popularizing the initiative in a big way through media‖ 
has been duly noted, and in due course, there may be avenues of popularizi ng the 
initiative through media under awareness and communication initiatives of DeitY in 
respect of the National e-Governance. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 

23 
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 Taking cognizance of the acute shortage of manpower in NIC, the Committee in their 
Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) had recommended the Department 
to take up the issue with concerned Ministries/Departments for getting requisite approvals 
for increasing the manpower of NIC. The Committee note that as a follow -up action the NIC 
is taking necessary action for conversion of temporary 239 posts (by Ministry of Finance) to 
permanent posts fo r eligible officers. NIC has also initiated a professional study on the 
requirement of additional manpower (based on the Committee constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani). The Committee are unhappy to note that even after 
a considerable lapse of time no tangible progress has been made on the issue of increasing 
the manpower of NIC and lack of adequate manpower is affecting the day -to-day 
functioning of the organization. Keeping in view the crucial role of NIC in the 
implementation of var ious National/State level ICT enabled initiatives on behalf of the 
Government, the Committee strongly recommend that all the issues with regard to 
providing additional manpower for NIC should be resolved within a specified time frame.  
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for regularization of 265 posts of Scientific Officer/Engineer -SB created 
for National Data Centre has been approved by Department of Expenditure as per 
instructions issued vide D/o Expenditure O.M. dated 24th March, 1976. As per this O.M,  
90% of temporary posts that the Ministry considers necessary for work of a permanent 
nature, can be converted into permanent ones.  Accordingly, D/o Expenditure has agreed 
for conversion of 90% of these 265 posts, i.e. total of 239, into permanent posts. 
 
Besides this, two other proposals for creating 144 posts and 355 posts for (i) End -to-
End computerization of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) Operations and (ii) 
Enhancing manpower for cyber security respectively are being processed. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  17 of the Chapter I) 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Manpower Development (including  Skill Development in IT and IT for Masses)  
 ,,,, 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee note that DeitY was given a target of skill development of 10 million 
persons by 2022, under the National Policy on skill development. The target set under for 
the year 2012-13 was to train 4.4 lakh person. The Commit tee are unhappy to note that out 
of this assigned target of training 4.4 lakh persons, 3.27 lakh persons have been trained 
through various stakeholders during 2012 -13. The National Institute of Electronics and 
Information Technology (NIELIT), a scientific society under Deity has trained 95,088 persons 
in Basic Computer Course (BCC), a 40 hours IT Literacy programme. Further, 4232 persons 
are undergoing training at Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC) 
Centers. When asked the reasons for the s hortfall the Department has simply stated that 
the final report on skilling data would be ready by mid April, 2013 and the Department is yet 
to receive the target for the year 2013 -14. While expressing their displeasure over the 
shortfall in the target the  Committee recommend the Department to gear up its machinery 
to ensure that the yearly targets under the national policy on skill development are achieved 
fully. A periodical review mechanism should be put in place to ensure that target of skill 
development of 10 million persons is achieved by 2020. 
 
Reply of the Government 

24 
 
Advisor to PM on Skill Development, PM‘s National Council on Skill Development had 
set a target of skilling 4.4 lakh persons during FY 2012 -13 for DeitY.   NIELIT was assigned 
a target o f skilling 4,00,215 persons out of which it has achieved skilling of 3,38,809 
persons.   A target of skilling 15,000 persons was assigned to CDAC, out of which it has 
trained 11,185 persons and 4,232 persons being trained at various CDAC Centres, would 
complete their training in July 2013. A total number of 3.70 lakh persons were trained 
during the FY 2012 -13 by all the stakeholders.   Further, National Institute of Electronics 
and Information Technology (NIELIT) has also trained 1,08,167 persons in Basic C omputer 
Course of 40 hrs duration. 
 
NIELIT has been facing severe competition as a large number of Engineering 
Colleges/ Polytechnics have come up in the past few years in the private sector. It has been 
seen that students prefer to join these University c ourses as they become University 
Degree/Diploma after the course.   In the non -formal sector, recently MHRD has advised 
NIELIT to align its courses with NVEQF Framework. However, the NVEQF Framework is yet 
to be finalised, which creates doubts among the st udents and hence, intake for these 
courses is getting adversely affected. 
 
The Prime Minister‘s National Council on Skill Development has set a target of 
training 5 lakh persons during FY 2013 -14 for the Department.   This target has been 
further assigned to various stakeholders, viz. NEILIT, CDAC and others.  The achievement of 
target is constrained by the availability of funds. 
 
Secretary reviews the achievements made against the target of training 5 lakh 
persons during the F.Y. 2013-14 on a periodic basis. 
 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
 The Committee note that DeitY was not involved in setting up of the Social Media Lab 
set up by Mumbai Polic e recently. The DeitY has come out with a framework and guidelines 
for use of social media by its agencies. Considering all the controversies surrounding usage 
of social media, the Committee recommend the Department to be proactive in such 
initiatives and also have a Cyber Lab and other necessary infrastructure for tackling these 
issues. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Social Media Lab set -up by Mumbai Police enables the Police to scan the happenings 
on the Social Networking sites such as facebook, twitter, You Tu be, etc. and be able to take 
advance pre-emptive actions as necessary.  In support of Law Enforcement related actions, 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology has taken several proactive 
initiatives such as setting -up of Cyber forensics traini ng labs, training of Law Enforcement 
agencies and judiciary in the area of Cyber crime, Cyber Security and Forensics.  In 
addition, the Department has also brought out cyber investigation manuals with procedures 
for search, seizure analysis and presentatio n of digital evidence in courts.  These manuals 
have been circulated to Law Enforcement Agencies in all the states. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 
E-INDUSTRY (ELECTRONIC HARDWARE) 
Promotion of electronic /IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 

25 
 
 The Committee note that out of reported global electronics hardware production of 
USD 1750 billion Indian electronics hardware production is only 1.3 per cent. It is  estimated 
that demand of electronics products and systems in India would grow to USD 400 billion by 
2020 at Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 22 per cent, however, the demand of 
about USD 100 billion would be possible to be met by 2020. Recognizing th at sustained 
growth in IT/Telecom sector is hugely dependant on the indigenous electronic hardware 
manufacturing and the challenge posed by the growing security concerns, the Committee 
have been recommending the Department to attach priority to this sector  since beginning of 
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that, inspite of their observation made in Fifty -
eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) that IT/Software 
production has been increasing and the electronic hardware sect or is lagging, it is only after 
a lapse of 5 years the Department has now accepted that for a decade they had been 
focusing on the software side and hardware/electronic side was not being given any 
prominence. 
 
  The Committee also note that to promote ele ctronics/IT hardware sector in the 
Country, the Department has not only renamed the Department of Information Technology 
as the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) but has also coined 
the slogan ‗Electronic India -  Billion Needs, Million Chips‘. The Committee also note from 
the Department‘s submission  that substantial increase in Twelfth Plan outlay is to give fillip 
to the electronic sector. 
 
 The Committee, however, note with concern that even after realizing the significance 
of this sector nothing concrete has been done to implement the initiatives for attracting 
industrial houses in the country and have indigenous manufacturing of electronic hardware. 
The Committee note that the Department‘s approach to boosting this sector has  been only 
in piecemeal. Though a Task Force has been formed which has given 198 recommendations 
the Department is acting only on 6 key issues that too the action in these areas are not 
complete. Similarly, under SIP Scheme announced in 2007, even though 2 6 applications 
have been received, only 4 are being considered by the Appraisal Committee. The 
Committee strongly condemn the extremely slow pace of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Task force and poor performance under SIP Scheme. The 
Committee expect the Department to clear the pendency of all the approvals on a priority 
basis so that the country becomes secured  and self reliant in the field of electronic 
hardware and immense potential of intellectuals and workforce in this sector is positive ly 
channelized and utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Apart from the action being taken on the six key issues, the National Policy on 
Electronics (NPE) 2012 was approved on October 25, 2012 by the Union Cabinet.  The vision 
of the policy is to create a gl obally competitive electronics design and manufacturing 
industry to meet the country's needs and serve the international market.  The policy has 
taken into consideration the various recommendations of the Task Force.  The policy is 
expected to create an in digenous manufacturing eco -system for electronics in the country. 
It will enable India to tap the great economic potential that this knowledge sector offers. 
Several schemes such as Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC), Modified Special 
Incentive Packa ge Scheme (M -SIPS) and policy for providing preference to domestically 
manufactured electronic products, in procurement of those electronic products which have 
security implications for the country and in Government procurement have been notified. In 
order to curb inflow of sub -standard and unsafe electronic products by mandating technical 
and safety standards which conform to international standards, DeitY has also notified the 
―‖Electronic and Information Technology Goods (Requirement for Compulsory Regis tration) 
Order, 2012‖ on the 3 rd  October 2012 mandating compulsory Registration of 15 electronics 
items with the Bureau of Indian Standards based on their compliance to Indian safety 
Standards under the Compulsory Registration Scheme of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs.  The order has come into effect from 3 rd July 2013.  The Policy provides a clear road 

26 
 
map for the development of electronics sector in the country for the coming decade.  The 
NPE also proposes to facilitate setting up of semiconductor waf er fab facilities and to create 
and sustain a vibrant research and development and innovation eco -system in the ESDM 
sector. Another important objective of the policy is to significantly upscale high -end human 
resource creation to 2500 PhDs annually by 2020 in the sector.  
 
The Policy also envisages various initiatives such as aggressively marketing India as 
an investment destination; facilitation of FDI in the ESDM sector; promotion of exports; 
promotion of manufacturing capacities for sourcing ESDM in str ategic and core 
infrastructure sectors; etc.  
  
The Modified Special Incentive Scheme has already been notified on 27th July, 2012  
and published in the official Gazette of India. As per para 6.1 of the notification, an 
appraisal Committee has been constit uted vide order dated 30 -10-2012. As per para 6.2 of 
the notification,  the guidelines for operationalising the scheme have been announced on 
07-11-2012 after consultation with Ministry of Finance, Department of Commerce and 
Department of Industrial Policy  and Promotion.   As per para 5.1 of the MSIPS guidelines, 
Nodal officer   has been appointed  vide order dated 27 -11-2012. As per para 3.10 and 4.7 
of the MSIPS guidelines, the application fee has been notified vide order dated 31.12.2012.  
An EOI has bee n floated for engagement of an agency to act as Programme Management 
Unit (PMU) for appraisal of applications. As per para 8.1 of the MSIPS guidelines, three 
Technical Evaluation Committees(TECs) for different electronic verticals have been 
constituted  vide orders dated 25.03.2013, 26.04.2013  and 24.05.2013. As per para 6.6 of 
the MSIPS guidelines, Industry Advisory Committee for advising the Department on issues 
related to MSIPS verticals has been constituted vide order dated 11 -03-2013.  The 
awareness advertisement for attracting applications was published on 20 -03-2013, 08-06-
2013 and 09 -06-2013 in leading Newspapers.  The online portal for online submission of 
MSIPS applications is being developed by C -DAC.  The first phase of the development is 
completed.  The second phase of online scrutiny of MSIPS applications is under 
development.  The investment proposals worth around Rs. 3800 crore are under evaluation 
and the proposals worth Rs. 817 crore have already been recommended by Appraisal 
Committee. 
 
The Electronics Manufacturing Cluster Scheme (EMC) was notified  on 22nd October 
2012.  Under the EMC Scheme, the guidelines for identification and notification of  
Brownfield clusters  were issued on 14th January 2013.   The guidelines for operationlization  
of  the scheme were notified on 15.4.13.    Application fee for the EMC has been notified on 
7th May 2013. The notifications for identification of 18 Brownfield Clusters have been issued 
by June  2013. The guidelines for formation of Special Purpose Vehic le (SPV) have been sent 
to Department of Economic Affairs for seeking concurrence.  The seven preliminary 
applications with approximate investment of Rs. 2100 crore for setting up of Greenfield 
clusters are undergoing appraisal process in the Department. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  23 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Development Programme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
 The Committee note that Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Programme aims at 
developing core R&D capabilities, expanding the base of Nanoelectronics and develop overall 
semiconductor industry in the country. It is disquieting to note tha t for last 2 years the 
Department is falling short of its target in utilizing the fund under this Scheme which is at a 
very nascent stage in India. The Committee are extremely concerned at the Department‘s 

27 
 
submission that there is very limited capacity in the organizations to take up R&D in these 
areas and the Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY) has been trying 
to create R&D capacity at various organizations through programmes like Special Manpower 
Development Program (SMDP) and India n Nano -Electronics Users Program (INUP).  With 
the increase in the availability of researchers and specialists in this field, the critical mass 
for taking up major projects in this area will be created. The Committee strongly 
recommend the Department to ma ke sincere efforts for creating R&D capacity under this 
Scheme and take measures to attract not only the researchers and specialists but also the 
industrialists in this field. The Committee may be apprised about the details of the initiatives 
in this direction along with its outcome during 2013-14 accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Microelectronics Programme 
 
1. Reasons for shortfall : 
Basic reasons for savings were that most releases could not be made due to pending UCs 
with the institutions (and also the restriction of expenditure to 15% during March) due to 
which there was underutilization of funds.  Detailed reasons are as follows:- 
 
The Budget Estimates in the case of Microelectronics included a large developmental 
project which was later decided to car ry out in phases with study project. Thus there 
was a major saving in the year 2012 -13. Releases for on going projects and new 
projects were estimated assuming that the UCs pending with the institutions would 
be cleared. Out of the expected releases only f ew releases for the ongoing projects 
and new projects were made due to UCs pending with respective institutions. 
 
In view of above, funds could not be released in the ongoing projects as well as in 
the new proposals and thus, the allocated fund utilization  was lower than the 
allocation in the area of Microelectronics and Nanotechnology Development.   
 
 
2. Detailed Initiatives  and Outcomes 
The Department is making sincere efforts for creating R&D capacity under the 
Microelectronics Development Program and taki ng measures to attract not only the 
researchers and specialists but also the industry/ industry experts in this field.   
 
In the 12th Plan, the focus will be on innovations, technology/ product development and 
technology transfer.  Efforts would be made no t only to translate R&D efforts/technology 
development into product development and commercialization.,but also involve industry / 
end users in the R&D initiatives under this programme. The industry /end users are being 
approached for their interest and co mmitment for usage of the technology being developed 
under the projects.   
 
(i) During the 12th Five Year Plan under the Microelectronics Development Programme, 
it is proposed to broaden the microelectronics base in the country through setting up 
Centres f or Excellence, promoting technology development, capacity building 
through R&D sponsored projects, protection of Intellectual Property of semiconductor 
integrated circuits etc.   
 
(ii) During the year 2013 -14, it is proposed to initiate a mega project enti tled ―Chip to 
System Development‘ involving more than 50 institutions across the country 
including all IITs, all NITs, IIITs, IISc -Bangalore etc.  and institutions like CEERI, 
Pilani, CDAC etc who have developed expertise in design of integrated circuits.  This 
project will focus on the following : 
 
a. Development of manpower i.e. PhDs, M.Tech in VLSI, M.Tech in 
Electronics/Communication  
b. Design of working system prototypes using ICs developed under the project 
as well as design and development of custom ICs.   

28 
 
 
Thus, efforts would be made to bring about a culture of system designing in the 
academic institutions across the country.  Industries / users would be closely 
involved in this project for design of chip to systems.  Also representatives from the 
industries would be included in the committees to capture their perspective of 
manpower and system requirements.   
 
(iii) The centres setup in the area of Analog and Mixed Signal Design at IISc Bangalore, 
IIT Madras, CEERI Pilani, IIT Bombay etc. would result in design of Integrated 
circuits as well as development of expertise in Analog and mixed signal area. This 
would also lead to filing of international and Indian patents. This work would be 
taken up further this year.    
 
(iv) A study entitled ―Technical Evalu ation and Preparation of a Proposal for Design of an 
India Microprocessor‖ is being carried out and will be completed this year. The   
study would cover the following aspects: 
 
a) Technical evaluation of various processor architecture implementations, 
processors and peripheral IPs available in the institutions identified in the 
country- ANURAG (DRDO), BARC, ISRO etc as well as technical evaluation of 
processor architects implementations available today globally. 
b) Interaction with prospective users for better un derstanding of various 
applications areas intended. 
c) Preparation of a detailed proposal for setting up a resource centre for design 
and development of processors and IP cores.  
d) Preparation of detailed proposal for the design, implementation of an India 
Microprocessor with full ecosystem for application porting. 
   
The review team for the study consists of experts from the area from Strategic 
sector, industry/industry consortia, R&D institutions and academia. Further actions 
for the design and development of a microprocessor would be initiated by DeitY 
based on the recommendations in the report submitted. 
 
(v) It is also proposed to develop the R&D capacity in the country by way of supporting 
R&D projects in the frontier areas of microelectronics including Ana log mixed signal 
technologies, Microelectronics devices (ICs and Discrete) - development, 
characterization and modeling, VLSI Design and Microstructures -Micro-Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), micro sensors and detectors. While evolving new 
projects in the se areas, industry / R&D organizations participation as end users will 
be encouraged. 
 
Working Group on Microelectronics has been constituted with Shri K. Santeppa, Associate 
Director, ANURAG, DRDO as Chairman, Working Group and microelectronics experts fr om 
academia, R&D organizations and industries/industry consortia [including IITs, IISc, BARC, 
India Electronics and Semiconductor Association(IESA), Sasken Communication 
Technologies Ltd. etc.]  as members of the Working Group. 
 
Nanotechnology Programme 
 
3. Reasons for shortfall : 
This year as per instructions of Ministry of Finance, releases could not be made till all UCs in 
respect of all agencies for all projects granted by DeitY were liquidated.  Liquidation of all 
pending UCs took lot of effort and time and caused a delay in the releases.  Then during last 
quarter due to restriction on amount of release of funds, only limited funds could be 
released.  
 
In view of above, funds could not be released either in on going projects or in the new 
proposals approved by the Department and there was underutilization of funds in the area 
of Nanotechnology Development.   

29 
 
 
4. Detailed Initiatives  and Outcomes 
 
The Department is making sincere efforts for creating R&D capacity under Nanotechnology 
Initiatives program and ta king measures to attract not only the researchers and specialists 
but also the industrialists in this field. 
   
(i) The Nanotechnology program aims at R&D in Nanoelectronics and creating 
infrastructure, central facilities, prototyping facilities and incubation  centres. These 
Central facilities are set up at academic organizations and will be used by 
researchers and industry across the country.  
 
(ii) Project ―Nano-Fabrication Prototyping Facility for SME and Start ups‖ with an outlay 
of Rs.24.86 crores has been initiated at IIT Bombay 
 
This project has been initiated to encourage and support start -up companies and 
SMEs for product development and commercialization. The project is being 
implemented along with IIT Bombay‘s business technology incubator – SINE (Society 
for Innovation and Entrepreneurship). This project will fill the gap between research 
results and commercial fabrication. Under CEN (Centre for Excellence in 
Nanoelectroncis) project, various industry leaders such as TCS, Applied Materials and 
Intel collab orated with CEN and a major research output as a result of these 
activities over the last 6 years has been the development of Micro and Nano Electro -
mechanical devices; the designs of which have now matured to a stage where they 
can be taken to the level of commercial fabrication and be utilized in products. 
  
             The objectives of the project are: 
 
i.  To set up a Centre for Prototyping and Testing of Nano -Sensor and to 
provide Incubator Companies and Industry participants a facility to 
fabricate and  manufacture Nano-Scale devices to take products from 
research labs to the market 
ii. To provide facilities for scaling up of nano manufacturing operations in 
contamination and quality controlled environments. 
iii. To encourage incubator companies to start operati on in 
nanotechnology by providing them means for sustained and industry 
standard manufacturing facilities. 
 
(iii) Project ―Centre for Excellence for development of Micro and Nano Theranostic 
devices‖  by IIT Guwahati   
 
The project is being evolved with a budget  outlay of Rs.58 crores and is likely to be 
initiated in year 2013-14. Major long term objectives of this project are :   
 
i. Develop the state -of-art fabrication and characterization facilities at the Centre 
for Nanotechnology, IIT Guwahati, which will be th e first of its kind in the NE 
region. 
ii. Combine the existing expertise from physical, chemical, biological, and 
engineering sciences in order to design and develop futuristic micro/nano 
devices.  
iii. Involve the academia and industry in NE and other parts of the country to exploit 
these facilities for the development of futuristic devices.  
 
A successful implementation of the objectives will contribute towards improving the 
quality of local scientific and technological assets by developing cutting edge 
indigenous devices and trained manpower in NE India. The facility will be available 
for researchers across NE India.  
  
iv)  The project ―CEN Phase II‖ at IISc Bangalore and IIT Bombay‖   

30 
 
The project CEN (Centre of Excellence in Nanoelectroncis) Phase II  has been 
initiated with an outlay of Rs.147 crores after successful completion of Phase I. The 
project has the focus on Technology Development and is progressing well.   
 
v)    Indian Nanoelectronics Users Programme (INUP)    
Project ―Indian Nanoelectronics Users Pr ogramme (INUP)‖ was initiated at IIT 
Bombay and IISc Bangalore to facilitate and support generation of expertise and 
knowledge in nanoelectronics through participation and utilization by external users 
of the facilities established at the Nanoelectronics C entres at IISc Bangalore and IIT -
Bombay.  Various industry leaders such as TCS, Applied Materials and Intel have 
collaborated with CEN.  INUP Phase I, implemented with an outlay of Rs.29.39 crores 
has been highly successful.  More than 110 R&D projects fro m over 100 
organizations across the country have been taken up so far under INUP.  Around 
1150 researchers from 350 organizations across India have been trained through 
INUP.   
 
Based on the success of Phase I, INUP Phase II is being formulated and is expe cted 
to be initiated in FY 2013 -14.  It is planned to continue the INUP activities, to build 
on the success of the INUP to date, and to utilize the experience gained to date 
through a new project (INUP Phase II)  with following objectives :- 
 
i. To enable and  support the generation of expertise and knowledge in 
Nanoelectronics through participation by external users in INUP, who will 
exploit the comprehensive and state -of-the-art facilities established at the 
Centres of Excellence in Nanoelectronics (CEN) at IISc and IITB.  
ii. The reach of INUP will be extended to a much larger number of researchers   
through a variety of new and expanded initiatives. 
 
The centres being established at IIT Delhi and IIT Madras are also expected to 
launch their INUP like programs to  support R&D capacity creation at various 
organizations in their regions. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
OTHER INITIATIVES IN IT SECTOR 
National Cloud Computing 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
 
 During the examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13), the Department had 
apprised the Committee about their plans for ‗Cloud Computing‘. The Committee while 
noting that the Department had not assessed the suitability/technological and legal 
apprehensions associated with the concept of ‗shared platform‘ had recommended to 
address all the apprehensions viz. technology obsolescence; security issues; vendor lock -in; 
contract and SLA management; retention and recovery of data in case of disaster, data 
security; exit options available to the organization; data retention or transfer by the 
provider, intellectual property issues, etc. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department had 
submitted that they have taken note of the apprehension. In Final Action Taken Statement, 
the Department had stated that their SDC team has conducted Proof of Concept (PoC) in 4 
states to understand efficacy of cloud computing. The Committee observe that even without 
addressing the above apprehension, the Departmen t has taken an initiative called ‗National 
Cloud Computing‘ with an initial approved cost of Rs. 99 crore for the first phase of project. 
While expressing apprehensions about the Department‘s due -diligence on the concept and 
that it is not fully equipped t o tackle all the technological and legal apprehensions, the 

31 
 
Committee strongly recommend the Department to prepare themselves for all the 
challenges/threats associated with cloud computing viz. damage caused to the cloud centre 
by natural calamity; cyber t hreat; etc. The Committee may be kept apprised about the 
development and the Department‘s preparedness regarding ‗Cloud Computing‘. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is informed that in order to understand the issues and challenges, a Task Force 
was set up by D eitY, consisting of members from NIC, DeitY, NASSCOM, Academia, and 
Industry representatives. After a series of meetings of the Task Force and industry 
consultations, two reports, namely ―GI -Cloud Strategic Direction Paper‖ and ―GI -Cloud 
Adoption and Imple mentation Roadmap‖ have been drafted, and are under approval at 
DeitY.  
 
It is submitted that the National Cloud Computing proposal at a total approved 
outlay of Rs 99 Crores is aimed at setting up of a ―National Cloud‖ at Shastri Park Data 
Centre, operate d and managed by NIC, to deliver IaaS, PaaS and SaaS to Government 
ministries / departments at the central and State level. This National Cloud is a part of the 
GI-Cloud initiative. 
 
The two policy reports have been made public, after approval by the compe tent 
authority. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
Indigenous Tablets/PC 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
 
 The Committee note that considering the huge demand for tablets in the c ountry the 
Department has plans to promote indigenous domestic production. During the examination 
of Demands for Grants (2012 -13), the Committee had recommended the Department to 
accelerate R&D so as to have cost effective indigenous tablets/PCs. With rega rd to progress 
made in the direction of indigenous production of tablets the Department had even informed 
that a Committee regarding continuous R&D and timely delivery of a low cost access device 
‗Aakash‘ has been constituted vide Department of Electronics  and Information Technology 
order dated 22nd December, 2011 which has already held 5 meetings. In this regard, when 
the Committee desired to know further progress in the matter, to the utter surprise of the 
Committee, the Department has simply furnished a vague reply stating that the matter of 
procurement of Aakash tablets comes under the purview of the Department of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD). The Committee fail to 
understand as to why the Ministry was taking initiative  till 2012-13 when the matter comes 
under the purview of the Department of Higher Education. It is also beyond the 
comprehension of this Committee as to why the Department has detached and distanced 
itself from the issue now. In view of huge demand for tab lets and security issues related to 
imported electronic/IT components, the Committee recommend the Department instead of 
evading their responsibility particularly on R&D aspect should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and contribut e in R&D activities so as to make the cost 
effective indigenous tablets within a fixed timeframe. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised about the reasons for promoting the tablet from Pantel company keeping in view of 
the fact that an indigenous tablet ‗Akash‘ is already being developed. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Aakash is a series of Android-based tablet computers  produced by an initiative of 
Ministry of Human Resource Development , G overnment of India. It is a low -cost tablet 
computer with a 7 -inch touch screen. In this series, the new version of Aakash has been 
named as Aakash IV. The Committee regarding contin uous R&D and timely delivery of 
―Aakash‖ was constituted by DeitY vide Order No.8(195)/2011 -IPHW dated 22nd December, 
2011. A Sub -Committee comprising technical experts has prepared the vendor neutral 
Technical Specifications of Aakash IV. These specificat ions have been developed with a view 

32 
 
to have a low cost device and have been put up for stakeholder consultation, before 
finalization.  
C-DAC, in consultation with IIT, Bombay is in the process of creating a scheme for 
licensing of Aakash Tablets to those manufactures that conform to the minimum 
specifications notified. Manufactures so licensed would be allowed to sell the Tablets in the 
market under the brand name of Aakash.  
 
The Government has notified the policy for providing preference to domestically 
manufactured electronic products in procurement due to security considerations and in 
Government procurement vide Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
(DeitY) Notification No.8(78)/2010-IPHW dated 10.2.2012. In furtherance of the said Polic y, 
DeitY has issued Notification No.8(41)/2012 -IPHW dated 22.1.2013 for providing preference 
to domestically manufactured Tablet Personal Computers (PCs) in Government 
procurement. The Notification prescribes 50% preference (in value terms) to domestically  
manufactured Tablet PCs in Government procurement, subject to the condition that the 
Tablet PCs meet specified domestic value addition in terms of Bill of Material. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II)  dated 
24th July, 2013] 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Overall Analysis of DeitY Budget (Twelfth Plan and Financial Year 2013-14) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that during Eleventh Plan (2007 -12) against th e proposed 
outlay of Rs. 21,835.89 crore, the Department was allocated a sum of Rs. 11,370 crore 
whereas the actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 9,481.04 crore (i.e. 83.38 per cent of 
the fund allocated). The Committee are astonished to see that for the whole of Twelfth Five 
year Plan the Department had proposed an Outlay to the tune of Rs. 81,378.45 crore which 
is almost ten times more than the sum utilized during Eleventh Plan. However, the approved 
GBS for this period is Rs. 36,078.00 crore. For th e first year of Twelfth Plan (i.e. 2012 -13) 
the Department had proposed a demand of Rs. 10,491.33 crore against which Rs. 3,000 
crore was approved at BE stage and Rs. 2,000 crore was allocated at RE stage. The 
Committee note with great concern that the Dep artment could utilize only 61.77 per cent of 
the BE allocation and 17.66 per cent of the outlay proposed by the Department. The 
Committee further note that for the second year of the Plan (2013 -14), the Department has 
sought an allocation of Rs. 6,927.84 c rore against which Rs. 3,000 crore has been allocated 
by the Planning Commission. The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that the projections 
made by the Department are far from realistic and the Department‘s programmes lacked 
credibility or not found fe asible otherwise why the Planning Commission would curtail the 
Department‘s projections drastically. The Committee also note that the Department is 
caught in a vicious circle of poor implementation of the schemes – non-utilization of fund – 
non submission of UCs—lesser allocation of fund.  
 
 While acknowledging that there is substantial enhancement in the Twelfth Plan 
outlay, the Secretary during the course of evidence stated that this is to give a fillip to the 
electronic manufacturing sector and manpower development in IT sector. The Committee‘s 
analysis of Department‘s budget shows that indeed these two important sectors are lagging 
behind in their scheduled targets. The Department has, however, assured that this year the 
Schemes will see a breakthrough a nd with that they would ensure effective utilization and 
might even need more funds.  
 
On the initiatives/measures for better implementation of various 
schemes/programmes, the Department has assured the Committee that it would review all 
the Schemes/Programmes keeping in view the priorities and objectives which will be defined 
in the coming years of the Twelfth Plan with a view for optimal and judicious utilization of 
funds. Considering the vision of the Government for e -Development of the country and the 
fact that IT is touching all spheres of life rapidly, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that the Department has to rise to the occasion and meet the growing needs of IT 
Sector. While deploring the way the schemes under DeitY have been lagging behi nd their 
targets and the way considerable mismatch between budgetary allocation and actual 
utilization has become a common feature in the budgetary exercise of the Department, the 
Committee exhort the Department to take necessary steps for more near realis tic 
projections. The Committee desire that the Department should also monitor implementation 
of its schemes/programmes efficiently so as to meet both the physical and financial targets. 
The Department should take the desired action on the suggested lines a nd inform the 
Committee accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 

35 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Department‘s proposal to 
Planning Commission during Twelfth Five Year Plan was based on the recommendations 
made by the Working Group on In formation Technology for the Twelfth Plan constituted by 
the Planning Commission. The approvals for the Policies took time. As the Policy framework 
is in place, department is now focussing on actual implementation.  The Department is in 
the process of subm itting the new EFC/SFC proposal for the 12th Plan to the Planning 
Commission for its approval to give a fillip to the electronic manufacturing sector, 
manpower development in IT and also other schemes. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  8 of the Chapter I) 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee, further, find it disquieting that though the Department had set a 
target of 1000 l ocations by March 2013 to implement the proposal of establishing solar 
power in North Eastern States and hilly States (with a total cost of Rs. 320 crore) so far 
they have received agreement from only 3 States viz. Tripura, Manipur and Assam. While 
expressing their unhappiness over such a dismal situation related to a major initiative, the 
Committee recommend the Department to act immediately to address all the issues related 
to power shortage and impediments coming in the way in implementing the proposal o f 
establishing solar power in coordination with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE). The Committee also endorse the Department‘s suggestion for use of laptops by 
CSCs operators as it can provide power backup for 6 to 8 hours after power breakdown. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to resolve the connectivity issue on priority by 
coordinating with BSNL/DoT. Action may be taken on each of above observation and 
Committee apprised accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The department is focusi ng on the issue of the connectivity for SWAN and CSC 
scheme and regular meetings of the BSNL Working group are being held to address the 
connectivity related issues. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 the Chapter I) 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013-Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
National Knowledge Network 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that inspite of full utilization of allocated funds under National 
Knowledge Network Sche me, there has been gross mismatch between the proposed and 
allocated GBS for this scheme since inception. The Committee note that their earlier 
recommendation made in Thirty -fourth Report with regard to certainty of allocations at BE 
stage itself and endin g ad-hocism in allocation has not yielded any result. The Committee 
are perturbed to note that due to inadequate funds, out of targeted 600 additional 
institutions, connectivity could be provided to only 307 institutions as on 31st March, 2013. 
The Committee are also unhappy to note that though the Department had projected 1500 
institutions to be connected under NKN yet  upto March, 2013 only 988 institutions are 
connected and of these only 287 are in Tier III and IV cities. Apart from inadequacy of fund, 
the implementation of scheme is also suffering because some of the educational institutions 

36 
 
do not have internal networks (LAN‘s) to operationalise NKN connectivity. In addition to 
these existing hindrances, the Committee are concerned to note that during 2 012-13 the 
Department could not utilize the fund under the Scheme because of the restriction imposed 
by the Ministry of Finance‘s Circular dated 14th November, 2012. 
 
 The Committee take serious note of the response of the Ministry of Finance regarding 
supplementary Grants wherein they have stated that it would not be possible to give such a 
huge additionality during middle of the Financial Year and DeitY may identify likely savings 
within the grant for giving additional funds to NKN. In their earlier repor ts, the Committee 
have been disapproving the ad -hocism of the Government in allocating fund to such an 
important programme and consistently been recommending for adequate allocations at the 
BE stage itself. In view of lesser allocation of funds under the S cheme, the Committee feel 
that the Department has not been able to convince and put forward their case before the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance backed by perfect plans and pleas for 
allocation of funds at BE stage only.  The Committee onc e again like the Department to 
impress upon the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance the need for more 
allocation of funds under this flagship scheme. The concern of the Committee should also be 
placed before the Ministry of Finance/Planning Com mission regarding adequate and timely 
allocation of funds for the Scheme. The Committee also recommend the Department to fix 
specific percentage of the number of connectivity to institutions in tier III and IV cities in 
rural and backward areas where the s haring of knowledge resources is more required. The 
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this regard. 
 
<,,,,,, 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to Government of India and 
Shri Kapil Sibal, Minist er of Communications and IT have addressed letters (dated 
10th April 2013 and 18th April 2013 respectively) to Shri P. Chidambaram, Finance 
Minister with the request to make available funds to the tune of Rs. 1240 cr in the FY 
2013-14 for NKN. PSA in his l etter has also requested the Finance Minister to 
consider special dispensation for NKN (which is multi -department and multi -
institution project) to ensure timely availability of funds for smooth implementation 
of NKN. DeitY has been following up the matter with Ministry of Finance.  
(ii) Following discussion at the 13th meeting of High Level Committee (HLC) to establish 
NKN held on 19.11.2012, the following may kindly be noted, which was in response 
to the query ―whether the NKN institutes are distributed across  all districts as per the 
mandate of inclusiveness in the 12th plan‖:  
―…  
Out of 640 districts about 550 districts level NKN PoP would be setup.... NKN 
would reach all districts once there are such institutions demanding NKN 
connectivity 
…‖ 
(iii) Creation of LAN at institution level has not been envisaged under the NKN. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  20 of the Chapter I) 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
Media Lab Asia (MLA) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note that the scheme of Media Lab Asia aims to bring benefits of the 
Information and Communication Technologies and other advanced technologies to the 
common man. It is operating through collaborations with other organizations and experts 
(Government, NGO sector, academia, individuals and industry) for development and 

37 
 
deployment of ICT tools. Media Lab Asia is working presently in the areas of ICT for 
empowerment of the differently abled, healthcare, liv elihood enhancement and education 
and has taken up the Project ITRA. NeGD has also been created as an autonomous business 
division within Media Lab Asia. The Committee also note that Media Lab Asia is also focusing 
on facilitating and supporting the proces s of taking technologies from ‗Lab to Land‘. The 
Committee find that the persistent problem of under utilisation of funds as noticed in other 
schemes of DeitY has also been noticed under this Scheme. What surprises the Committee 
is that when the Committee queried about the damage caused to the project due to under 
utilization, the Department stated that only some of the identified projects/activities could 
be taken up during 2012 -13 under the core activities of Media Lab Asia.  Other identified 
projects would be taken up in the Financial Year 2013 -14.  Other than some time delay, 
there is no other major loss in the project. In view of the fact that this Scheme has already 
suffered delays in implementation during Eleventh Plan (as observed in Fifty -eighth Report 
of the Committee during Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee are amused at the 
Department‘s submission that other than time delay, there is no other major loss. The 
Committee are of strong view that IT sector is an evolving and ever changing sector and  
loss of time in this sector is huge loss. While deploring the Department‘s callous attitude 
towards loss of time, the Committee recommend the Department to identify the constraints 
and address the issues under scheme so that the motto of the Scheme to tak e the 
technologies from ‗Lab to Land‘ is achieved in letter and spirit.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  26 of the Chapter I) 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013-Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
27th December, 2011 and was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Information Technology on 5th January 2012.  The Committee presented its Report to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012. The Committee note that following 
Cabinet‘s approval on 18th March 2013 to the Department‘s proposal on withdrawal of the 
Electronic Delivery of Services Bill 2011 and introduction of a fresh Bill titled ‗The Electronic 
Delivery of Services Bill, 2012‘ with modifications proposed on the basis of the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Information Technology, the Department is 
working in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministr y of Parliamentary 
Affairs on the follow-up action. The Committee have been informed that the Department has 
suitably addressed to the concerns of the Committee as outlined in their Thirty -seventh 
Report. The revised EDS Bill has received the approval of t he Union Cabinet in March, 2013. 
On the issue of Model State Electronic Service (ESD) Rules, formulated and circulated by 
DeitY for adoption by various states under the IT Act, 2000, the Committee find that two 
States viz. Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir hav e notified their respective rules. The 
Committee would keenly await the introduction of revised Bill to ensure that their concerns 
have been met. The Committee would like the Department to expedite the process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Union Cabinet h as, in its meeting held on 18th March 2013 approved DeitY‘s 
proposal for introducing ― The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2012‖ in the Parliament 
with such changes of drafting and consequential nature as may be deemed necessary by 
Legislative Department. 
 
Following Cabinet‘s approval, consultative process is currently on the give effect to 
Legislative Department‘s suggestions, with a view to ensure an early introduction of the 
proposed Bill in the Parliament. 
 
As regards Model State Electronic Servic e Rules formulated and circulated by DeitY 
for adoption by various States/UTs, the Committee would be pleased to note that in addition 
to the two States of Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir, two more States viz. National Capital 
Territory of Delhi and Maharashtra have also since adopted and notified these Rules. 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
E-SECURITY 
Cyber Security (Including CERT-In IT Act) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
 The Committee find that for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, as against the demand of  
Rs. 1500 crore the Department has been allocated only Rs. 500 crore under this Scheme. 
The Committee are highly unhappy to note that the increased demand for 2013 -14 
proposed by the Department for taking new initiatives in the field of cyber security, have 
not been considered by the Planning Commission. In view of the fact that in last 5 years, as 
many as 1273 Government websites have been hacked and financial fraud/cyber crime ha ve 

39 
 
increased tremendously, the Committee  endorse the  Department‘s submission that the 
restrictions in allocation would delay in taking new initiatives to keep a check on cyber 
crime/frauds. The Committee strongly feel that the funds allocated under cyber  security 
including CERT -In IT Act should be increased. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should ensure to fully utilize the funds so that Department‘s initiative to tackle 
myriad issues related to cyber security do not suffer. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet Committee on Security considered the cabinet note on Cyber Security 
architecture submitted by the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) and has 
approved the same.  The Cyber Security architecture includes Key Cyber Security Projects 
of National significance. Actions have been initiated for seeking necessary approval of the 
Key Cyber Security Initiatives and allocation of required funds for implementation.  
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/20 13-Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that the year 2012 -13 witnessed few controversies related to 
Section 66A and Section 79 of the IT Act, 2008 and the Department has issued an advisory 
in this regar d so that Government‘s stand becomes clear on the issue.  The Committee do 
not agree with the contention of the Department that the 4 cases under Section 66A and 2 
cases under Section 79 of the IT Act during 2012 -13 are mere aberrations and that it would 
not be advisable to amend the law based on these 4 cases where appropriate action has 
been taken to address the issues. The Committee strongly feel that these cases should be 
taken as precedents which might be repeated in future to harass the innocent citiz en and 
infringe upon the Right of Freedom of speech of public. Acknowledging that the Department 
has already followed the International Best practices while framing the provisions of the Act 
and appreciating the Department‘s efforts in this regard, the Com mittee are of the view that 
any Act/Legislation has to take into account the ground situation in course of time and 
adapt to the emerging challenges. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department to 
take necessary corrective steps for revision of the clauses of the Act. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As stated by the Hon‘ble Minister of Communication and IT in the Rajya Sabha on 1st 
March, 2013, issue with regard to section 66A of the Information Technology Act 2000 is 
before the Hon‘ble Supreme Court.  Hon ‘ble Supreme Court on 16.5.2013, in an interim 
order, has taken note of the Advisory issued by the Government and has asked the State/ 
Union Territories to follow the Advisory.  Final decision from the Hon‘ble Supreme Court in 
this regard is still awaited.   Subsequently, if need arises, Government may hold a round 
table to discuss the related issues. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 

40 
 
Indigenous Manufacturing of Set Top Boxes 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
 In the context of switchover over to Digital Addressable System (DAS) regime and 
the status of R&D in basic electronic component of Set Top Boxes, the Committee note that 
as per CEAMA during 2011 -12 domestic production of STB s was 1.7 million and is expected 
to grow to the level of 5.1 million in 2012 -13. The Committee also note that to promote 
manufacturing of Set Top Boxes, the Department is taking some initiatives which inter -alia 
include discussion with some of the major i mporters of STBs to transfer their manufacturing 
from China to India; floating tender to develop Conditional Access System and planning to 
enforce standards for electronic products under BIS. The Department in this regard had also 
informed the Committee du ring examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13) that the 
prototype of card for the STB would be developed by C -DAC in 6 months. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note that now the Department would require at least 12 
months more for indigenous production of CAS. 
 
 In view of the fast development in digitization process and consequent rapid demand 
of Set Top Boxes alongwith the security concerns associated with the imported Set Top 
Boxes, the Committee impress upon the Department for speeding up the R &D so as to start 
indigenous production of CAS within 12 months as assured by the Department. The 
Committee also recommend for strict compliance with Gazette Notification No. 8(78)/2010 -I 
PHW dated 10th February, 2012 so as to address to security issues as sociated with the 
import of electronic/IT/Telecom products.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) released an 
Expression of Interest (EOI) for Development of Indian Conditional Access System (CAS). 
The last date of submission of response to EOI was April 2, 2013. Based on the responses 
received, bidders have been shortlisted for issuing Request for Proposal (RFP). The draft 
RFP containing the technical specifications for development of Indian CAS has bee n 
prepared and is under finalization.  
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
E-INNOVATION/R&D 
Technical Development Council (Including ITRA) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
 The Committee note that the programme Technical Development Council (TDC) aims 
to facilitate proliferation and absorption of emerging technologies in the country by 
supporting Research and Development in IT; to promote the use of free and open source 
software; dev elop and apply state -of-art cost effective indigenous solutions for important 
industrial sectors; technology developments in bio -informatics, IPR promotion, innovation 
and incubation promotion and setting up of IT Research Academy (ITRA). The Committee 
also note that for last 3 years the Budgetary Support provided to TDC has not increased and 
actual utilisation has decreased. The year 2012 -13 again witnessed decline in utilisation due 
to the Ministry of Finance‘s Circular. The Committee, further, note that ITRA – a new project 
under TDC, envisaged to focus on strengthening the nation‘s competitiveness by expanding 
the R&D base in IT, especially by leveraging the large IT education sector and IT users such 
as Government, industry and other organizations was a pproved in 2010 -11 for an initial 
period of 5 years. However, after lapse of 2 years, the Committee note that a Project 
Steering and Implementation Group (PSIG) has been set up for initiating the ITRA activities 
and ITRA is still formulating an implementat ion plan for 6 identified research areas viz. 
Water; Mobile Applications; Transportation/Railways; Food and Agriculture; Disaster 

41 
 
Management; Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing (CAD/CAM). Considering that ITRA 
under TDS is a national programme to buil d a national resource for advancing the quality 
and quantity of R&D in IT by closely collaborating teams of researchers and institutions 
having expertise in the different aspects of the chosen research or application problems, the 
Committee recommend the D epartment to implement the programme effectively so as to 
have proper utilisation of funds and realisation of objective of the Scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department has initiated steps for recruitment of technical officers which is expected 
to impro ve the technical manpower availability which in turn will help taking up more 
projects and utilization of resources optimally by TDC. 
 
In the ITRA Programme, Strategy Formulation Meetings (SFMs) consisting of National & 
International experts were held in the areas of: 
 
1) Mobile Computing, Networking Applications 
2) Water Resources Sustainability 
3) IT in Agriculture and Food 
 
Project proposals were invited, evaluated and are expected to be initiated soon in the 
areas of Mobile Computing and Water Resources Sustaina bility. About 15 Team projects, in 
these two areas together, (each team consisting of 3 -4 participating organisations) are 
being initiated in the FY 2013 -14. Team projects, Team proposals will be invited, processed 
and initiated in the area of IT in Agricu lture and food.  Strategy Formulation Meetings are 
also planned in other areas as well and projects will also be initiated in those areas 
subsequently. 
 
[Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 2(1)/2013 -Budget (Vol. II) 
dated 24th July, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
13 December, 2013  Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)         Information Technology 

42 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6 th November, 2013 from                      
1100 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman  
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri A.Ganeshamurthi 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Abdul Rahman 
8. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Gazipur) 
9. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Joy Abraham  
11. Shri Salim Ansari 
12. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
13. Dr. C.P Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Garg - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 

43 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman w elcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened ……………x.x.x.x. ………..  to consider and adopt draft Action 
Taken Report on Forty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) relating to the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology.   
 
……………x.x.x.x. ……….. 
3. ……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ……….. 
4. ……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ……….. 
5. ……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ………..……………x.x.x.x. ……….. 
……………x.x.x.x. ……….. 
6. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken Report on 
action taken by the Government on Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants                        
(2013-14) relating to the Department of Electronics and Information Technology. The 
draft Report was adopte d by the Committee without any modification.  The Committee, 
then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the Report to the House on a date 
convenient to him. 
 
7. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance p rovided by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee  in 
drafting of the Report. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 

44 
 
 
 ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FOURTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 23 and 24  
 Total 15 
 Percentage 62.50 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 00.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2, 9, 13 and 22  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 16.67 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  11, 15, 16, 19 and 20  
 Total 05 
 Percentage 20.83 
 
 