 
 
1 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
49 


 
 
2 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
7 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
26 
CHAPTERIV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accept ed by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
28 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
31 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the  Fourth sitting of the Committee held on 21st November, 
2013. 
 
36 
II. ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SIXTH REPORT  
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
10. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
11. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
27. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
28. Dr. Kunwar Deep Singh 
29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
30. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
31.  Vacant 
  
 
  
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sandip Prasad - Executive Assistant 
(ii) 
  

 
 
5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2013 -14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty-ninth 
Action Taken Report by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2013-14)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   
30th April, 201 3. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-sixth Report on 20th June, 
2013.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
21st November, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Forty-sixth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
  RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi                   Chairman, 
13 December, 2013                                                                                        Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                                                  Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in their Forty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants(2013 -14)’ relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th April, 
2013. It contained 22 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Department of Telecommunications and are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19.  
 Total 13 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 3 and 10  
 Total 02 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-8, 9, and 12.  
 Total 03 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl ies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 14, 20, 21 and 22.  
 Total 04 
 Chapter V 
 
  

 
 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be give n to implementation of 
the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. The Committee further 
desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -
I and final action taken replies to the Recommendations /Observations contained in Chapter-
V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
 
A. Autonomy and Accountability of Prasar Bharati 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
6. In their original Report, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been consistently expressing their concern over the sorry 
state of affairs in functioning of the public broadcaster - Prasar Bharati and their 
operational and financial autonomy. In this regard, the Committee note various 
concerns of the Prasar Bharati which include:- 
 
(i)  As per Section 3(4) of the Prasar Bharati Act, the general 
superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of Prasar Bharati shall 
vest in the Prasar Bharati Board. However, the functional autonomy as envisaged 
in the Act gets diluted by various other Sections, especially Section 32 and 
proviso to Section 33 thereby compelling Prasar Bharati to seek prior permiss ion 
from the Government on matters of recruitment, remuneration and other 
conditions of service. 
(ii)  The operational autonomy of the organization has been diluted because 
of shortage of staff and  
(iii)  Uncertainty of funding pattern. 
 
The Committee not e that to address various issues related to financial and 
operational autonomy of the organization, several measures/ initiatives have 
been taken which include cabinet approval of proposal for providing Prasar 
Bharati non-plan support for meeting 100 per c ent expenses towards salary and 
salary related expenses. However, all other operating expenses of Prasar Bharati 
are to be met out of its internal revenue earning which are decreasing year after 
year and Prasar Bharati have expressed its inability to fully  meet the financial 
requirement of the organization. To improve the financial and functional 
autonomy of Prasar Bharati, CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted before the 
Committee that they require help in grant of service tax exemption to Prasar 
Bharati, issue of directives to all the Ministries/PSUs to extensively use the public 
service broadcaster viz. AIR and Doordarshan for releasing all of their publicity 
campaigns in respect of their policies and programmes and ensuring complete 

 
 
3 
 
waiver of space segment and s pectrum charges on actual basis every year for 
and uninterrupted allocation of frequency authorization/space segment to 
AlR/DD. The Committee feel that all these issues merit serious consideration to 
bring effectiveness in the functioning of Prasar Bharati  and the Ministry should 
consider them for follow up action.” 
 
7. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the action taken notes 
have stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.” 
 
(File No. 44011/02/2012-BAP dated 04.06.2013) 
8. Observing that functional and operative autonomy of Prasar Bharati had been diluted 
because of various provision s of Prasar Bharati Act and shortage of staff, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry should address to various concerns expressed by CEO, Prasar 
Bharati before the Committee viz help in grant of service tax exemption, issue of directives to 
all the Ministries/PSUs to extensively use AIR and Doordarshan for releasing of the publicity 
campaigns and en suring complete waiver  of space segment and spectrum charges on actual 
basis every year for uninterrupted allocation of frequency authorization space segment to 
AIR/DD. The Ministry, however, in its Action Taken Reply, instead of giving concrete response 
to each of the suggestion, has simply stated ‘recommendations noted for compliance’. Such a 
generalized response on the part of the Ministry is unacceptable as t his reflects the non -
serious approach of the Ministry to issues concerning Prasar Bharti . While emphasizing the 
need for addressing all the issues on priority, Committee desire that Ministry should apprise 
the Committee of the concrete action taken within a period of three months.  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with satisfaction that a panel led by Shri Sam Pitroda with 
11 Working Groups has now been constituted for the purpose of reviewing the 
institutional framework of Prasar Bharati including its relationship with 
Government, its continuing role as a public broadcaster and measures needed to 

 
 
4 
 
ensure technical up-gradation of the organization. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to pursue the matter with the expert panel for early submission of the 
report. In the meanwhile, the Committee woul d emphasize that a balance 
should be struck between the Ministry and Prasar Bharati in such a way that 
Prasar Bharati enjoys fair amount of autonomy while the objective of the public 
service broadcaster is not lost sight of.” 
(Para No. 2.14, Rec. Sl. No. 9) 
 
10. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the action taken notes 
have stated as under:- 
 
“The directions of the Committee have been communicated to the Prasar 
Bharati for placing them before the Expert Committee for compliance.” 
 
(File No. 44011/02/2012-BAP dated 04.06.2013) 
 
11. Emphasising the need for maintaining a balance between Prasar Bharati and Ministry 
so that Prasar Bharati enjoys a fair amount of autonomy and perform s its role as a Public 
service Broadcaster, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should pursue the matter 
with Sam Pitroda Committee for early submission of their report, which has been constituted 
inter-alia for reviewing the institutional framework of Prasar Bharati including its relationship 
with the Government. From the reply of the Ministry the Committee note that the Ministry 
instead of communicating the concern of the Committee  to Sam Pitroda Committee 
themselves has asked Prasar Bharati to do so. The Committee  are, also, dismayed to note 
that the Action taken Reply of the Ministry is  completely silent on the ways and means 
through which the Ministry plans to maintain a delicate balance so that Prasar Bharti enjoys 
fair amount of autonomy while fulfilling its role of a public broadcaster. While expressing 
their unhappiness over the way Ministry has evaded the issue, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should look into this vital aspect  and inform the Committee of the concrete action 
taken in this regard.  The Committee also desire that Ministry should themselves pursue with 
Sam Pitroda Committee for early submission of their report. 
 

 
 
5 
 
C. Issues related to transmission in Border Areas 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note  that there is a proposal for up -gradation of 58 existing 
FM/MW transmitters, setting up of 157 new FM transmitters of various 
capacities and eight high power transmitters along Indo -Nepal Border. However, 
the scheme is yet to be approved/sanctioned by the  competent authority. The 
Committee emphasise that Prasar Bharati should take up these 
projects/schemes in the right earnest, get approvals for them early and closely 
monitor their implementation.” 
 
13. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the a ction taken notes 
have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“AIR has stated that improvement of FM coverage and that of alongwith Indo -
Nepal Border is part of Umbrella Scheme “Broadcast Infrastructure Network 
Development”. This scheme is under process for approval of competent 
authority. 
 
Doordarshan has informed that in the 12 th Plan, Doordarshan has proposed 
establishment of following eight high power transmitters along Indo Nepal 
Border.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above 8 HPTs are included in the 12th Plan scheme “Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Network Development”.  The EFC proposal containing the above 
projects has been circulated to appraisal agencies during Dec. 2012. The revised 
EFC Memo in respect of Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development of 
DD/AIR by incorporating the Comments of Planning Commission, and Ministry of 
Finance has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance on 23.5.2013 so as to 
convene the EFC meeting at the earliest.”  
 
(Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No.  N-18013/1/2013-B(D) dated 
30th May, 2013) 
Sr.no. State Location of    HPT 
1. Uttarakhand Pithoragarh 
2. Uttarakhand Tanakpur 
3. Uttar Pradesh Bankatwa 
4. Uttar Pradesh Nishangara 
5. Uttar Pradesh Siddharth Nagar 
6. Bihar  Forbesganj 
7. Bihar Raxaul 
8. Bihar Jaynagar 

 
 
6 
 
 
14. The Ministry had informed that there was a proposal for up -gradation of 58 existing 
FM/MW transmitters, setting up of 157 new FM transmitters of various capacities and eight 
high power transmitters along Indo -Nepal Border.  Considering the important role of these 
projects for the border areas, the Committee had recommended  that the Ministry/ Prasar 
Bharati should take up these project s/schemes in the right earnest, get approvals for them 
early and closely monitor their implementation. From the reply of the Ministry it is observed 
that there has been some progress in  some border areas except Indo -Nepal Border.  While 
emphasizing the need  for improvement of FM coverage along Indo Nepal Border, the 
Committee desire that the proposals for upgradation and setting up of transmitters should be 
accorded top priority and these projects should be completed in a time bound manner.   The 
Committee ma y, therefore, be apprised of the concrete action plan for upgradation of 
transmitters and setting of new transmitters along  all border areas including  Indo-Nepal 
Border. 

 
 
7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Grants for the year 2013-14 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that as per Demand No. 61 the budgetary allocation to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting is for a total amount of Rs. 3035.65 crore which include Rs. 
905 crore as Plan outlay and Rs. 2130.65 crore as non -plan outlay. For the Tw elfth Five Year 
Plan (2012-17), the Ministry had proposed a total plan outlay of Rs. 21731 (including IEBR of 
Rs.5000 crore from Prasar Bharati) against which the approved outlay is Rs. 8583 crore 
(including IEBR of Rs.1000 crore from Prasar Bharati).     
 
The Committee find that during the year 2012 -13 as against the proposed sum of 
Rs.3280 crore, the Ministry was allocated an amount of Rs. 905 crore. This was further reduced 
to Rs. 676 crore at RE stage out of which the actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 611.38 
crore. In terms of percentage this comes out to be 90.4 per cent of RE allocation. The position 
of utilisation of funds during 2011 -12 was better as out of Rs. 786.82 crore allocated at RE 
stage, actual expenditure was Rs. 762.81 crore i.e. 96.96%. The Committee are unhappy to note 
that even after overall reduction in allocation of funds in 2012 -13, the same were not utilized 
fully. The BE of Rs. 905 crore for 2012 -13 were revised to Rs. 676 crore and the utilisation was 
Rs. 611.38 crore only.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons advanced by the 
Ministry for under -utilisation of funds during 2012 -13 which inter alia include (i) delay in 
approval of the schemes resulting in surrender of funds and (ii) the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry of Finance restricting expenditure to 33% of the BE in the last quarter and not more 
than 15% of the BE in the last month, scheme wise, subject to RE ceiling. The Committee feel 
that the Ministry did not take effective steps for approval of the schem es at the beginning of 
the financial year 2012 -13 which led to surrender of funds due to restrictions imposed by the 
midway i.e October, 2012 Ministry of Finance.  
 
The Committee note that Ministry has initiated some steps to effectively utilize the 
funds during the year 2013 -14 which inter alia include streamlining of the planning and 
approval of the schemes to ensure their quicker approval, evaluation of all ongoing schemes 
and ongoing components of the new schemes, weekly review at Secretary Level, Deleg ation of 
financial powers upto Rs. 300 crore to Prasar Bharati Board etc. To avoid repetitive trend of 
earlier years for under -utilisation of funds, the Committee recommend that all the above 
corrective measures should be implemented in right earnest so th at the funds allocated for the 
year 2013-14 are fully utilized and there are no slippages in achieving the physical and financial 
targets.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
The Ministry is taking all out efforts to ensure timely completion of appraisal/approval 
of all new schemes of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  Out of nineteen new schemes, six are already 
approved.  The remaining schemes are in the advanced stage of completio n of appraisal -cum-
approval process.  Further, regular monitoring of the approval process is being undertaken in 
weekly meeting of Senior Officers.  
 
The Ministry has since received the reports in respect of all the 26 on -going 
schemes/on-going components of the new schemes ordered for evaluation as part of XII Plan 
formulation.  The timely availability of reports will facilitate speedy appraisal and approval of 
the schemes. 
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. G-30014/12/2013-PCdated 16.05.2013) 
 
 
On-going and New Schemes  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that a very notable feature of the 
Twelfth Plan strategy include complete restructuring and rationalization of plan schemes 
wherein 65 schemes of Elevent h Plan have been reduced to 26 during Twelfth Plan which 
include seven ongoing schemes. The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that despite 
their recommendation in Thirty -second Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) wherein the 
Committee had impressed upon the need to streamline the approval process for schemes, four 
ongoing schemes viz. National Film Heritage Mission, National Centre of Excellence Scheme, 
International Channel and Global Film School, which were conceptualized during 11th Five Year 
Plan, are still at the stage of approval. While disapproving the way the schemes are being 
planned and approved by the Ministry, the Committee are of the considered opinion that there 
is an imperative need to speed up the examination and approval process of various schemes in 
the Ministry specially when delay in approval of schemes is leading to surrender of funds and 
under-utilisation of the outlay. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should streamline the process of appraisal/appr oval of the schemes and obtain the 
clearances as per the revised/projected deadline during the year 2013 -14 itself so that the 
targets set under various schemes are not shifted/deferred further. The Committee also urge 
the Ministry to vigorously pursue the  matter with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance for obtaining clearances for 26 schemes initiated during the year 2013 -14. The 
concerns of the Committee, in this regard, should also be duly communicated to both the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and Committee be apprised of the action taken in 
the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
 
The Ministry has taken following steps to improve the planning and apprais al-cum-
approval process: 
 
(i)   As a result of rationalisation and restructuring of Plan schemes undertaken by the Ministry, 
total number of schemes has been reduced to 26 in Twelfth Five Year Plan from 65 in Eleventh 
Five Year Plan. It includes 7 on-going schemes and 19 new schemes. The reduction in number of 
new schemes would result in lesser time for scrutiny which will facilitate quicker 
appraisal/approval process. 
 
(ii)  The Ministry has been monitoring the progress of approval of schemes in every week ly 
meeting of Senior Officers.  As a result of regular monitoring, six new schemes have already 
been approved and the remaining schemes are at advanced stage of appraisal -cum-approval 
process              . 
 
(iii)  The evaluation of schemes, required as pa rt of XII Plan formulation has been completed 
and all reports are now available for consideration of the respective competent authority. 
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. G-30014/12/2013-PC dated 16.05.2013) 
 
 
Revenue earnings of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4) 
 
The Committee note that the gap between the revenue projected and the revenue 
earned by Prasar Bharati has been increasing year after year.  During the year 2011 -12 and 
2012-13, the revenue projection were Rs.1650 crore and Rs.1815 crore respect ively and 
revenue receipts for the years were Rs.1409.54 and Rs.1263.56 crore (upto February, 2013).  
The Committee are also concerned to note the increasing disparity between the revenue 
earned and expenditure year after year.  The Committee find that dur ing the year 2010-11, the 
gap between revenue earned and expenditure was Rs.1633.73 crore which increased to 
Rs.1931.03 crore in the year 2011 -12 and further swelled to Rs.1376.32 crore in 2012 -13.  The 
contention of the Ministry, for justifying the huge g ap between the revenue earned and 
expenditure, that Prasar Bharati being a public service broadcaster is not principally guided by 
commercial consideration is not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee regret that 
despite apprehension expressed by the  Ministry that if this trend continues it would result into 
wiping out the entire available reserve of Prasar Bharati and the organization may find itself in 
immense financial distress, nothing concrete has been done to address to this malaise.” 
(Para 2.7 of Rec. Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee find that of late to increase their revenue, Prasar Bharati has been 
adopting aggressive marketing strategies.  Other steps taken include better publicity like 
newspaper insertions, Media Plan, New media campaign and bette r professional handling of 

 
 
10 
 
the Prasar Bharati marketing divisions.  As per the submission of the Ministry, Prasar Bharati is 
also exploring the feasibility of revenue generation by utilizing the extra space commercially by 
installation of ATM machines, ins tallation of electronic displays for advertisements of private 
parties, launching of IVR/SMS based services to provide news headlines and letting of FM 
transmitters to private parties.  While these are good initiatives, the Committee are not 
satisfied with the pace of progress as so far only one office of Prasar Bharati has been identified 
for installation of ATM and the Ministry/Prasar Bharati are yet to make a survey of their total 
land and buildings to assess spare infrastructure.  The Committee would li ke the Prasar Bharati 
to make more rigorous efforts in the asset management are a and try to generate more 
revenues by adopting aggressive marketing strategy and better professional handling of Prasar 
Bharati Marketing Division which in turn will make it financially more viable and secured. 
(Para 2.8 of Rec. Sl. No. 4) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet approved a proposal for financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati.  According 
to it, during the next five years from 2012 -13 to 2016 -17, the Government wo uld make 
available to Prasar Bharati Non -Plan support for meeting 100% expenses towards salary and 
salary related expenses.  All other operating expenses are to be borne by Prasar Bharati out of 
internal revenue earnings. 
 
Prasar Bharati has further inform ed that though the decision of the Cabinet has 
rationalized the funding pattern, it would not help them in fully meeting the requirements of 
the Organization. It has further informed that during the current financial year, other 
operational expenses are ex pected to be approximately Rs.1530 Crore against the projected 
revenue earnings of Rs. 1815 Crore. The gap between expenditure and revenue is likely to 
increase in the coming years in view of likely increases in other operational expenses due to 
inflation etc. While there might not be commensurate increase in internal revenue earnings 
due to highly competitive media sector in which more than eight hundred channels are vying 
with each other for advertising revenue share and also limitations on Prasar Bharati  due to its 
public service broadcasting character. 
 
It may also be mentioned that too much focus on commercial earnings for meeting the 
revenue gap might force the Organization to make compromises with market forces which 
might further dilute its public service broadcasting character. Therefore a  more robust and 
reliable funding pattern for the Organization needs to be considered thus eliminating its 
dependence on commercial revenue and helping it achieve genuine operational and financial 
autonomy, that would ensure fulfilling the statutory mandate without making compromises.  
 
Besides setting up of Marketing Divisions, Prasar Bharati has been taking following 
additional steps to increase its revenue: 
 
a) Improving AIR’s content has been a priority area. 
b) Different stations have been given the task of producing in -house 
customized quality programmes in order to attract clients to invest more 
money. 

 
 
11 
 
c) Marketing Executives have been hired by the Marketing Divisions to tap 
the untapped clients. 
d) To bring in more scientific way of marketing methodology, Prasar Bharati 
has also appointed Marketing Experts. 
e) Programmes based on the rich archival material are also being produced 
and have been marketed even before its launch. 
f) Self Publicity -Prasar Bharati  has given priority for this area and now 
presence in the media space is being made visible through Newspaper 
ads and hoardings etc.  
g) The digital survey is being carried out initially for Delhi region. It would 
also be undertaken in other parts of the c ountry which would be a 
permanent assets record in digital format and will be useful for future 
planning and asset management/commercial use of extra space. 
 
Modernisation of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that for the modernization of Doordarshan and All India Radio an 
amount of Rs.2932 crore and Rs.1718 crore had been allocated respectively during the Eleventh 
Plan. The Committee further note that some of the schemes for modernization of Doordarshan 
viz. Digitalisation  of Tranmitters and Studio in Doordarshan Network, High Definition Television 
(HDTV), Modernisation,  Augmentation and Replacement of Satellite Broadcast equipment  are 
under implementation. However, additional schemes for modernization of Doordarshan 
Network viz. Digitalisation Transmitter and satellite Broadcast equipment included in Twelfth 
Plan are yet to be approved. Further, with regard to modernization of All India Radio, the 
Ministry has informed that AIR started modernization of its structure duri ng Tenth Plan and has 
set 2017 as the target year for complete digitalization of its infrastructure. The Committee in 
this regard note that though some of the schemes have been completed, most of the schemes 
could not be completed during Eleventh Plan peri od and these are planned to be continued in 
Twelfth Plan. Considering  the fact that major thrust for AIR and Doordarshan in Twelfth Plan is 
to improve efficiency, effectiveness and quality of broadcasting through complete digitalization, 
expanding their r each in most backward, coastal and naxal affected areas and to rejuvenate 
and revitalize Prasar Bharati by giving a look and feel, the Committee are concerned to note the 
slow and tardy progress in the approval of schemes relating to modernization and 
augmentation of existing infrastructure of both AIR and DD.  The Committee again emphasize 
that there is an imperative need to expedite the approval and implementation of all the 
schemes relating to modernization of AIR and Doordarshan so as to provide them mu ch needed 
facelift and enable them to compete with private broadcaster. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prasar Bharati has stated that Modernization of Doordarshan Network is a continuous 
process and schemes in this regard are formulated   and implemented from time to time. At 
present, following schemes are under implementation, as part of 11th Plan continuing schemes. 
 

 
 
12 
 
1.  Digitalization  of Transmitters and Studios in Doordarshan Network (scheme approved in 
April, 2010 at a cost of Rs. 620 crore). 
 
2. High Defi nition Television (HDTV) (scheme approved in August, 2009 at a cost of Rs. 165 
crore).  
 
3. Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of Transmitter and Studio equipment 
(scheme approved in February, 2011  at a cost of Rs. 298.57 crore). 
 
4. Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of Satellite Broadcast equipment (scheme 
approved in Feb., 2009 at a cost of Rs. 125 crore). 
 
Status of above schemes is as under: 
 
1. Digitalization of Transmitters and Studios in Doordarshan Network   
 
Major projects under implementation as part of this scheme are –Full digitalization of 39 Studio 
centres& establishment of digital HPTs at 40 places. Full digitalization of  39 Studio centers is 
expected to be completed in 2013 -14. The above 40 digital HPT s are being installed in two 
phases (19 transmitters in first phase and remaining 21 transmitters in second phase). As per 
present indications, the above 19 digital transmitters are expected to be installed by the end of 
2013-14. The remaining 21 digital transmitters are expected to be installed by December, 2014.   
 
2.  High Definition Television (HDTV) 
HDTV projects approved  under the scheme are (i) HDTV Studios at Delhi and Mumbai; (ii) HDTV 
field production, post production and preview facilities at De lhi, Kolkata, Mumbai & 
Chennai;(iii) Providing HDTV uplink at Delhi (iv) HDTV transmitters at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata 
and Chennai; (v) Multi Camera OB van (2 nos.) for outdoor production at Delhi and Mumbai.  
Installation of HDTV Studio has been completed a t Delhi and is nearing completion at Mumbai. 
HDTV field production, post production and preview facilities at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai& 
Chennai have been established. HDTV uplink has since been completed. The remaining projects 
are at different stages of imp lementation and are expected to be completed during the later 
half of 2013-14. 
 
3. Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of Transmitter and Studio equipment 
Major projects under implementation, as part of this scheme, are (i) Replacement of  old ageing  
High Power Transmitters (HPTs) at 15 locations   (ii)Replacement of existing 60 old Low Power 
Transmitters (LPTs) by automode (1+1) 500 Watt LPTs; (iii) Modernization of 20 Studio centres 
by way of replacement of old aging equipment like Camera chains,  Production Switchers, Logo 
Generators &Colour monitors etc. Order for HPTs (15 nos), LPTs (60 nos) and most of Studio 
equipment have been placed. The above projects are expected to be completed by 2014, in 
phases.   
 
4. Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of Satellite Broadcast equipment 
Major projects approved under the scheme are (i) New Earth Stations (5 no); (ii) Upgradation of 
10 existing Earth stations (iii) DSNGs -15 nos. Earth station has been upgraded at 5 locations. 
Remaining projects are expected to be completed in 2013-14.   

 
 
13 
 
EFC memo of the following two 12 th Plan Schemes of Doordarshan were circulated by the 
Ministry in Dec. 2012: 
i) Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development. 
ii) Special Projects 
 
The revised EFC Memo in respect of Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development of 
DD/AIR by incorporating the Comments of Planning Commission, and Ministry of Finance has 
been forwarded to Ministry of Finance on 23.5.2013 so as to convene the EFC meeting at the 
earliest.  
 
(Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/1/2013-B(D) dated 30th May, 2013) 
 
 
Outstanding dues from Doordarshan Kendras and National Channels 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee observed that for the year 2010-11, funds to the tune of Rs.330.81 crore 
are outstanding from producers of various Doordarshan Kendras and National channels for the 
sponsored programmes/serials.  Similarly, an amount of Rs.166.38 crore is due from various 
agencies for the year 2011 -12.  In view of poor financial health of Pras ar Bharati, the 
outstanding dues of such a huge amount is a matter of great concern to the Committee.  The 
Committee also note that 87 cases are under arbitration.  The Committee note that the 
Ministry has initiated certain steps viz. regular monitoring of  payment schedule of private 
agencies, withdrawal of credit facility beyond certain period, encashment of bank guarantee, 
entering into an agreement for sticking to payment plan, etc. for realizing the outstanding dues.  
The Committee recommend that these steps should be implemented in right earnest so that 
the outstanding amount is recovered as early as possible.  The Committee also desire that 
efforts should be made to expedite resolution of 87 cases which are under arbitration.  The 
Ministry/Prasar Bhara ti should also review their policy of charging levy on producers for the 
sponsored programmes/serials in the wake of increases in cases of outstanding dues year after 
year. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of hon’ble Standing Committee have bee n noted and steps 
would be taken in right earnest so that outstanding dues are recovered as early to the extent 
possible.  In this regard Prasar Bharati has reported that full revenue of total business (accrued) 
during a financial year may not be realized within that year because Doordarshan provides the 
credit facility to accredited agencies for 60/75 days as per industry norms and Prasar Bharati 
Policy.  Thus there can never be a nil balance against any agency/producers having continuous 
business relation  with us.  There will always be an outstanding amount aggregating to more 
than Rs.200 crore depending upon the business accrued in that particular period as well as from 
the firms availing of credit facilities.  In other words, the outstanding  dues involv es a part of 
new business cycle, owing to credit facility as mentioned above and part of outstanding after 
the expiry of period.  Doordarshan charges interest @ Rs.14.5% p.a. (simple interest) on the 
component remains outstanding after the expiry of credit  period.  Prasar Bharati has further 

 
 
14 
 
reported that more than Rs.51.40 crore has so far been received from such defaulting 
producers/agencies as award/interim award during arbitration/ legal proceedings.  An amount 
of Rs.7.58 crore has recently been awarded  by arbitrator to Prasar Bharati.  Further, it is also 
intimated that Doordarshan has recovered Rs.2.30 crore from two long period debtors under 
One Time Settlement Scheme of Prasar Bharati.          
 
As regards outstanding dues in case of defaulting agencies, it is intimated that Doordarshan 
has taken the following steps for recovery of dues: 
(a) Pursuing of defaulting agencies through regular reminders. 
(b) Encashing their Bank Guarantees. 
(c) Cancellation of their accreditation/registration or frozen which redu ces their 
creditability in the media market. 
(d) Legal notices are issued. 
(e) Arbitration/court proceeding are initiated. 
(f) A One Time Settlement Scheme  to encourage the defaulters to come for reconciliation 
for settlement of long outstanding dues is under consideration of the Prasar Bharati Board.   
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting File No. G-20019/1/2013-B(Fin) Dated 07.06.2013)  
 
 
Filling up of posts in Prasar Bharati  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that the existing staff strength in All India Radio and Doordarshan 
is 48,022 as on January 01, 2012 and 14222 posts are lying vacant. Out of these 3452 vacancies 
were more than one year old and were covered under deemed abolition'. The Committee have 
been informed that approval of the Department of Expenditure was required to be obtained 
before these are filled. The Department of Expenditure had cleared 1150 of these posts and 
had indicated that proposal for the balance posts may be take n up in March, 2013. The 
Committee fail to understand as to how DD and AIR can work effectively without filling the 
essential vacancies. The Committee desire that adequate steps should be taken to fill up 1150 
post cleared by the Department of Expenditure.  The Committee would like to be apprised  of 
the outcome in this regard. 
 
(Para No. 2.11, Rec. Sl. No. 7) 
 
The CEO, Prasar Bharat i during his evidence also stated that the Government has been 
kind enough to offer 3000 new recruitment. In the light of the above, the committee would like 
to emphasize that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should co -ordinate with the 
Staff Se tection Commission that all the vacant posts are filled up without further delay. The 
Committee also recommend that expeditious steps should be taken for constitution of 
Recruitment Board for filling up of vacancies in Prasar Bharati. 
 
(Para No. 2.12, Rec. Sl. No. 7) 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On the basis of recommendation of the Group of Ministers on Prasar Bharati (GOM) for 
filling up of 3452 essential category of posts in Prasar Bharti, the Ministry had taken up the 
matter with the Department of Expendi ture (DOE which cleared 1150 posts for filling up in the 
first phase.  Recruitment Regulations for the Group ‘B’ and Group ‘C’ posts, that formed part of 
1150 critical posts, have been notified by the Prasar Bharati following approval of the 
Government. Th e Prasar Bharati has placed request to the Staff Selection Commission for 
recruitment and filling up of these Group ‘B’ and Group ‘C’ posts under a special dispensation 
given to it.  
 
As per the advice of DOE, the proposal for the revival of the remaining 2302 posts was 
moved in March 2013 for concurrence of DOE.  DOE have advised to resubmit the proposal for 
revival of the remaining posts after filling up of 1150 posts already cleared by them. 
 
The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting obtained the approv al of the Department of 
Personnel & Training (DOP&T) and the advice of Department of Legal Affairs for undertaking 
recruitment against Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts of the Prasar Bharati through the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) as a one -time special dispensa tion so as to enable filling up of the critical 
posts expeditiously.  The Prasar Bharati has placed the request with Staff Selection Commission 
for filling up of Group ‘B’ and Group ‘C’ posts that formed part of critical vacancies, live 
vacancies and backl og vacancies for SC and ST categories.   For some of these posts 
advertisements have also been issued for recruitment through the SSC.  
 
The revised proposal for notification of Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board (PBRB), as 
approved by the Prasar Bharati Boa rd in its meeting held on 16.05.2012 has been concurred by 
the Department of Expenditure and DOP&T with some modifications.  The notification for 
enabling constitution of PBRB has been referred for vetting/ concurrence of  the Ministry of Law 
& Justice. 
 
Issues related to transmission in Border Areas 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that AIR has been expanding their broadcasting services 
throughout the country including in hilly and inaccessible areas of the country. At present AIR 
has terrestrial coverage (primary) of 91.90 per cent area and 99.20 per cent populati on of the 
country. Also 21 radio channels (Programmes) of AIR are available through DD Direct Plus DTH 
Platform (Ku band) all over the country except Andaman and Nicobar Islands. These 
programmes can be received through a set top box on DTH platform. The C ommittee further 
note that during the last years and current  year, various schemes for up -gradation  of 
power/coverage of 11 transmitters of AIR and installation of 132 additional FM transmitters of 
various capacities have been undertaken. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, during the course of evidence also stated the commissioning of high power AIR 
transmitter in Rajkot, the signals of which can reach well within Pakistan and another one on 
the eastern side at Chinsura to be commiss ioned shortly. While appreciating these initiatives of 

 
 
16 
 
the Ministry, the Committee feel that the AIR and Doordarshan still have not been able to reach 
out to the remotest corners of sensitive areas of North eastern States and North. This is evident 
from th e fact that in these sensitive areas, people are not even aware of their country, their 
constitution, their rights and duties. The Committee are concerned to note that people of some 
parts of our country are being forced to listen/view, radio/TV of neighbo uring countries. The 
Committee emphasize that the funds earmarked for north east region should be fully utilized 
and infrastructure in these areas be upgraded urgently so that the culture, national feelings of 
the people of these areas are not impacted adversely. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prasar Bharati has stated that AIR’s 21 Radio Channels in KU Band on DD’s free -to-air 
DTH platform are available all over the country except Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Now, 6 DTH 
Channels in C-Band have been made available to Andaman & Nicobar Islands also. 
 
Special schemes for improvement of coverage in North East a nd J&K region were 
approved by Government of India. The Schemes are under various stages of implementation. A 
scheme for improvement of coverage along Indo-Nepal Border has been proposed in XII Plan. 
 
Prasar Bharati has also informed Doordarshan has been assigning priority to provision of 
TV coverage to border areas of the country in the various expansion Plans formulated from 
time to time. At present, 27 3 TV transmitters (HPTs -48, LPTs-88, VLPTs-132, Transposers-5) are 
functioning in border districts of the country.  
 
In North East Region, 132 transmitters (HPTs -25, LPTs-39, VLPTs-68) are functioning. As 
part of 11 th Plan, five earth stations at Imphal, K ohima, Itanagar, Gangtok&Agartala have been 
upgraded; eleven Studio centres (partially digital) in NE region are being made fully digital in 
2013-14. In addition, projects of setting up of digital HPT at Guwahati and replacement of old 
ageing HPTs by new HPTs at Dibrugarh& Tura are under implementation in NE region. 
 
As part of continuing schemes from 11th Plan, 5 HPT projects are under implementation in J&K : 
1. HPT, Green Ridge (Uri)                     - (Kashmir region) 
2. HPT, Himbotingla (Kargil)                  - (Ladkah region) 
3. HPT Natha Top                                  - (Jammu region) 
4.HPTsRajouri  (DD1  & DD NEWS)     - (Jammu region) 
 
Eight HPTs, one each at Pithoragarh&Tanakpur (Uttarakhand), Bankatwa, 
Nishangara&Siddharth Nagar (Uttar Pradesh) and Forbesganj, Jaynagar&Raxaul (Bihar) are 
proposed under 12 th Plan. The EFC proposal containing the above projects has been circulated 
to appraisal agencies during Dec. 2012. The revised EFC Memo in respect of Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Network  Development of DD/AIR by incorporating the Comments of Planning 
Commission, and Ministry of Finance has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance on 23.5.2013 
so as to convene the EFC meeting at the earliest.  
Total expenditure incurred under Plan (Capital) d uring 11th Plan is Rs. 645.84 crore. Out 
of this, an expenditure of Rs. 47.13 crore was incurred for NE region. Out of total expenditure 
of Rs. 208.08 crore incurred under Plan (Capital) during 2012 -13, Rs. 35.31 crore was incurred 
for NE region. 

 
 
17 
 
 
(Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/1/2013-B(D)dated 30th May, 2013) 
 
 
Digitisation and the issue of Set top Boxes 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that to usher a new era in broadcasting the Government has 
completed the first phase of digitization and digital addressable system has come into effect in 
three metro cities viz. Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata and phase -II of digitization in  38 cities across 
the country is in progress.  The digitization process has been held up in Chennai due to a court 
case.  The Committee learn that out of roughly 150 million TV homes in India, 40 -50 million are 
DTH and about 80 million homes are cable TV h omes.  According to the Ministry against the 
total requirement of 160 lakhs STBs, 105 lakh have already been installed and as per data 
furnished by the MSOs by March, 2013 there would be sufficient STBs with no shortage. While 
taking note of the Ministry’s  submission that transition from non -addressable cable TV system 
to Digital Addressable System involved massive exercise and poor progress of installation of 
STBs in phase-II of digitization in some cities and also the resistance from the cable industry, the 
Committee feel that the progress in this regard should be in commensurate with the availability 
of equipments and infrastructure rather than blindly restricting the target upto December, 
2014.  Further, apprehending security issues associated with impor ted STBs and component of 
STBs, the Committee during the examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13) in their Thirty 
second Report had recommended the Ministry to coordinate with the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology so as to have indige nous production of STBs.  The 
Committee, in this regard, during the evidence of Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology on Demands for Grants (2013 -14), have been informed that C -DAC under the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technolo gy would be ready with CAS only after 12 
months.  Further, from the submission of the Secretary, Deity, the Committee understand that 
the domestic manufacturing of Electronic hardware would see a breakthrough during 2013 -14.  
The Committee also note that t he Ministry of Information and Broadcasting are in the process 
of formulating a policy whereby in the third and fourth phase of digitization there could be a 
possible 40 per cent or around 40 per cent reservation of STBs for domestic manufacturers.  
 
(Para 2.18 of Rec. Sl. No. 13)  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The target dates for implementation of digital addressable system were set with the 
approval of the Cabinet, based up on the recommendations of TRAI. Cable TV digitization for 
Phase-I and Phase-II were completed as per the target date notified by the Ministry. It may be 
appreciated that the smooth transition from non -addressable cable TV system to Digital 
Addressable system would involve various measures. Considering that  digital switch -over of 
cable tel evision networks is a massive exercise, which  requires all stakeholders, namely, 
Broadcasters, Multi System Operator (MSO) and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) to get prepared 
in the form of putting in place requisite technical infrastructure to facilitate a seamless 
transition on the due dates, the Ministry of I&B, which has been overseeing the digital -switch 

 
 
18 
 
over, has taken initiatives to ensure that the stipulated timelines for the DAS are adhered to. 
The Ministry had set up a Task Force on 22.7.2011 under the chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (I&B) to review the progress made towards the implementation DAS within the 
mandated timelines. The Task Force comprised of representatives of Cable Operators 
Federation of India (COFI), Multi System Operator (MSO) Alliance, Indian Broadcasting 
Foundation (IBF), News Broadcasters Association (NBA), Direct to Home (DTH) Association, 
FICCI, CII, ASSOCHAM, Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers Association 
(CEAMA), other Central Government Departments, TRAI, Consumer organizations, etc. 
Additionally, the Ministry also constituted various sub -groups of MSOs, Local Cable Operators, 
Independent MSOs to have more focused digitization and address their specific issues regarding 
to digitization. 
Efforts to achieve the target of digitization in the Phase –I 
The Task Force met on fortnightly basis and held 20 meetings to review the progress of 
digitization  
Ministry closely monitored procurement and progress of installation of STBs by various MSOs 
regularly.  
Sub-Groups constituted by the ministry for national level MSOs, independent MSOs and Local 
Cable Operators helped the Ministry to get a feedback from ground.  
Additionally, data was also collected from DTH operators on a daily basis.  
Ministry embarked on an aggres sive Public Awareness Campaign in the Electronic and Print 
Media. 
6 Video spots and 12 Radio jingles were brought out by the Ministry for broadcast on Television 
and radio.  
An intensive SMS Campaign was also launched on the Mobile phones.  
Additionally cinema slides and hoardings on bus shelters etc, were also put up.  
The ‘Blackout Advertisement’ carried out by the Ministry on all prominent Television channels 
created a massive public awareness about the digitization deadline.  
More than 200 channels carried ‘blackout advertisement’ of the Ministry on the same day and 
time in a synchronized fashion which is a record of sorts.  
 Ministry also launched a Face book account and started a special website on digitization.  
Extensive field visits w ere taken up by officials from the Ministry and technical teams from 
BECIL to assess the ground realities and provide continuous feedback so that the digitization 
process could incorporate the learning from the field.  
A Toll free number was also designated to answer queries of people about digitization. 
Technical Team of the Ministry carried out inspections at the headends of MSO to ensure  
digital switch over  
In the countdown to the digitization, Ministry set up a Control Room with a toll free number to 
answer queries of consumers .In order to facilitate a seamless transition, major MSOs deputed 
their representatives in the Control Room to address and clarify various queries relating to 
acquisition of Set Top Boxes, various schemes of purchase of STBs, pa ckage rates offered by 
MSOs etc. The Control Room received more than 5000 calls within a span of 15 days. 
 
Efforts taken for the digitalization in Phase – II 
The Task Force has been reconstituted to include representatives of MSOs, LCOs and Consumer 
Organizations of 38 cities. Following measures have been taken   to achieve the target: 
The Task Force set up by the Ministry reviewed   progress of digitization in Phase-II every week. 

 
 
19 
 
 State Governments nominated nodal officers in 38 cities to review the progr ess of 
implementation with MSOs and LCOs  
The Ministry collected data from MSOs about their stock position of STBs, procurement plan, 
and data relating to installation of STBs regularly. In the run up to the deadline, the data on 
seeding of STBs has been collected on a daily basis.  
The Ministry conducted   two rounds of meeting with nodal officers of 38 cities to ascertain 
preparedness in these cities. 
The Ministry has stepped up the Public Awareness campaign through print and electronic 
media as has been done in Phase-I.  
All India Radio and Private FM Stations were broadcasting radio jingles on its National and 
regional networks for creating public awareness.  
The Ministry has already brought out a print advertisement in all 38 cities in the respective 
regional languages.  
 Several rounds of SMS campaign was launched in 38 cities  
 
As part of the awareness initiative, television channels broadcast video spots; black out 
advertisements, scrolls, etc well in advance informing the public about the cutoff date and need 
for STBs to watch Television after 31.3.2013.  
 
The   manpower in the Control Room of the Ministry has been augmented for 
addressing queries from consumers. In order to facilitate a seamless transition on the due date 
of 31st March 2013, major MS Os deputed their representatives in the Control Room to address 
and clarify various queries relating to acquisition of Set Top Boxes, various schemes of purchase 
of STBs, package rates offered by MSOs etc. The Control Room is still functioning. 
 
Technical teams of the Ministry undertook inspection on the head ends of MSOs in 38 
cities to assess their readiness. 
 
With all these efforts Phase-I and Phase-II of cable TV digitization has been completed. It 
is proposed to adopt similar strategy in the remaining phases of cable TV digitization with more 
focus of aggressive public awareness campaign and stringent monitor ing of availability and 
installation of STBs in collaboration with the nodal officers of the State Governments   
 
Para 2.19 
 
(i) In view of the emerging scenario, the Committee feel that the process of 100% 
digitization will not be smooth and there may be more problems in Phase III & IV of digitization. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to move with caution and incorporate in -
built safeguards in their digitization policy so as to tackle the anticipated apprehensions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Suggestion of the Committee is noted. The Ministry would devise separate strategy in 
terms of public awareness, monitoring of progress of digitization for Phase-III and Phase-IV. 
 
(ii)  While appreciating the Ministry’s submission for providing 40% reservation of STBs for 
domestic manufacturers, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to create a congenial 

 
 
20 
 
atmosphere for MSOs, cable Operators and broadcasters and have an overall friendly policy for 
domestic manufacturers. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As mentioned in against para 2.18 above, Ministry had constituted Task Force to review 
the progress and to steer the implementation in time bound manner. Representatives of MSOs, 
LCOs, Broadcasters, Consumers, STB manufacturers and Consumers were members of the Task 
Force. Similar strategy would be adopted for the remaining two phases. Issue of providing 
reservation for local STB manufacturers is also being discussed. 
 
(iii)  Considering the pot ential security threats involved with imported STB, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to formulate a suitable policy and co -ordinate with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments for mandatory security clearance of imported STBs immediately 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue was discussed with the Department of Electronics& IT and they have already 
made it mandatory that all the STBs must comply with the Indian Safety Standards. All the 
manufacturers are now required to get the STBs tested from an approved test house for the 
Safety standards. It is mandatory that after testing, every STBs must have a test certificate. 
 
 
Community Radio  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that Community Radio is a crucial communication tool particularly 
in communities where most people can neither read nor write and it provides an opportunity to 
community to speak about issues concerning their lives. The Committee have been informed 
that at present, 148 CRS are operational in the country and 230 applications  are pending for 
grant of licenses. The Committee note that in the Twelfth Plan, a small scheme viz. 
Strengthening Community Radio Movement in India has been proposed for strengthening 
Community Radio Movement in India. The Scheme aims at setting up 100 ne w Radio Stations 
and supporting 30 existing CRSs. The Committee are concerned to note that as many as 230 
applications are pending for grant of licenses for community Radio. In view of importance of 
CRS as a low cost communication medium that can be levera ged for broadcasting local issues/ 
messages in vernacular languages on issues of social concern by community organizations as 
well as the Government, the Committee feel that there is an imperative need to find ways and 
means to make the scheme financially remunerative so as to attract more number of applicants 
for setting up of CRS. The Committee are also of the opinion that reputed universities/ 
Government institutions can be provided financial and technical assistance to set up their own 
CRS on a pilot basis so as to popularize the concept which can be scaled up at a later stage. 
 
(Para No. 2.22, Rec. Sl. No. 15) 
 

 
 
21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 One reason for the slow growth of community radio stations (CRS) can be  attributed to 
lack of resources with Non -Government Organizations to meet the capital cost of setting up 
CRS and hand holding. Their capacity to mobilize resources is extremely limited.  
 
2. To address this issue, Ministry of I & B had proposed a new Plan Scheme “Supporting 
Community Radio Movement in  India” to provide financial assistance to genuine grass roots 
organizations to enable them set up CRS. The scheme is under consideration in the Ministry.  
 
3. The Plan Scheme “Supporting Community Radio Movement in India” has two 
components namely: 
(i) Community Radio Support Scheme (CRSS) to provide financial assistance to 
existing and new CRS. It has an allocation of Rs.90 Crore for five years. It will 
support every year around 100 new CRS and 30 existing CRS. 
(ii) Information, Education and Communication Activit ies (IEC Activities) for 
community radio for organizing Awareness/capacity building Workshops, 
publicity of the Scheme, National Sammelan, developing a content sharing 
platform, developing a Management Information System, conduct evaluations 
and Impact stu dies and present National Awards etc. Rs.10 Crores have been 
allocated for this component for a period of 5 years. 
 
4. Financial assistance to community radio stations will be provided for following activities: 
(i) Financial Support to new Community Radio Stat ions (CRSs) for acquisition of 
equipment:-This support will be available to those CRSs which have received the 
Letter of Intent (LOI) from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for setting 
up of CRS in India, but are not yet operational.  Every year about 100 new CRS will be 
supported. 
 
(ii) Equipment acquisition by the existing Community Radio Stations for 
upgradation/replacement etc: - Under this, CRSs which are already on air for a 
period of at least 3 months would be provided financial support for the upgradation 
of their equipment/technology for enhancing their performance. Every year about 
30 existing CRS will be supported. 
 
In the above two cases, up to 50% of the cost would be provided by the Ministry, 
subject to a ceiling of Rs. 7.50 lakhs. The remaining amount will have to be mobilized and borne 
by the grantee. 
 
(iii) Capacity Building through Training Support: 
For the purpose of capacity building of Community Radio Broadcasters, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting will identify suitable institutions in various parts of the 
country and will enter into Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with them for 
providing training to CR operators/station managers/content producers/ technicians 
and community representatives  as per the terms and conditions of MOU.  
Community Radio Stations would be asked to nominate persons for professional 

 
 
22 
 
training in these institutions. Payments relating to the cost of training would be 
made to the institutions directly by the Ministry as per MOU. 
 
(iv) Emergency grant to Community Radio Stations: 
 
Emergency grant will be provided to CRSs to cover the damages caused to the 
equipment due to natural calamities, lightening, cyclone etc.  Screening Committee 
will examine the proposals submitted by CRSs and the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting will take action after getting the approval of the Inter -Ministerial 
Committee. The Emergency Grants will be only for equipment replacement. 
 
(v) Innovation Grants:  
 
Innovation Grant would be provided to encourage innovation in the field of content 
development, CR Technology, Research etc.  These grants will be given to the CRSs, 
individuals and organizations working in the field of Community Radio.  The 
quantum of the grant would be decided by the Screening Committee, subject to the 
approval of the Inter-Ministerial Committee.  The proposals in this regard would be 
invited through a competitive process. 
 
5. The Universities/Educational Institutions, holding permission to set up CRS, will also 
be eligible to apply for financial assistance to set up th eir community radio stations. 
At present majority of the CRS are operated by Universities/Educational Institutions. 
Out of total 150 operational CRS, 88 are being run by Universities/Educational 
Institutions.  
 
6. Govt. is also organizing awareness worksho ps across the country to popularize the 
scheme among community based organizations. So far 46 workshops have been 
organized. Once the Plan Scheme to provide financial assistance is announced, more 
applicants will be encouraged to apply for permission to set up CRS. 
 
(Ministry of I& B, O.M.  No. 403/103/2013-CRS, Dated: 23rd May, 2013) 
 
 
Information Sector 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee find that out of total plan allocation of Rs. 905 crore for the year 2013 -
14, the Information sector has been allocated Rs. 235 crore, which comes out to 25.96 per cent 
of the budgetary allocation.  Against this the utilization was to the tun e of Rs. 147.27 crore 
(upto February, 2013).  Considering the fact that budget for 2013 -14 has been raised 
substantially as compared to previous years, the Committee would like to emphasize the 
Ministry to make sincere and concerted efforts for full utiliz ation of funds and achievement of 
objectives laid down under this sector.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
23 
 
The progress of expenditure vis-à-vis the allocation is being reviewed on weekly basis at 
the level of Secretary (I&B).  All sincere and concerted efforts  will be made to ensure full 
utilization of funds allocated under BE-2013-14. 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 17) 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) is a ‘Centre of Excellence’ in the field of 
communication, teaching, training and research. The Committee note that during the year 
2012-13, against the proposed outlay of Rs. 16.00 crore for IIMC, the allocation at BE stage was 
Rs. 11.00 crore, which was further reduced to Rs. 4.70 crore at RE stag e and the same was 
utilized fully. The allocation at BE stage for the year 2013-14 under the scheme is Rs. 7.00 crore. 
The Committee note that Regional Centres of IIMC at Amratvati, Kottayam, Aizawl and Jammu 
are functioning from temporary premises and the  plots of land for permanent campuses for 
their Regional Centres have already been identified, but the same are yet to be transferred to 
IIMC. The Ministry of I&B and IIMC are pursuing with the respective State Governments in this 
regard. Needless to empha size that the Ministry/IIMC would be ready with their DPRs for 
construction of buildings once, the lands are registered in IIMC’s name. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the matter with concerned 
State Governments for early transfer of land. 
  (Para 2.24, Rec. Sl. No. 17)  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Land for construction of permanent campus at Aizawl Regional Centre has been 
transferred to IIMC and it has initiated the process of preparing the DPR.  As regards oth er 
Regional Centres at Amravati, Jammu and Kottayam, the land for construction of permanent 
campus has been identified but yet to be transferred to IIMC. The Ministry of I&B and IIMC 
authorities are in regular consultation with the respective State Governm ents for facilitating 
early transfer of the land to IIMC for these Regional Centres so that the process of preparation 
of the DPRs could be initiated.   
 
(MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING, File No.  M-16012/5/2012-IP&MC Dated; 
29.05.2013)  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 18) 
As regards the proposal for degree granting power to IIMC, the Committee note that 
after due deliberations between the legislative Department and the Ministry/IIMC, a Draft Bill 
was prepared by the Legislative Department and wa s sent to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting for scrutiny and examination. After examination and scrutiny the draft Bill has 
again been referred to the Legislative Department. The Ministry has also informed that after 
finalization of the draft Bi ll, the approval of the Cabinet will be sought for introduction of Bill in 
Parliament. The Committee recommend that necessary steps should be taken for clearance of 
Bill from the Cabinet and its introduction in Parliament under intimation to the Committee. 
(Para 2.25, Rec. Sl. No. 18) 
 

 
 
24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
A draft Note for the Cabinet along with a draft Bill was earlier circulated to the 
concerned Ministries/Departments for approval/comments in August 2012. However, due to 
substantial changes carried out in the draft Bill in consultation with the Legislative Department, 
the draft Note for the Cabinet along with the revised draft Bill has again been circulated to 
concerned Ministries/Departments on 29 th May 2013 for approval/comments. After obtaining 
comments/approval of these Ministries/Departments, the draft Cabinet Note will be forwarded 
to the Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department for finalisation of the draft Bill. 
Thereafter, approval of the Cabinet will be sought for introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. 
(MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING, File No. M -16012/5/2012-IP&MC Dated; -
29.05.2013.) 
 
Initiatives of the Ministry in Social Media  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 19) 
The Committee find that in order t disseminate informat ion on the policy initiatives of 
the Government through the social media platform and to reach out to the young population of 
the country and sensitizing them of the Government’s policies and programmes, the Ministry 
launched its You Tube Channel, Facebook  page and Twitter account in September, 2012 and 
last week of December, 2012.  The Committee note that the channel has provided a window to 
disseminate information on key issues and events regularly in an effective manner.  As part of 
the initiatives under taken, the 43rd International Film Festival of Goa  from 20th to 30th 
November, 2012 was publicized and promoted in a big way through the channel thereby giving 
it a better profile on the social media  network.  The Committee note that the response of the 
initiatives taken was good and till 31 stJanuary, 2013 the channel received 90,000 video views 
and got subscriber list of approximately 1049.  The Committee also find that the Ministry’s 
venture in the facebook has also been well received with weekly reach of 15,000, 75,000 post 
views and 361 followers.  Further, a Digital Volunteer Programme which aims at dissemination 
of development message in the social media space has also been started.  The Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, during the  evidence informed about the initiatives 
and stated that as a Government initiative, it surpasses any other initiative taken by any other 
Ministry of Government of India.  The Committee have been informed that the Ministry will 
frame a comprehensive social  media policy and place an appropriate infrastructure to harness 
and leverage the potential of social media.  Taking note of the above initiatives, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take urgent steps to frame the social media policy in co -ordination 
with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  The details of appropriate 
infrastructure to harness and leverage the potential of social media should be worked out and 
put in place. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 29-05-2013, the Youtube Channel of the Ministry has received more than 2,55,000 
views and approximately 2486 subscribers. Facebook has 3300 likes and has a weekly reach of 

 
 
25 
 
more than 25,000 accounts. Twitter account has more than 17,000 followers.Blog has more 
than 1,18,000 page views an d has more than 490 subscribers. Goggle account of the Ministry 
has more than 1 lakh followers. More than 1650 people have registered with the Ministry as 
Digital Volunteers under “My India initiative and applications are still pouring in. 
 
In order to harness the potential of Social Media space effectively and to put in place 
the necessary infrastructure for the same, The Ministry has proposed to establish a “New 
Media Wing” in the Ministry to address the communication and dissemination requirements of 
the Government on social media platforms. The proposed wing would proactively pursue the 
engagement of the Government through a social media strategy aimed at focussed and 
enhanced dissemination, image and perception management.  In this regard, a draft No te for 
the Cabinet has been prepared and circulated to all Ministries/Departments including M/o 
Communication and IT for inter -ministerial consultation.  The comments of the 
Ministries/Departments are being received.  After the inter -ministerial consultation the Cabinet 
Note will be sent to the Cabinet Sectt. for placing  the same before the Cabinet. 
 
For establishment of the “New Media Wing”, which is a component of the Plan Scheme 
of the Ministry, a provision of Rs. 2250 crore has been made for the 12th p lan period.  The EFC 
for the said scheme is scheduled to be held shortly. 
 
(File No. P.11017/28/2013-PPC dated 3.6.2013)  
 

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee note that Broadcasting Sector of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting comprises of a PSU, the Broadcasting Engineering Consultants India (BECIL) and an 
autonomous Corporation-Prasar Bharati with two wings viz. All India Radio and Doordarshan.  
For the Twelfth Plan, the proposed IEBR was Rs.5000 core while the approved IEBR was Rs.1000 
crore.  For the year 2012 -13, Rs.400 crore had been earmarked under IEBR compo nent.  The 
Committee further note that the initial IEBR projected at Rs.400 crore, approved for financing 
Prasar Bharati’s Plan for the year 2012 -13 was reduced to Rs.200 crore at Revised Estimate 
Stage.  The Committee are dismayed to note that during the year 2012 -13, the revenue 
generated by AIR and Doordarshan was Rs.1263.56 crore and expenditure incurred from IEBR 
(upto February, 2013) was Rs.1583.43 crore leading to a gap of Rs.319.87 crore between the 
revenue earned and expenditure met out of IEBR.  I t is astonishing to note that despite 
widening gap between revenue receipt and expenditure, the target for IEBR during Twelfth Plan 
have been reduced to mere Rs.1000 crore.  The Committee would like to know the rationale 
behind steep reduction in IEBR targ et and how it is proposed to meet the burgeoning 
expenditure without generating IEBR.  They would like the Ministry to re -visit this vital aspect.  
The Committee would await necessary details in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
For Twelfth Plan Ministry of I&B proposed Rs. 5000 Crore to be funded by Prasar Bharati 
from Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) for the scheme ’Content Development & 
Dissemination’ under Revenue Plan. The position of the Ministry has remained same s o far. 
However Prasar Bharati has expressed its inability to incur this expenditure due to its IEBR 
funds being used for other obligations.  
Prasar Bharati has  intimated that the funds accrued from Internal Extra Budgetary Resources 
(IEBR) are being kept in Bank account and utilized for meeting the normal requirement such as 
– (i) Salary and wages of persons engaged on contractual and outsourcing (ii) Other 
Administrative expenses-Medical expenses, Domestic Travel expenses, Foreign Travel expenses, 
Power Supply Charges, Machinery and equipment/Tools & Plants, Minor Works, Augmentation 
& replacement of existing infrastructure and repair and maintenance of capital assets spread all 
over the country. (iii) Programme expenditure including software production and acquisition for 
Content Development and Dissemination of routine nature and Service Tax. 
 

 
 
27 
 
Importantly, any organization of this magnitude should have a cushion of amount worth 
of 4 months operating cost to face any eventuality of grant not being received  in time or 
delayed etc. 
The details of revenue earned (IEBR) and utilization of IEBR by Prasar Bharati during last 
three years are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Revenue (IEBR) Total expenditure  
( Plan & Non-Plan) 
Out of IEBR 
2010-11 1306.00 2939.73 1112.78 
2011-12* 1409.54 3340.57 1444.36 
2012-13*  1552.90 3412.85 1327.86 
* Subject to reconciliation of accounts. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting File No. G-20019/1/2013-B(Fin) Dated 07.06.2013) 
 
 
Implementation of Optical Fibre Connectivity Schemes 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee are also of the strong opinion that there is an imperative need to have a 
national broadcaster to spread nationalism, maintain cultural heritage of the country, protect 
and promote the language and dialects of people from across the country. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to take note of the concern of the Committee and apprise them of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Section 12 of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990, envisages that the Prasar Bharati while 
discharging its functions shall be guided by factors such as: upholding the unity and integrity of 
the country and the values enshrined in the Constitution, providing adequ ate coverage to the 
diverse cultures and languages of the various regions of the country by broadcasting 
appropriate programmes, promoting national integration by broadcasting in a manner that 
facilitates communication in the languages in India, etc.  The Ministry and the Prasar Bharati are 
bound by and committed to the provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act.  
 
(File No. 44011/02/2012-BAP dated 04.06.2013) 
 
  

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Autonomy and Accountability of Prasar Bharati 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee have been consistently expressing their concern over the sorry state of 
affairs in functioning of the public broadcaster - Prasar Bharati and their operational and 
financial autonomy. In this regard, the Committee note various concerns of the Prasar Bharati 
which include:- 
 
(i)  As per Section 3(4) of the Prasar Bharati Act, the general superintendence, 
direction and management of the affairs of Prasar Bharati shall vest in the Prasar Bharati 
Board. However, the functional autonomy as envisaged in the Act gets diluted by 
Various other Sections, especially Section 32 and proviso to Section 33 thereby 
compelling Prasar Bharati to seek prior permission from the Government on matters of 
recruitment, remuneration and other conditions of service. 
(ii)  The operational autonomy of the organization has been diluted because of 
shortage of staff and  
(iii)  Uncertainty of funding pattern. 
 
The Committee note that to address various issues related to financial and operational 
autonomy of the organization, several measures/ initiatives have been taken which include 
cabinet approval of proposal for providing Prasar Bhar ati non-plan support for meeting 100 per 
cent expenses towards salary and salary related expenses. However, all other operating 
expenses of Prasar Bharati are to be met out of its internal revenue earning which are 
decreasing year after year and Prasar Bha rati have expressed its inability to fully meet the 
financial requirement of the organization. To improve the financial and functional autonomy of 
Prasar Bharati, CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted before the Committee that they require help in 
grant of service tax exemption to Prasar Bharati, issue of directives to all the Ministries/PSUs to 
extensively use the public service broadcaster viz. AIR and Doordarshan for releasing all of their 
publicity campaigns in respect of their policies and programmes and ensur ing complete waiver 
of space segment and spectrum charges on actual basis every year for and uninterrupted 
allocation of frequency authorization/space segment to AlR/DD. The Committee feel that all 
these issues merit serious consideration to bring effectiv eness in the functioning of Prasar 
Bharati and the Ministry should consider them for follow up action 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
(File No. 44011/02/2012-BAP dated 04.06.2013) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 

 
 
29 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note with satisfaction that a panel led by Shri Sam Pitroda with 11 
Working Groups has now been constituted for the purpose of reviewing the institutional 
framework of Prasar Bharati including its relationship with Government, its continuing role as a 
public broadcaster and measures needed to ensure technical up -gradation of the organization. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue the matter with the exper t panel for early 
submission of the report. In the meanwhile, the Committee would emphasize that a balance 
should be struck between the Ministry and Prasar Bharati in such a way that Prasar Bharati 
enjoys fair amount of autonomy while the objective of the public service broadcaster is not lost 
sight of. 
 
(Para No. 2.14, Rec. Sl. No. 9) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been communicated to the Prasar Bharati for 
placing them before the Expert Committee for compliance. 
 
(File No. 44011/02/2012-BAP dated 04.06.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee note that there is a proposal for up -gradation of 58 existing FM/MW 
transmitters, setting up of 157 new FM transmitters of various capacities and eight high power 
transmitters along Indo -Nepal Border. However, the scheme is yet to be approved/sanctioned 
by the competent authority. The Committee emphasise that Prasar Bharati should take up 
these projects/schemes in the right earnest, get approvals for them early and closely monitor 
their implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
AIR has stated that improvement of FM coverage and that of alongwith Indo -Nepal 
Border is part of Umbrella Scheme “Broadcast Infrastruct ure Network Development”. This 
scheme is under process for approval of competent authority. 
 
Doordarshan has informed that in the 12th Plan, Doordarshan has proposed 
establishment of following eight high power transmitters along Indo Nepal Border.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above 8 HPTs are included in the 12th Plan scheme “Broadcasting Infrastructure 
Network Development”.  The EFC proposal containing the above projects has been circulated to 
appraisal agencies during Dec. 2012. The revised EFC Memo in respect of Broadcas ting 
Infrastructure Network Development of DD/AIR by incorporating the Comments of Planning 
Commission, and Ministry of Finance has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance on 23.5.2013 
so as to convene the EFC meeting at the earliest.  
 
(Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/1/2013-B(D) dated 30th May, 2013) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
  
Sr.no.      State     Location of    HPT 
1. Uttarakhand Pithoragarh 
2. Uttarakhand Tanakpur 
3. Uttar Pradesh Bankatwa 
4. Uttar Pradesh Nishangara 
5. Uttar Pradesh Siddharth Nagar 
6. Bihar  Forbesganj 
7. Bihar Raxaul 
8. Bihar Jaynagar 

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
 
Expansion of FM Radio 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 14) 
  
The Committee Note that the Cabinet in its meeting held on 7 th July, 2011 had approved 
‘Policy Guidelines on Expansion of FM Radio broadcasting service through private 
agencies(Phase-III)’. These were notified on 25th July, 2011. The Committee have been informed 
that permission for FM radio channels will be awarded through ascending e -auction, as 
followed by Department of Telecommunications for the auction of 3G and BWA spectrum, 
mutatis-mutandis, as recommended by the GoM on licensing methodology for FM Phase -III. An 
Application Review Committee (ARC) has been constituted in the Ministry for short listing of 
prospective bidders to participate in e -auction for award of license of FM channels under FM 
Radio (Phase-III). The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also submitted during 
the course of evidence that the Ministry is in the process of auctioning 839 new private FM 
Radio stations in 294 cities which is just about to begin. However, the post evidence reply of the 
Ministry wherein it has been stated that shortlisting of bidders can take place only when Notice 
Inviting Applications (NIA) is issued, gives an impression that the Ministry is yet to issue the NIA 
thereby delaying the subsequent stages involved in the process.   
 
(Para No.2.20 of Rec. Sl. No. 14) 
 
Keeping in view the fact that expansion of FM Radio Phase -III is one of the thrust areas 
of the Ministry during the Twelfth Plan and more than one and a half years have elapsed since 
the notification of guid elines in July, 2011, the Committee feel that the efforts of the Ministry 
need to be intensified further so as to achieve the projected targets. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to expedite the execution of various stages of auctioning of 83 9 new 
Private FM Radio Stations so that the number of cities having private FM Radio stations is 
significantly increased thereby helping in overall expansion of FM Radio stations. 
 
(Para No.2.21 of Rec. Sl. No. 14) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. E -auction of 839 
new private FM stations are proposed to be completed during the current financial year i.e. 
2013-14. All efforts are being made/will be made to achieve the target of e -auctioning of 839 
channels in 294 cities.  
 
(Replies to para nos. 2.20 and 2.21) 
 
 (F.No.N-38032/13/2013-FM dated 24th May, 2013) 

 
 
32 
 
 
Setting up National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that though the scheme of National Centre of 
Excellence for Animation Gaming and Special Effects was conceptualized in 2007 -08, it has still 
not been formally approved. The Committee express their serious displeasure t hat continued 
inter-Ministerial consultation and the constant landing of the proposal at the doorsteps of the 
Department of Expenditure, Department of Economic Affairs, the Planning Commission, Legal 
Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice without any constructive outcome has caused 
inordinate delay in implementation of the scheme.  Considering the fact that the scheme was 
conceived and formulated at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan and even after six precious 
years approval/ clearances are still awai ted for the scheme, the Committee feel that the 
Ministry is not serious about implementation of this scheme.  The Ministry has informed that 
EFC for the project is likely to be approved by May, 2013.  The Committee recommend the 
Ministry to streamline and fast track the approval for the scheme so that the centre can be set 
up in the current financial year itself. 
(Para 2.27, Rec. Sl. No.20)  
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Information &  Broadcasting has taken up this matter on priority with 
appraisal agencies such as Deptt. of Expenditure, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, Planning 
Commission for their concurrence/approval to enable this Ministry for early commencement of 
this scheme namely “S etting up of National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and 
Special Effects”.  An amount of Rs.11.00 crore has been allocated for the current financial year 
2013-14.   
Planning Commission has advised that the scheme being in PPP model with cost le ss 
that Rs. 100.00 crore is to be appraised by PPPAC and Advisor (Infrastructure), Planning 
Commission. A discussion with representative of Planning Commission was also held in the 
chamber of Secretary (I&B) to finalise the mode of operation/methodology fo r implementation 
of the scheme. Accordingly, revised proposal in PPP format is being referred to Advisor 
(Infrasturcture). Once the financial approval for the scheme is obtained, process for selection of 
a Financial Consultant and Transaction Adviser will be undertaken. 
 
 (File No. M-35018/7/2013-DO(F.I.) 
 
Global Film School 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 21) 
The Committee note that as part of the Twelfth Plan Scheme ‘Infrastructure 
Development Programme relating to Film Sector’ there is a proposal for improving the 
infrastructure of the Film and Television Institute of India, Pune to match the global standards.  

 
 
33 
 
The Committee further note that Planning Commission has accorded in -principle approval for 
the scheme with a total proposed outlay of Rs. 167 crore, out of which Rs. 80 crore is for FTII.  
The Committee also find that for the year 2013 -14, an allocation of Rs. 32.50 crore has been 
made out of which an amount of Rs. 15 crore has been allocated for FTII. Some of the 
components under infrastructure developmen t of FTII are augmentation of the resources  and 
replacement of old/ obsolete equipments both in Film and TV industry; introduction of the new 
technologies such as High Definition TV, advanced computer animation, digital film recording, 
etc.; updating the existing equipment to bring about overall improvement in the standards of 
higher professional education in the field of film making and TV production; expansion of some 
parts of buildings of FTII which also include advance resource and knowledge centre; 
construction of a new main theatre, etc.  Considering the contribution made by Indian film 
industry nationally and internationally, the Committee is of the firm view that the setting up of 
a new institute of global standards is indeed the need of the hour. T he Committee has been 
informed that based on the comments of Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance, the EFC 
Memo has been revised and circulated and the meeting of the EFC is scheduled for 05.04.2013.  
While taking a serious note of the callous attit ude and inaction on the part of the Ministry due 
to which the scheme has been delayed, the Committee recommend the Ministry to fast track 
the scheme and take urgent necessary steps for the approval and implementation.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal to upgrade Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) has been included in 
the 12 thPlan Scheme ‘Infrastructure Development Programme Relating to Film Sector’.  The 
total allocation for upgradation of FTII is Rs. 80 crore during the 12th Plan. A fter obtaining in -
principle approval of the Planning Commission, the scheme has been appraised by Expenditure 
Finance Committee on 05.04.2013.  The proposal has now been submitted for the approval of 
the competent Financial Authority. The scheme would be i mplemented immediately on receipt 
of approval from the Competent Authority.  
 
[F. No. M-21013/4/2013-F(F) dated 28th May, 2013] 
 
 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee note the Central Board of Film Certification, has been set up by the 
Central Government under section 3 of the Cinematograph Act 1952 for the purpose of 
sanctioning films for public exhibition.  An amendment to the Act was initiated by the Mi nistry 
way back in 2008 and a proposed Bill in this regard was circulated to all concerned Ministries 
including Ministry of Law & Justice for comments/views.  After incorporating their 
views/comments, the draft was further submitted to the Ministry of Law and Justice for their 
final vetting before submission to the Cabinet for approval.  In due course, however, it was 
realized that there are number of issues such as the process of certification, categories of 
certification, powers of the Ministry to enact l aws concerning certification of the 

 
 
34 
 
Cinematograph films for exhibition under Entry 60, List -1 of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India, etc. which needed to be looked into.  The Government felt that relevant 
provision of the Act should be re -examined thoroughly with an eye on public sensibilities, rapid 
changes in mode of exhibition due to emerging technologies and also to strike a balance 
between the Fundamental Right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 
19(1) (a) of the Co nstitution of India vis-à-vis the restrictions imposed under Article 19(2).  In 
this background, the Ministry have constituted a Committee of Experts i.e. Justice 
MukulMudgal Committee to look into issues related to functioning of CBFC and the certificatio n 
process.  
(Para No. 2.29) 
 
In view of the growing number of controversies relating to certification for Films, the 
Committee also feel that there is an urgent need to have a relook at the six decade old 
Cinematograph Act so as to bring it in tune with present times.  In fact, the amendments should 
have come much earlier.  The Committee desire that Ministry should impress upon the Expert 
Committee to examined the issues within a specific timeframe. 
 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should tak e all necessary steps so 
that an amount of Rs.10 crore earmarked for CBFC under Twelfth Plan for undertaking various 
activities under the scheme of ‘Upgradation Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC and 
Certification Process’ can be utilized meaningfully. 
(Para No. 2.30) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1952, which is almost six decades old, needs to be 
contemporized in order to make the process of certification of films for exhibition in tune with 
the changed times and also make it an effecti ve tool to tackle piracy.  It is, therefore, proposed 
to introduce Cinematograph Bill by repealing the Cinematograph Act, 1952. 
 
In this regard, the Ministry of I&B has constituted an expert Committee to examine 
issues of certification under Cinematograph Act, 1952 headed by Justice MukulMudgal (Retired 
High Court Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana) to review the Cinematograph Act in a time 
bound manner. 
 
The Committee since its constitution already held three meetings [at New Delhi, 
Mumbai and Kolkata] and various issues of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 have been discussed.  
Once the Report of the Committee is accepted by the Ministry, efforts will be made to 
introduce the draft bill in the Parliament as per the provisions laid down in this regard. 
 
 
Twelfth Plan scheme of ‘Upgradation Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC and Certification 
Process’ 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting under 12 th Plan has a Scheme title 
“Infrastructure Development Programme relating to Film Sector”, which has six com ponents 
related to various Media Units under Film Wing. One component is titled as ‘Upgradation 

 
 
35 
 
Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC and Certification Process’ for undertaking various 
activities of CBFC and has been allocated an amount of Rs.10.00 Crores un der 12 th Five Year 
Plan (2012 -17).  The total allocation sought for the whole scheme is Rs.167.00 Crores.  In -
principle approval by Planning Commission has been accorded.  After seeking the approval of 
the competent financial authority, CBFC will be able t o complete its activities during the 
current Plan Scheme period. 
 
(Reply to paras No.2.29 and 2.30) 
 
[File No.M-11014/1/2013-DO(FC)], dated May 29, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi Chairman 
13 December, 2013  Standing Committee on 
22 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)         Information Technology 
 
  

 
 
36 
 
Annexure-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21st November, 2013 from 11 00 hours to 
1240 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri Khagen Das 
4. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Sadashivarao D. Mandlik 
8. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
9. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani  
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Joy Abraham 
11. Shri Salim Ansari 
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
13. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
14. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Garg  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to   xxxx   xxxx  xxxx    consider and adopt draft Action Taken Report 
on Forty -sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  
3. xxxx     xxxx    xxxx 
4. xxxx     xxxx   xxxx 
5. xxxx     xxxx   xxxx 
6. xxxx     xxxx   xxxx  
7. xxxx     xxxx   xxxx 
 
8. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken Report on 
action taken by the Government on recommendations contained in Forty -sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
The draft Report was adopted by the Committee without any modification. The 
Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the Report to the 
House on a date convenient to him. 
  
9. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance provided by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee in 
drafting of the Report.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
***** 
 
xxxx     xxxx    xxxx  matter not related to the Report  

 
 
38 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SIXTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19  
 Total 13 
 Percentage 59.09 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 3 and 10  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 9.09 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 8, 9 and 12  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 13.64 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos:- 14, 20, 21 and 22  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 18.18 
 
 
 