 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 
  
 
29 


 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-23 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
24-62 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
63 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
64-79 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
79-86 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the committee held on 7th March, 2012….. 
 
87-88 
II. Annexure-II as referred  in the Action Taken Notes on the Recommendation No. 
22 of the Original Report……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
89 
III. Analysis of action taken by the Government on THE 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Twenty -first Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
90 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
14. Shri  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
    
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-first Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for Grants (2011 -12)’ of the Department of 
Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 4 August , 201 1. The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action 
Taken Notes contained in the Twenty -first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 4th November, 
2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
7 March, 2012. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendation s/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi;                          Chairman, 
20 March, 2012                                                                         Standing Committee on 
30 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                         Information Technology 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011-12) deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-first (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relating to Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the 
Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 August, 2011. 
It contained 36 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contain ed in the 
Report have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Para Nos.:-  2, 3, 4, 6, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 35 & 
36  
 
 Total: 20 
 Chapter: II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total: Nil 
 Chapter: III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24 & 29   
 Total: 08 
 Chapter: IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the repl ies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 10, 12, 17, 23, 28, 30 & 34  
 Total: 08 
 Chapter: V 
 
  

 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation of the 
Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible  
for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee further desire that Action Taken Note s on the Recommendations/Observ ations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by t he Government on some of their 
Recommendations.  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para No. 1 ) 
I. Under Utilisation of allocations made under IEBR and GBS 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Budget Estimate allocations that include both 
Internal and External Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and Gross Budgetary Support 
(GBS) are for Rs. 19881.09 crore during the year 2011-12 against the allocation of Rs. 
18135.10 crore during the previous year.  So far as the trend of utilization of outlay 
earmarked at BE st age is concerned, it has been observed that the allocations 
earmarked at BE stage are being reduced at RE stage and the actual utilization is far 
lesser than the allocations made at RE stage.  The Committee have consistently been 
expressing concern over th e aforesaid trend and exhorting the Department to take 
corrective action.  In spite of that the status of utilization of funds during the year 
2010-11 has further worsened. The allocations made for Rs.  18135.10 crore at BE 
stage were drastically reduced to  just Rs. 11860.84 crore at RE stage.  Not only that 
the utilization as on February 2011 is just Rs.  6507.60 crore i.e 54.87 per cent of the 
allocations made at RE stage.  In case the utilization status is compared to the 
allocations made at BE stage, it just comes to 35.88 per cent. 
 
 If the financial performance of the Department during the Eleventh Plan as a 
whole is taken into consideration, the proposed allocations for the five years both 
for IEBR and GBS are for Rs.  103526.96 crore.  During the first four years of the 
Eleventh Plan, the Department could utilize just Rs.  41676.36 crore which is little 
more than 40 per cent of the allocations.  In spite of the continuous pursuance of 
the issue, the Department does not seem to have bothered to undertake d etailed 
analysis of the reasons for under utilization of the scare resources.  The reply of the 
Department that the projects do not come up or get delayed sometimes due to 
reasons beyond control further substantiates the aforesaid observation of the 
Committee.  The detailed analysis of the various Plan schemes and the performance 
of two Public Sector Undertakings viz. MTNL and BSNL has been done in the 

 
 
subsequent paras of the Report.  Here the Committee express serious concern over 
the trend of under utilization of resources.  Moreover, it seems the Department has 
not taken the observation of the Committee seriously.  The Committee again exhort 
the Department to analyze the implementation of various Plan schemes so as to 
ensure that the budgetary resources p rovided for various schemes are effectively 
utilized and the schemes are implemented in a proper way.  The Committee strongly 
emphasize to undertake the review of the various schemes of the Department so as 
to understand the bottlenecks in implementation o f various schemes.  The desired 
corrective action may accordingly be taken and the Committee informed 
accordingly.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
7. The Department in their Action Taken Notes has inter-alia stated as under:- 
“BSNL: 
 
IEBR Allocated & Utilized during the last five Years & the Current Year 2011 -
12 is furnished below: 
                                      (Rs. in Crores) 
Financial Year IEBR Allocated  Fund Utilized 
2007-08 13846.5 7239.43 
2008-09 17813.5 10876 
2009-10 14001.19 12681 
2010-11 * 10151.7 24646 
2011-12  15277.63 1259.41 
 
Note:  
1. The figures of funds utilized for the year 2010-11 is provisional. 
2. The funds utilized for the year 2011 -12 (up to 31.07.2011) is 
provisional. 
3. * Rs. 18500.38 Crores paid to DOT for one time Spectrum Charges in 
respect of 3G & BWA during 2010-11 year. 
4. This allocation includes all Capital Expenditure. 
No budgetary support is provided by Government to BSNL. 
 
Under utilization of allocations made under IEBR and GBS: 
 
The outlays involve several c omponents.  One of the components may be 
related to the release of the payments to vendors under the ongoing 
projects.  It may be noted that there are defined rollout obligations/targets 
against which the payments of the vendors are released in these proje cts. 
Some of the rollout targets/obligations could not be completed by the 
vendors in time because of several reasons like delay in provisioning of 
electricity connections by state electricity authorities, delay in municipal 
clearance, delay in permission provided by state governments, delay in 
commissioning by the vendor etc.  As per the tender terms and conditions 
payments will be released once these targets/obligations are met by the 
vendors.  Therefore, the provisions made in the outlays for these payme nts 
may get shifted to the next financial year. 
 

 
 
The effective utilization of outlays is primarily linked to timely completion of 
tendering process for procurement and execution in case of turnkey 
projects. BSNL has made all out efforts for effective utili zation of outlays by 
ensuring effective and timely planning and estimation of requirements and 
formulation/ floating of tenders and thereafter the completion of tendering 
process, rigorous monitoring of project execution by regular periodic  review 
meeting at all level at BSNL corporate office as well as field unit. However 
the shortfall in effective utilization of outlays is most of the time due to 
unforeseen and unavoidable situations whereby the tendering process gets 
delayed/ stalled and the subsequent execution of project also gets affected.  
 
Measures being taken to ensure optimum utilization are as under:- 
 
(a) Change in procurement policy related to Price Formula; Vendors tie 
up; Fixing of   ‘Block of Three Years’ for procurement etc to curb the 
delay in procurement of equipment. 
(b)  Resorting to strict and tight schedule for timely availability of 
equipment. 
(c)  Periodical monitoring of implementation of all major projects for 
achievements of targets. 
 
MTNL: 
 
The financial performance of MTNL during the la st four years is given 
below:- 
                                                                                                                       (Rs. in crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Budget Estimates (IEBR) 2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 1204.10 
Revised Estimates 1692.33 1304.28 1352.01 1281.84 
Actual utilization  932.46 871.12 1194.70 1257.07 
Percentage  of utilization 
w.r.t. Revised Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 88.36% 98.06% 
Note: No budgetary support is provided by Government to MTNL. 
 
MTNL has been formulating its annual plan taking into consideration the 
experience it had gained during the previous years. Meetings are held with 
the units to review the progress of the ongoing projects. Further the status 
of the new / upcoming projects to be take n up during the next year, are 
reviewed and the funds are allocated based on the expenditure likely to be 
booked under various heads. MTNL has been making its best efforts for 
making estimates and projections as realistic as possible based on available 
information. Thus, every year MTNL is trying to formulate a more realistic 
plan where it hopes to spend all its plan outlay for the achievement of its 
physical targets. It is quite evident from above table that MTNL has 
progressively improved the amount of ca pital expenditure incurred vis -à-vis 
the proposed outlay and the utilization is 98.06  percent  in 2010-11. At the 
time of initial planning, provision of funds have also to be kept for the new 
and upcoming projects likely to come in future. However, if the projects do 
not come up or are delayed due to unavoidable circumstances in such cases 
the funds allotted against such projects remain unutilized and results in 
lower expenditure as compared to outlay. Further, in the telecom sector 

 
 
which is driven by stiff  competition, fast changing technologies and falling 
prices of the telecom equipments, it is becoming increasingly difficult to 
predict/ forecast the requirements well in advance. As an abundant 
precaution, certain provisions are kept in the projections wh ich do not 
always get spent.” 
 
8. The Committee had expressed their serious concern over the persistent trend of 
allocations lesser than projections, reduction of Outlays at Revised Estimates  stage and 
considerable shortfalls in the utilization of allocation s both under Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) component an d exhorted the 
Department of Telecommunications to take corrective action by reviewi ng the 
implementation of various schemes to ensure that the budgetary resources provided are 
effectively utilized and the schemes are implemented expeditiously. The Committee note 
from the information furnished by the Department that the issue has not been addressed 
adequately inspite of continuous pursuance by the Committee in various Reports on Demands 
for Grants. Instead of taking the desired action, the Department has tried to justify the under 
utilization of Outlays by simply stating that projects do n ot come up or are delayed leading to 
the Outlays provided remaining unutilized.  Delay in tendering process , not meeting the 
relevant obligations/targets by the vendors  have been cited as some of the reasons for under 
utilization of Outlays. Not only that , the Department has repeated the routine reply being 
furnished to the Committee year after year whereby the helplessness of the Department in 
providing/forecasting the requirement well in advance has been expressed due to the fast 
changing technologies an d falling price s of telecom equipments. The Committee disapprove 
the way the Department has addressed to such an important issue. The Committee are not 
inclined to accept the stereotyped reply particularly when the under utilization of Outlays is 
the persistent problem with the Department. While expressing their deep concern over the 
issue of under spending  of the allocated Outlays , the Committee once again exhort the 
Department to undertake the reviews of the various schemes/projects as well as workin g of 
the two Public Sector Undertakings i.e. BSNL and MTNL under the administrative charge of the 

 
 
Department. Besides, stringent measures need to be taken for the effective implementation 
of various  schemes/projects programme which would ultimately result into effecti ve 
utilization of Outlay s. The Committee may also like to emphasize to resort to Zero Based 
Budgeting strictly to improve the implementation status  of the various schemes/project s. 
Needless to say, realistic projection and bringing improvement in tendering process are the 
areas which needs to be looked into by the Department while assessing the requisite Outlays.   
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 5) 
II. Rural Telephony 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that rural teledensity as on 31st March, 2010 was 24.31 
per cent which has grown to 32.19 per cent as on January, 2011.  During the 
corresponding period, the urban teledensity has shown a tremendous 
growth.  It grew from 119.45 per cent to 150.20 per cent.  Wha t is 
disheartening to the Committee is the fact that in the last five years rural 
teledensity has not shown the kind of growth which has been witnessed in 
the urban areas.  In the last five years the urban teledensity has shown 
positive growth of 120.64 pe r cent which is almost four times that of the 
growth of rural teledensity.  The Committee find this highly disturbing.  
Taking into account that in line with NTP, 99, the Universal Service Support 
Policy came into effect from 1 st April, 2002 with the manda te to improve 
rural telephony.  However, in spite of the rigorous work done in the last 9 
years with the help of USOF, rural telephony has not shown the kind of 
growth which is expected.  The Committee understand that the telecom 
connectivity has played an important role in the overall economic growth of 
the country.  To achieve the inclusive growth there is an urgent need to give 
more attention to rural areas.  As such the initiative being taken by the 
Department and BSNL should further be geared up so as to fill up the gap 
between urban and rural teledensity.  The Committee would also like the 
Department to explore the possibility of introducing various new services to 
capture the rural market and steps be taken to make a significant inroads for 
3G and BWA services in these areas.” 
  
10. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
“Following initiatives have been taken on rural connectivity/broadband: 
 
i) Allotment of Spectrum for 3G and BWA services to the private 
operators through auction.  This will facilitate proliferation of 
broadband through mobile handset and wireless technologies. 
 
ii) Permitting Sharing of infrastructure amongst the Service providers. 
 

 
 
iii) The Indian Telegraph Rules have been amended, and stream IV has 
been added under the title “Provision of broadband connectivity to 
villages in a phased manner” to bring provisioning of broadband 
connectivity to the rural areas under the purview of the USOF. 
 
iv) USOF schemes for supporting shared infrastructure for mobile 
services in rural and remote areas. These towers will also be used to 
provide Broadband connectivity in the newly covered Block/Taluka 
headquarters. 
 
v) USOF, through BSNL, has started ‘Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme’ 
to provide wire-line broadband connectivity t o rural & remote areas 
by leveraging the existing rural exchanges infrastructure and copper 
wire-line network.  Under this scheme, BSNL will provide 8, 88,832 
wire-line Broadband connections to individual users and 
Government Institutions over a period of 5 -years, i.e., by 2014. The 
estimated subsidy outflow is Rs. 1500 crore in 5 years. As of July 
2011, a total of 3,06,443 broadband connections have been provided 
under this scheme. 
 
As on 31.03.2011, BSNL has the 28.16 Million rural GSM connection out of 
total 86.32 Million GSM connection, which is 32.62 % of total GSM (Rural+ 
Urban) connection. As on 31.08.2011, BSNL has the 29.79 Million rural GSM 
connection out of total 90.48 Million GSM connection, which is 32.92 % of 
total GSM (Rural+ Urban) connection.  BSNL has planned to cover all the 
villages with GSM services having population greater than 1000 in coming 
years, subject to techno -commercial viability of BSNL. Out of 6.1 Lakh 
villages, BSNL has already covered 3.95 Lakhs villages, having population 
more than 1000. To further augment the GSM capacities, process to procure 
additional 15 Million GSM lines has already been initiated.  BSNL, subject to 
techno commercial feasibility, will continue to participate in the schemes 
launched by USOF, in providing se rvices to urban & rural masses of the 
country. The 3G Services is presently planned in cities only due to techno -
Commercial reasons.” 
 
11. The Committee express serious concern over the way the Department has 
responded to one of the major concern relating to slow growth of teledensity in rural 
areas as compared to the growth in urban areas in the country.  Even when the urban 
teledensity grow th has been almost four times that of the growth of rural teledensity 
during the last five years, the reply furnished by the Department does not indicate the 
sense of urgency with regard to the rural teledensity.  As per the reply furnished by the 
Department out of 6.1 lakh villages having population more than 1000, BSNL has covered 
only 3.95 lakh villages.  The position of villages having population less than 1000 has not 

 
 
been indicated in the action taken note.  What is more disturbing is the BSNL’s respo nse 
which states that the PSU would continue to participate in the schemes launched by USOF 
subject to techno - commercial feasibility.  With regard to the commercial aspect, the 
Committee find that BSNL has been losing ground to private sector and its shar e in the 
wireless connection has shown a decline during the period March 2010 to January 2011 as 
revealed during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2011 -12 from 21.39 per 
cent to 12.22 per cent.  Even in the wireline connection, the share of P SU has declined by 
1.95 per cent during the aforesaid period. The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that 
BSNL has neither been able to compete in the market on commercial considerations nor 
ready to shoulder the social responsibility bestowed upon it be ing the Government 
Telecom Service Provider.   
On the recommendation of the Committee to explore possibility of introducing 
various new services to capture the rural market as well as to initiate steps to make 
significant inroads for 3G and BWA services in  rural areas, the Department has again 
shown insensitivity and stated that 3G services are presently planned in cities only due to 
techno commercial reasons.  The Committee fail to understand depriving rural masses 
from the latest technological initiatives being taken with regard to telecom services.   
The Committee while expressing serious concern over the attitude of BSNL with 
regard to rural areas telephony would like the Department to take up the matter seriously 
with BSNL so as to sensitize the organization towards the issues related to rural telephony 
particularly when BSNL is the Government undertaking under the administrative control 
of the Union Ministry of Telecommunication.  The Committee would also like the 
Department of Telecommunication that th eir concerns in this regard should be placed at 
the highest level in the Government.    

 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 8) 
II. Having telephone connection as one of the criteria to debar a person from BPL list 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee in 8th Report on Demands for Grants 2010 -11 had 
recommended that the issue regarding debarring a person from the BPL list 
on possessing a telephone connection should be taken up by the 
Department with the Ministry of Rural Development and the State 
Governments.  When the issue was pursued further during the examination 
of Demands for Grants of the year 2011 -12, the Ministry has taken up the 
matter with the Ministry of Rural Development.  As per the status report 
given by the  Ministry of Rural Development, the position is not very clear.  
As per the Ministry of Rural Development the existing criteria/methodology 
for identification of BPL households i.e criteria/ methodology for BPL Census 
2002 was adopted on the recommendation  of an Expert Group.  In this 
method, 13 socio -economic indicators reflecting the levels of living and 
quality of life of the rural population were used to identify the poor 
households.  While elaborating on the 13 indicators, at one place these have 
been stated to be Land Holdings, Type of House, Availability of Clothing, 
Food Security, Sanitation, ownership of consumer durables viz. TV, Electric 
Fan, Kitchen appliances, Cooker, Radio etc., Literacy status if highest literate, 
Status of Household Labour, M eans of livelihood, Status of Children, Type of 
indebtedness, Reasons for migration and Preference for Assistance.  The 
telephone connection thus do not find direct mention in the list.  However, 
at another place in the case of BPL Census 2002 conducted in  the year 2004 
in the State of Karnataka, it has clearly been mentioned that telephone 
connection is one of the parameters.  The family having telephone 
connection along with other household equipments like Television, Radio, 
Fan, Refrigerator, 2/4 wheeler s etc. were given 4 marks.  In Karnataka, 
families who scored 14 & less than 14 points are considered BPL families. 
 
The Committee observe that in case where a person having telephone 
connection as is evident from the practice in Karnataka is debarred from  the 
BPL list, to achieve the desired level of teledensity in rural areas may be a big 
problem.  The Committee find that this is a serious matter which could have 
got the attention of the Department suo -moto.  The Committee deplore 
even when the issue was raised by the Committee in their said report, the 
Department did not bother to get the clear -cut position from the Ministry of 
Rural Development.  While expressing unhappiness over the way the 
Department has dealt with the matter, the Committee strongly re commend 
to take up the matter with the Ministry of Rural Development, particularly 
when the methodology for the proposed forthcoming BPL 2011 Census is 
being finalized.” 
 
13. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“Information obtained from the Ministry of Rural Development regarding 
Having Telephone connection as one of the criteria to debar a person form 
BPL list” is as follows:- 

 
 
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development. The 
Ministry of Rural Deve lopment has clarified that it provides financial and 
technical support to States/UTs for conducting the BPL Census to identify 
the rural households living below the Poverty Line who could be assisted 
under its various programmes. The BPL Census is conducte d by the 
respective States/UTs and the BPL lists are prepared and maintained by the 
respective State Government/UT administrations. Last such BPL Census was 
conducted in 2002. 
 
For conducting the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Ministry 
of Rural Development constituted an Expert Group, to advise it on the 
suitable methodology which consisted of academicians, experts, 
representatives of the civil society organizations and senior officials of the 
Central and State Governments associated with m anagement of the rural 
poverty alleviation programmes, as members. The Expert Group submitted 
its report on 21 st August 2009 under chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena. The 
Report of the Expert Group was posted on the Ministry’s website 
www.rural.nic.in  soliciting comments and suggestions. It was circulated 
among the State Governments/UT Administrations and the concerned 
Central Ministries for their comments. The Ministry also consulted the issue 
of finalization of methodol ogy with experts in the related field. In 
accordance with suggestions of experts of Ministry of Rural Development  
has conducted a Pilot survey to field test alternative methodologies and to 
arrive at the methodology for conducting forthcoming BPL Census. Results of 
pilot study were discussed with States/UTs and methodology/criteria so 
arrived was placed before the approval of Cabinet which include 
“Households owning landline phones” as one of the exclusion criteria. 
 
With approval of Union Cabinet the Socio -Economic and Caste Census (SECC 
2011) has been commenced for collecting Socio -economic and caste data of 
households in the rural and urban areas of the country. Socio economic data 
collected from SECC 2011 will be u tilized by respective States/UTs for 
identifying BPL households in rural areas for Twelfth Five Year Plan. The 
SECC-2011 would be conducted from 30th June, 2011 to 31st December, 
2011 in a phased manner throughout the country. However the Criteria for 
identification of rural BPL households under the Socio Economic and Caste 
Census (SECC-2011) have not yet been finalized.” 
 
14. The Committee find that the Department at last made some efforts to get the clarification 
from the Ministry of Rural Development reg arding debarring a person from the BPL list on 
possessing a telephone connection.  Even when the information obtained from the Ministry of 
Rural Development clearly stipulates that the methodology/criteria of identification of BPL 
persons include household s owning a landline phone as one of the exclusion criteria, the 
Department has not bothered to furnish their comments which clearly indicates the insensitivity 
of the Department towards achieving the desired level of teledensity in rural areas.  As observe d 

 
 
by the Committee in the earlier recommendation in case a person having telephone connection is 
debarred from the BPL list to achieve the desired level of teledensity in the rural areas may be a 
big problem.  The Committee exhort the Department to take up  the issue with the Department of 
Rural Development on an urgent basis.  The concerns of the Committee in this regard should also 
be adequately conveyed to the Ministry of Rural Development as well as the Ministry of Finance 
and Planning Commission.   
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 9) 
III. Shared Infrastructure Mobile Service Scheme 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The aforesaid scheme was launched with the help of USOF with objective to 
provide subsidy support for setting up and managing 7871 number of 
infrastructure sites (towers) in 500 Districts across 27 States for provision of 
mobile services in the specified rural and remote areas where there is no 
existing fixed wireless or mobile coverage.  The targets were further scaled 
down to 7363.  The agreements effective from 1 June, 2007 were signed 
with the successful bidders in May, 2007.  The roll out period which was 
initially one year, was further extended till December, 2009.  Even when the 
extended period has already been over, 211 towers are yet to be set up.  The 
physical targets of setting up of 265 towers during 2010-11 could not be fully 
met.  The physical achievement was only 138 towers as on December, 2010. 
 
As per the information furnished by the Department, the infras tructure so 
created is to be shared by three service providers for provision of mobile 
services.  So far as the status of utilization of the infrastructure so created 
under the scheme is concerned, the data furnished by the Department 
indicates that out of  the target of 22161 Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) 
only 13866 i.e. 62.57 per cent of BTS could be commissioned by different 
service providers as on December, 2010.  The Committee are surprised to 
note the replies of the Department as furnished on 18 Mar ch, 2011 whereby 
it has been stated that most of the towers under this scheme are likely to be 
commissioned in a phased manner by March, 2011.  The Committee fail to 
understand how the Department would ensure the commissioning of most 
of the BTS within a f ew days.  The Committee express serious concern over 
the way the scheme is being implemented.   The Committee recommend 
that all out efforts should be made to ensure that all the targeted towers are 
set up and commissioned so that rural and remote areas co uld get the 
telecom connectivity.” 
 
16. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“It is informed that 7289 out of the proposed  7353 mobile towers under the 
scheme have been commissioned. Infrastructure Providers who are installing 

 
 
the mobile towers in North East states i.e. BSNL and KEC International 
Limited have been allowed to commission the remaining towers by 31 
August 2011 ke eping in view the difficulties being faced by them in the 
region. Regular meetings are being held with Infrastructure Providers & 
Mobile service providers to review the progress and to resolve the issues 
leading to delay, which are in the purview of the USOF.” 
 
17. The Committee note that the Shared Infrastructure Mobile Service Scheme which 
mandated to provide subsidy support for setting up and managing 7871 number of 
infrastructure sites (towers) in 500 Districts across 27 States for provision of mobile services in 
the specified rural and remote areas where there is no existing fixed wireless or mobile 
coverage is yet to be completed.  As per the Action Taken Note furnished by the Department, 
there are still 64 mobile towers yet to be commissioned.  Beside s, the Department has not 
even bothered to furnish the updated status of commissioning of the remaining 8295 BTS 
even when the Committee had expressed doubts about the commissioning of these towers by 
March 2011 as submitted during the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the year 
2011-12.  The Committee express their serious concern over the undue delay in the 
completion of the project taking into account that it was originally targeted to complete the 
project by 2008 and therefore once again imp ress upon the Department to ensure that the 
remaining mobile towers are commissioned at the earliest and the Committee informed 
accordingly.   
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 11) 
IV. Illegal Operations of Telecom Networks 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the illegal telecom networks are 
mushrooming in the country.  As per the cases reported so far 500 
clandestine/illegal setups are operating in various parts of the country.  The 
actual position in this regard may even be worse.  After analyzing the State -
wise position with regard to illegal operation of telecom networks in the 
country, the Committee observe that such cases have been reported in 16 
States.  The position is worse in Andhra Prad esh (120) followed by Tamil 
Nadu (100), Delhi (61), Maharashtra (54), Karnataka (31) where the number 
of illegal operations is very high.  The Committee express serious concern 
over such a high number of illegal telecom networks in the country.  These 
illegal networks cause a great loss to the Government because they need not 

 
 
pay the licence fee.  Not only that they are security threat to the country.  
The Committee understand that the illegal operations are busted by TERM 
Cells.  The raids are conducted al ong with the persons from Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and the cases are handed over to LEAs 
simultaneously.  The Committee are concerned to note that the Department 
has not maintained the data with regard to dates when these cases were 
referred to LEAs .  The Committee strongly recommend to collect such 
information and apprise the Committee so as to understand the action taken 
against the illegal operators.” 
 
19. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“The date of raids has been submitted along with the list of cases provided 
earlier. The raids have been conducted along with the persons from Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and the cases are handed over to LEAs 
simultaneously. In general, the date of raid can be take n as the date of 
handing over of the case to LEA. The TERM Cells have been asked to mention 
the dates on which the cases were handed over to LEAs for rechecking the 
same.” 
 
20. The Committee had recommended the Department to collect the information about t he 
dates when the raid with regard to the illegal operations of telecom networks are busted by TERM 
Cells and the cases handed over to Law Enforcement Agency (LEA).  The Department instead of 
collecting the data and furnishing the same to the Committee has  reproduced the already known 
information in a vague manner according to which the raids are conducted alongwith the persons 
from Law Enforcement Agency and the cases are handed over to LEA simultaneously.  The 
Committee again emphasize that illegal teleco m networks cause a great loss to the Government 
and are a serious security threat to the country.  There is an urgent need to take immediate steps.  
The Department’s response indicates the casual attitude on the part of the Department.  The 
Committee again  emphasize to collect the desired information and furnish the same to the 
Committee.  Besides, urgent steps need to be taken to ensure that cases of illegal telecom 
networks mushrooming in the country are investigated within the stipulated timeframe and th e 
offenders held guilty are penalized.      .  
  

 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 22) 
V. Roll Out Obligation of 2G Spectrum 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“As per para 10.2(1) of the Licence Agreement, the licensor may without 
prejudice to any other remedy available for the breach of any conditions of 
licence, by a written notice of 60 Calender days from the date of issue of 
such notice to the licencee, terminate these licences under specified 
circumstances which include failure  to perform any obligations under the 
licence including timely payments of fee and other charges due to the 
licensor, failure to rectify within time prescribed, any 
defect/deficiency/correction in service/equipment as may be pointed out by 
the licensor, if licensor goes into liquidation or ordered to be wound up and 
if the licence is recommended by TRAI for termination of licence for non -
compliance of terms and conditions of the licence.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that the Department has not maint ained data with regard 
to licensees issued notices for not agreeing to the aforesaid obligations as 
per the Licence Agreement.  When the specific information was asked, the 
Department in a very vague manner has stated that compliance to different 
conditions of licensees are dealt with in various wings/units of DoT and 
compilation of violations by approximately 260 existing UAS licensees is not 
readily available.  The Department has further mentioned that it would take 
sometime to collect the data desired by the Committee. 
 
 The Committee further find that 120 new licences of 2G spectrum for 
Unified Access Service were issued by the Department in January, 2008.  
Para 35.2 of the Licence Agreement specifically provides for roll out 
obligations and penal provis ions for violation.  As per the Agreement, for 
delay in roll out of more than 52 weeks, the licences may be terminated 
under the terms and conditions of the Licence Agreement.  The Committee 
further note that in the delay of less than 52 weeks, the licenso r is entitled 
to recover LD charges at the specified rates as mentioned in para 35.2 of the 
Licence Agreement.  When asked for the specific information about the 
number of operators who are yet to start 2G operations after obtaining the 
licence, the Department at one place has mentioned the name of 6 licensee 
companies viz. S. Tel Private Limited (Jammu and Kashmir), Spice 
Communications Limited (Andhra Pradesh), Spice Communications Limited 
(Haryana), Spice Communications Limited (Maharashtra), Idea Cellul ar 
Limited (Karnataka) and Idea Cellular Limited (Punjab).  It has been 
mentioned that the licensees have been allocated start up allocations after 
award of UAS but have not yet registered with Telecom Enforcement and 
Resource Monitoring (TERM) Cells of Department of Telecommunications for 
coverage testing of their network to meet the roll out obligations as per 
licence conditions.  As per the information furnished by the Department, till 
date no UAS licence has been terminated.  At another place it has bee n 
mentioned that recently TRAI recommended for cancellation of 74 UAS 
licences for violation of roll out obligation conditions.  With regard to issue 
of show cause notices, there is no clarity with regard to number of licencees 
who have been issued show ca use notices.  At one place it has been 

 
 
mentioned that show cause notices for termination have been issued to 5 
licensees and for additional 5 licensees notices are under approval.  In the 
same para, it has been mentioned that in addition to above, 3 show c ause 
notices for cancellation of UAS licences have been issued for violation of roll 
out obligation conditions and 2 more show cause notices for termination are 
under approval. In the next line, it has been mentioned one show cause 
notice for termination has been issued for violation of the licence conditions 
and intra -service area merger guidelines and 5 more notices of similar 
violations are under legal vetting.  Not only that it has also been mentioned 
64 cases have been referred back to TRAI for their r econsideration in the 
context of licence conditions.  To add this the analysis of the detailed 
statement sent by the Department along with the written replies reveal that 
against the column of date of issue of show cause notice to the licencees at 
5 places  viz. Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. Ltd. (Delhi), Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. 
Ltd. (Mumbai) show cause notices have been stated to be issued on 7 
March, 2011.  Again in case of Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. (Assam), 
Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. (Kerala) and S istema Shyam TeleServices 
Ltd. (West Bengal) show cause notices have been stated to be issued on 5 
March, 2011.  In case of Spice Communications Limited (Andhra Pradesh) 
and Idea Cellular Limited (Karnataka), it has been mentioned that show 
cause to the licencee is under approval.  In the column of remarks of AS Cell, 
DoT against 7 licensees roll out has been shown within one year from the 
date of startup spectrum allocation and in 2 causes it has mentioned as 
more than 52 weeks.  The aforesaid licensees are apart from the licensees to 
whom the show cause notices have been stated to be issued in the detailed 
statement. 
 
 The aforesaid position clearly indicates that there is lot of confusion 
with regard to the number of licensees who could not meet the roll out 
obligations and to whom the show cause notices have been issued.  Not only 
that, out of 74 UAS licenses recommended for cancellation by TRAI for 
violation of roll out obligation condition, the Department acted in respect of 
only 10 odd licensees.  Rema ining 64 cases have been referred back to TRAI 
for their reconsideration in the context of licence conditions.  The 
Committee note that 120 2G licenses were issued on January, 2008 and 
already more than three years have passed.  During these three years no  
action seems to have been taken to cancel the licenses of the defaulter 
licensees as clearly stipulated in the terms and conditions of the licenses.  
Show cause notices were issued only during the month of March and April, 
2011 and that too in respect of only 5 or 6 licensees.  What is surprising to 
the Committee is that no UAS licnese has ever been terminated till now even 
when cancellation of the license is a legal binding as per the license 
agreement as acknowledged by the Department.  To add to this, o ne of the 
conditions of cancellation of notice as per para. 10.2(1) of the License 
Agreement the details of which have already been given above is to 
terminate the licence if so recommended by TRAI for termination for non 
compliance of the terms and condition of the license.  The Committee fail to 
understand the inaction on the part of the Department with regard to 
cancellation of as many as 74 UAS licenses as recommended for cancellation 

 
 
by TRAI for violation of roll out obligation conditions.  The Committ ee 
deplore the way the Department and its various wings are functioning. 
 
 The Committee may further like to highlight that 120 new Licenses of 
2G spectrum for Unified Access Services were issued at a very reasonable 
price.  Even then, the licensees fa il to meet out the roll out obligations.  The 
scarce resource that is spectrum remained idle with the service providers 
which was a clear loss to the customer for the benefit of whom the spectrum 
was allocated.  What is really disappointing to note is that LD charges are 
imposed if the delay in roll out is upto 52 weeks is more a favourable 
position where neither the penalty is imposed nor cancellation is done as is 
apparent from the aforesaid position.  The Committee strongly disapprove 
the inaction of the Dep artment which made the default above 52 weeks a 
gainful position.  While deploring the way the Department and its various 
Wings have failed to ensure compliance of the roll out obligation by the 
service provides, the Committee strongly recommend that stric t action 
should be taken against the defaulter licensees.” 
 
22. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“Sub-Para 1:  As mentioned in the report in Para 99 &  100, some of the 
recent violations details had already been made available to the committee. 
However, various cells of the DoT/ TRAI have been requested to compile the 
data on priority as desired by the committee and the same would be made 
available, as early as possible.  
 
Sub-Para 2: In respect of the observations about the number of Show Cause 
Notices issued to UAS  licensees for violation of the various license 
conditions, earlier replies were given as per the specific question of the 
committee.  Their  seems to be confusion because in the said question, 
committee had referred to 120 UAS Licences and in subsequent question, 
Committee has referred to all UAS licensees. It is to mention that TRAI had 
sent the recommendations in respect of 145 UAS Licences only. The remarks 
in the Annexure (sent to the Committee earlier) were meant for further 
clarity and were based on the status at that time.  The desired information is 
attached again, in the tabulated form now, along with complete details as 
per Annexure-II. The list consists of details of 24 show cause notices (SCNs)  
issued for termination. Out of these 15 SCNs have been issued for violation 
of roll out obligations and 6 SCNs have been issued for violation of 
substantial equity related conditions/ merger guidelines. Three more SCNs 
are proposed to be issued as per legal advice, as the matter is sub-judice.  
 
Sub-Para 3:  TRAI vide its letters dated 18th November 2010 and 22nd 
December 2010 recommended for cancellation of 43 Unified Access Service 
(UAS) licenses as per licence conditions and to consider the cancellation of 
another 31 UAS licenses after legal examination out of 145 UAS licences.  
These 145 UAS   were granted from the year 2006 to 2008. Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) had examined the re commendations of TRAI as 
per the UAS License conditions in consultation with Ministry of Law and 
Justice. The Show Cause Notices were issued to the Licensees who have not 

 
 
registered with TERM Cell for roll out testing even after delay of more than 
52 weeks from the due date for meeting the 1st year rollout obligations.   
 
As per proviso -5 of section 11(1) of TRAI Act - 1997, ”if the Central 
Government having considered that recommendation of the TRAI, comes to a 
prima facie conclusion that such recommendatio n cannot be accepted or 
needs modifications, it shall, refer the recommendation back to the Authority 
for its reconsideration and the authority within fifteen days from date of 
receipt of such reference forward to the Central Government its 
recommendation after considering the reference made by that Government. 
After receipt of further recommendation if any, the Central Government shall 
take a final decision” 
 
Since the government came to a prima facie conclusion that TRAI 
recommendations may need modificat ions, the reference was sent back to 
TRAI for its reconsideration as per TRAI Act, 1997 for other cases. 
 
After reconsideration, TRAI vide its letter dated 14th July 2011 has 
recommended for cancellation of 53 licences. Out of these 53 licences, show 
cause notices have already been issued to 15 licensees and to 3 more 
licensees SCNs shall be issued as per lega l advice because the matter is sub -
judice. The details of 15 show cause notices issued for violation of roll out 
obligation condition are mentioned in the Annexure-II. Now, it has been 
decided to issue the SCNs for termination of licenses for remaining 35 UAS 
licensees also as recommended by TRAI. 
 
TRAI in its recommendation dated 14.07.2011 has also recommended to 
seek legal opinion once again on the issue of cancellation of another 30 UAS 
licences. Accordingly, case is being sent to law Ministry for legal opinion.   
 
After issuing of UAS licenses in the year 2008, an amendment dated 10 Feb. 
2009 in respect of rollout obligation conditions was issued.  Since this 
amendment had financial implications, therefore, the matter was referred to 
Ministry of Finance for getting their views in the matter. Ministry of Finance 
had given their view in December 2010. Action has been taken in these cases 
immediately after receipt of views /comments of Ministry of Finance. As per 
amended license conditions, data required for calculation of LD/ cancellation 
of the licenses, such as, date of allocation of frequency, average delay in 
SACFA clearance, date of registration by Telecom service Providers (TSPs) 
with TEC/ TERM cells for roll out testing were collected from various un it of 
the DoT and notices were issued to various licensees after compilation and 
computations for imposition of LD & cancellation of licenses, as applicable.                                                                
 
Sub-Para 4 : In respect of the 120 new Licensees, the LD was imposed as per 
licence conditions wherever there was  delay in compliance of rollout 
obligations beyond the due date. In respect of Licensees where delay in 
registration with TERM Cell was more than 52 weeks  from due date for 
meeting the roll out obligations, in addition to levying the maximum amount 
of LD i.e. Rs. 7 Crores, Show Cause Notices for termination of the UAS 
Licences has also been  issued.” 

 
 
23. The Committee find that whereas para 10.2(1) of the L icence Agreement clearly 
stipulates that the licensor may without prejudice to any other remedy available for the 
breach of any conditions of licence, by a written notice of 60 calender days from the date 
of issue of such notice to the licencee, terminates  this licences under specified 
circumstances, the Department of Telecommunication has failed to maintain the data 
with regard to licensees issued notices for not agreeing to the aforesaid obligations laid 
down under the Licence Agreement.  Even when the is sue was raised strongly by the 
Committee in the recommendation, the Department could not get the information from 
the various wings/TRAI for 260 existing UAS licensees. This speaks volume of insensitivity 
of the Department towards such an urgent issue.  Wh ile expressing strong objection to 
the way the Department of Telecommunication is functioning, the Committee desire the 
Department to act and make available the desired information to the Committee.  
Moreover, there should be a set procedure for maintaining the aforesaid information with 
the Department.   
 The Committee in the recommendation had further raised serious concern over 
the non-fulfillment of roll out obligation by various licencees and strongly recommended 
for strict action against the defaulter  licencees.  The action taken note furnished by the 
Department indicates that TRAI vide its letters dated 18.11.10 and 22.12.10 had initially 
recommended for cancellation of 43 UAS licences for violation of obligations as per the 
licence conditions and to consider the cancellation of another 31 UAS licences after the 
legal examination out of 145 UAS licences granted from the year 2006 -08.  The 
Department refereed back the case to TRAI for its reconsideration which seems to be a 
delaying tactics of the Depar tment.  Even when after reconsideration, TRAI vide its letter 
dated 14.07.2011 had recommended for cancellation of 53 licences clearly, show cause 

 
 
notices were issued to only 15 licencees.  The action taken reply further indicates that in 
addition to the a foresaid 53 licences, TRAI has also recommended to seek legal opinion 
once again on the issue of cancellation of another 30 UAS licences.  The Committee are 
further concerned to note that even in case of 15 licencees to whom the show -cause 
notices were iss ued latest by 01.06.2011 and the replies furnished latest by 18.08.2011, 
even after the passage of approximately six months, thereafter, the licences could not be 
cancelled.   
 The Committee may further like to highlight that the licences to the aforesaid 
defaulter licencees were issued during the period 2006 -08 and the penalty was imposed 
for default of 52 weeks as per the Licence Agreement.  Since the Licence Agreement 
stipulates cancellation after 52 weeks delay and do not provides for penalty beyond 52 
weeks, the licencees thereafter are neither paying the penalty nor action is being taken 
for cancellation of their licences which has made the delay of above 52 weeks in roll out 
obligation as a gainful proposition for the service providers.  Moreover, the  scarce 
resource that is spectrum remained idle with the service providers and the end user for 
whose benefit the spectrum was allocated remained the loser.  What is more 
disappointing is the fact that even when the issue has been raised very strongly in t he 
Committee’s earlier recommendation, the concrete action for cancellation of licenses has 
not been taken by the Department.  The Committee deplore the way the Department and 
its various wings have failed to ensure the compliance of the roll out obligatio n by the 
service providers and reiterate their recommendation to take strict action against the 
defaulter licencees. 
  

 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 24) 
VI. Roll Out Obligation of 3G Spectrum Services 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“xxxxx…the Committee further find that with regard to the allocation of 3G 
spectrum the stipulated roll out period is within 5 years of the effective date.  
The aforesaid provision has been made as per the amendments of UAS 
Licence Agreements issu ed from 1 September, 2010.  The Committee 
consider 5 years too long a period for the roll out obligation.  The Committee 
are unable to understand such a great difference of roll out period between 
2G and 3G.  In case of 2G, the roll out has to be effective within 52 weeks i.e. 
one year and in case of 3G upto 5 years the service providers can hold up the 
roll out.  The Committee may also like to highlight that spectrum is a scarce 
and non -renewable natural resource.  The best way is the efficient and 
effective utilization of the resource.  The aforesaid provision of 5 years for 
roll out obligation of 3G spectrum would result in blocking of the scare 
resource.  The Committee are of the strong opinion that the aforesaid 
provision need to be reconsidered by the Department in the light of the 
observations made above.” 
 
25. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
“xxxx….the rollout obligation in case of 3G being part of Notice Inviting 
Applications (NIA), it cannot be altered at this stage.” 
 
26. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had strongly recommended to 
reconsider the stipulated roll out period of 5 years with regard to 3G licenses particularly 
when the roll out period in case of 2G spectrum is 52 weeks i.e. one year.  Instead of acting on 
the recommendation of the Committee, the Department in a casual way has stated that the 
roll out obligation in case of 3G being part of Notice Inviting Application (NIA) cannot be 
altered at this stage.  The Committee find that th e recommendation has not been understood 
in a right perspective by the Department.  The Committee’s concern was for the future policy 
of the Government with regard to the allocation of 3G spectrum.  The Committee appreciate 
that the alteration of the perio d of roll out obligation may not be possible in case of the 
existing licenses, however, the issue need to be reconsidered for the future allocation of 3G 
spectrum.  The Committee again emphasize that spectrum is a scarce and non -renewable 
resource.  The best way is the effective and efficient utilization of the resource.  The aforesaid 

 
 
provision of 5 years of roll out obligation of 3G spectrum would result in blocking of the 
scarce resource keeping in view the existing scenario of roll out obligation of 2G spectrum.   
The Committee would, therefore, like to reiterate their recommendation to reconsider 
the period of roll out obligation of 5 years in case of 3G spectrum.  The period of roll out 
obligation for 3G licenses should be altered from 5 years to  52 weeks as applicable in the case 
of 2G spectrum.  
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 29) 
VII. Issues related to BlackBerry 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that in spite of the security agencies expressing 
serious concern over the encrypted data of Blackberry and its security risks, 
the Government have not been able to resolve the problem.  The Committee 
note that Research in Motion (RIM) through its Blackberry Services offers 
Voice, SMS, BlackBerry Internet Servic es (BIS), Blackberry Messenger (BBM) 
and BlackBerry Enterprise Solution (BES) services.  However, due to its 
nature of highly encrypted data, the Security Agencies want interception of 
these services in readable format.  The Committee have been apprised th at 
out of the various services provided by Blackberry, the Blackberry 
Messenger and BlackBerry Enterprise Solution services cannot be 
intercepted in readable format, even if the encrypted message is made 
available by the service providers.  The Committee n ote that the deadline to 
access the data in the requisite format from the BlackBerry company have 
been extended time and again from 31 st August to 31 st October, 2010 and 
then to 31 st January and again to 31 st March, 2011.  The Committee have 
now been informed by the Department regarding the constitution of the 
Committee to look into all types of encrypted communications.  The 
expected date for submission of the Report by the aforementioned 
Committee was 20 th April, 2011.  The Committee express unhappiness over 
the way the extension after extension are being given to resolve such an 
important issue related to security of the country.  Constitution of 
Committee for the purpose is another delaying tactics.  The Co mmittee are 
of the firm opinion that no compromise can be made when it is the question 
of the security of the Nation.  As such, the issue need to be taken strongly 
with BlackBerry so that the matter is resolved.  The Committee would also 
like to recommend to analyse the position internationally to know how the 
issue has been addressed in other countries.” 
 
28. The Department in their Action Taken Note has inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“As a Research Organisation in the field of Telecommunications, C-DOT has, 
over the past few years:- 
 

 
 
  Developed a Centralized Monitoring System for Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEA’s) for lawful interception.  
 Designed IP. Based Network elements for secured communication.  
 Assisted the government in the monitoring of Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs) gateways.  
 Associated with the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) for evaluation of 
network elements / telecom equipment for security.  
 Developed Pilot Models of a converged Multi Technology Centralised 
Interceptions Systems  
 
Though it is desirable that C-DOT, as a Public Funded Research Association, is 
formally authorized to participate, either directly or indirectly, in the 
development of telecom security related projects, the centre is not formally 
authorized to involve itself w ith reference to the services rendered by 
agencies like Research in Motion (RIM).  The Government will, therefore, be 
in a better position to furnish an appropriate response to this query.” 
 
29. The Committee while expressing unhappiness over the delaying tactics of the 
Government with regard to the issue of encrypted data of Blackberry and its security risk 
which has been a matter of serious concern with the security agencies had strongly 
recommended to resolve the matter with Blackberry.  The Committee had also recommended 
to analyze the position in this regard internationally to know how the issue has been 
addressed in other countries.  The Department instead of taking concrete action on the 
recommendation of the Committee has simply reproduced the respon se of C-DoT which only 
indicates the R&D made by the research organization in respect of data interception.  Even 
when C -DOT in the response has clearly stated that the Government would be in a better 
position to furnish an appropriate response to the Comm ittee’s concern, the Department did 
not bother to note the response of C-DOT and responding appropriately to the issue raised by 
the Committee in the recommendation.  Not only that the Department has not even indicated 
the status about the report of the Co mmittee which was looking into all types of encrypted 
communication and whose report was expected by 20 April, 2011 as mentioned during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants, 2011 -12.  This speaks volume of the casual 
attitude of the Department t owards such an important issue particularly when the issue has 

 
 
long been highlighted by the security agencies and raised strongly by the Committee in the 
report.   
The Committee would again like to emphasize that no compromise can be made when 
it is the qu estion of the security of the nation.  As such, the issue should be taken strongly 
with the Blackberry and the matter resolved within the stipulated timeframe.  The 
Committee’s query to analyze the position internationally in this regard be looked into and  
acted upon appropriately by the Department. 
***** 
  

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The performance of the Department so far as financial achievement of the allocations 
made under the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) segment is taken into consideration, the 
position is further worse.  During the year 2010 -11, the allocations of Rs. 2000 crore at BE stage 
were pruned down to Rs.397.26 crore at RE stage.  The utilization is ju st Rs.60.10 crore as on 
February 2011 which is 15.13 per cent of the allocations made at RE stage.  If the percentage of 
actuals is compared to BE stage, the achievement is just negligible i.e. 3 per cent.  The detailed 
analysis of the documents given by t he Department further indicates that the drastic cut at RE 
stage is due to non -execution of the Undersea Cabling between Mainland and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, delay in commencement of the Optical Fibre Connectivity Based Network for 
Defence Services, non -receipt of approval of the project ‘Communications and Security 
Research and Monitoring’ and delay in sanctioning of project for Telecom Engineering Centre 
(TEC).  The Committee understand that all these Plan schemes are very crucial schemes and 
have been  envisaged to meet the strategic requirement of the country.  The non -execution, 
delay in implementation of these schemes is not understandable to the Committee.  The 
Committee deplore the way the important schemes are being envisaged by the Department and 
the Committee strongly recommend that the allocations made at BE stage should be demanded 
by the Department after carefully analyzing the approval and execution stage of various 
schemes.  Moreover, since the aforesaid schemes are very important, the Depar tment should 
see that there is no further delay and the schemes are implemented expeditiously. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
OFC based Net work for Defence Services 
 
        Regarding OFC Network for Defence Services, BSNL had intimated that tenders for 
establishing OFC Network for Defence had been floated. But the lowest cost obtained through 
tenders was very much on higher side as compared to budget allocation. As pe r the decision of 
Telecom Commission, Ministry of Defence (MoD) was requested to vet and authenticate the 
proposal of enhancing the cost of project sent by BSNL. As desired by MoD, the matter was 
referred to the IMG which has submitted its report on 23 rd Aug 2011. The matter will shortly be 
placed before the Telecom Commission for deciding the further course of action.  
 
Out of the stated projects MTNL is involved only in laying of Optical Fiber for Air Force 
component of Defence project in Delhi and Mumbai .  Against MTNL’s claim of Rs.70.41 crores 
made against this project, Rs.62.35 crores has been released by DOT. The delay in execution of 
this project was mainly on account of lack of permission by various authorities i.e. Mumbai Port 
Trust Authority, Airport Authorities etc. 
 
CDOT: 
 
In respect of the scheme ‘Communications and Security Research and Monitoring’ 
implementation is as under. 
 

 
 
 The project approval of ‘Communications and Security Research and 
Monitoring’, though has taken a longer time than anticipated (the project is now 
approved by CCEA).  C -DOT’s research & development efforts for technology 
development related to voice interc eption, monitoring and analysis have been 
ongoing. Part of this interception and monitoring technology has also been 
implemented and deployed at Enforcement Directorate, which is one of  the Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEA).   
 The field trial of the above sc aled-up version of interception and monitoring 
technology, namely Centralized Monitoring System (CMS) catering to multiple 
LEAs is planned in two TSPs’ (Telecom Service providers) locations, namely, BSNL 
at Ambala, Haryana and MTNL, at Delhi.  On successful field trial completion, the 
technology deployment program will follow (as planned for the mentioned 
project).  
 Further, during the year, C-DOT has also undertaken efforts to build its expertise 
in architecting the ISP (Internet Service Provider) traffic interception and 
monitoring solution based on latest technologies to implement the ISP 
monitoring solution at the  gateways / POPs (Point -of-Presence) of all ISPs to 
meet the requirements of lawful interception and monitoring by LEAs. More 
than 40 ISP monitoring systems have been installed and working in the country.  
These efforts will also definitely complement in t he country -wide 
implementation of ‘Communications and Security Research and Monitoring’ 
program.      
TEC: 
 
1. Expenditure Estimate for NGN Transport Lab in TEC was sanctioned by 
Competent authority on 12-01-2011 
2. Status of NGN Transport Lab in TEC: 
 
(i) Techno-Commercial Evaluation of Tender has been completed. 
(ii) Financial bid Evaluation of Tender has been completed. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee observe that budgetary support is provided for executing the 
Universal Service Support Policy (USSP) through the Universal Service Obligation Fund 
(USOF) for bringing rural telecom connectivity.  The resources for meeting the same are 
generated through a Universal Service Levy (USL) which is 5 per cent of the Adjusted Gross 
Revenue (AGR) earned by all the telecom operators except pure value added service 
providers like internet service provider, voice mail etc.  The Committee in their Eighth 
Report on Demands for Grants of the previous year had expressed concern with regard to 
the position of not allocating resources commensurate with the collection even when the 
allocations are being fully utilized.  Inspite of that the trend has continued.  A s per the data 
furnished by the Department, the USL collections upto February, 2011 are for Rs.35700.83 
crore, whereas the final allotment and disbursal is only Rs.13113.98 crore i.e. in terms of 
percentage it is only 36.73 per cent.  If the relation of US L collection and allotment is 
analyzed year -wise, said gaps are seen every year.  During the year, 2007 -08, the USL 
collection was for Rs.5405.80 crore, against this the allocation made was only Rs.1290 crore.  

 
 
For the year 2008 -09, the collection made was  Rs. 5515.14 crore, however, the allocation 
made was only Rs. 1600 crore.  During the year 2009 -10, the total collection made was Rs  
.5778 crore, whereas, the allocation made was only Rs. 2400 crore.  For the year 2010 -11, 
the allocation made was Rs.3100 c rore whereas the total collection upto February, 2011 
was Rs. 4591.47 crore.  For the year 2011-12, the allocation is only Rs. 2100 which is Rs.1000 
crore less when compared to the allocation made during previous year.  The Committee 
conclude from the afor esaid scenario that the concerns of the Committee have not been 
seriously addressed by the Department.  While deploring the situation, the Committee once 
again emphasize that the Department should take up the matter seriously with the Ministry 
of Finance s o that the quantum of allocation for the USO activities commensurate to the 
collection made especially when there is a lot left to be done to increase the rural telephony 
in country and the Department has projected a target of having 40 per cent teledensit y by 
2014 from the present 32.19 per cent. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Concerns of the Standing Committee have been duly communicated by the 
Department to Ministry of Finance.  Further, budget allotments have been received as per 
demands projected by USOF. Thus, the allotment of Rs. 3100 Crore for  the year 2010 -11 
and Rs. 2100 crore for 2011 -12 were commensurate with the projections made by USOF 
during 2010-11 at RE stage. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 One of the thrust areas of the Department is the network expansion.  In this regard, 
the Committee note that during February, 2010, the Department had already achieve d the 
target of 600 million connections which was set by the Department to be achieved by 2012.  
As on January, 2011, 806.13 million connections have been provided, the break up being 95 
per cent wireless connections and 5 per cent wireline connections.  H owever, what is more 
disturbing to the Committee is the fact that the share of Public Sector both under wireline 
and wireless is continuously declining over the years whereas the growth of the Private 
Sector under both the schemes is phenomenal.  The data furnished by the Department 
reveal that the growth of the Private Sector under the wireline segment is continuously 
increasing.  Its share was 2.43 per cent as on 31 March, 2006 which has increased to 17.17 
per cent as on 31 January, 2011.  Contrary to this, the Public Sector which had edge over the 
Private Sector in terms of the wireline telephone connections is losing its share to Private 
Sector.  Its share was 97.57 per cent as on 31 March, 2006 which declined to 82.83 per cent 
as on 31 January, 2011.  S imilar is the case with the wireless telephone connections.  The 
Public Sector could not improve its position.  Its share was 21.39 per cent as on 31 March, 
2006 which declined to just 12.22 per cent as on 31 January, 2011.  Private Sector has 
positive growth during this period.  Its share was 78.16 per cent as on 31 March, 2006 which 
increased to 87.78 per cent as on 31 January, 2011. 
 
 The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that the Public Sector Undertakings viz. 
MTNL and BSNL are poorly performing and have reached at a critical stage.  More disturbing 
is the fact that both the Public Sector Undertakings are not able to leverage the backing of 

 
 
the Government.  The Undertakings failed to lure the customers even if the Government 
allocated 3G spectrum to them much before the auction was held and 3G spectrum 
allocated to the other Private Sector Service Providers.  This is a serious situation and there 
is an urgent need to review the performance of both the Undertakings by the Government.  
The Committee deplore the alarming situation and strongly recommend to the Government 
to undertake a detailed review so that the corrective action is taken. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
BSNL: 
It is submitted that the BSNL market share in Wireline & Wireless segment has been 
declining progressively, despite having growth in absolute numbers year on year basis. The 
details of number of subscribers in BSNL network since 31-03-2006 is given below: 
 
 (Figures in lakh nos.)   
S. 
No
. 
As on  Wired 
Line 
Wireless Grand 
Total WLL GSM Total  
1. 31.03.200
6 
354.23
# 
25.7
3 
171.6
4 
197.37
* 551.59 
2. 31.03.200
7 337.39 35.5
6 
274.2
9 309.85 647.24 
3 31.03.200
8 315.52 45.7
8 
362.0
9 407.87 723.39 
4 31.03.200
9 293.46 54.3
3 
467.1
1 521.44 814.91 
5 31.03.201
0 278.31 61.4
5 
633.0
5 694.5 972.81 
6 31.03.201
1 
252.25
# 
55.6
5 
862.6
9 
918.34
* 
1170.5
9 
7 30.06.201
1 247.25 
52.9
9 
884.2
9 937.28 
1184.5
3 
*4.5 times growth in its wireless segment vis-a vis # 30 % decline in wireline 
segment 
 
The reasons behind decline in the percentage of share of BSNL for the wireline and 
wireless services are given as under: 
 
a) Wireline services:  
 There is a general decline in the demand for the fixed lines telephone due to 
trend of  shifting of wired line customers towards cheaper and more convenient  
mobile (due to ease of use/mobility feature), services, its sheer convenience 
with regards to affordability and availability.  
 Closure due to nonpayment of telephone bills/economic reasons. 
 Surrender of landline connections by customers having more than one 
connection.  
 Frequent disturbance of services due to large scale damage of u/g cable by 
various utility agencies doing digging operations, cable thefts and cable faults 
etc 

 
 
 Unavailability of various attractive features in phones compared to mobile 
phones etc. 
 Increase in no of service providers in the segment. 
 Lack of uniform Right of Way (ROW) polic y in Urban and rural areas for laying of 
U/G Cables for expansion of Telecom Network. This also results in delay in fault 
repair where U/G cables get damaged due to road expansion or developmental 
activities undertaken by utility service providers. 
 
b) Wireless services:   
 Stiff competition in Mobile sector. 
 Entry of new service providers in the existing licensed area. 
 Aggressive tariff plans by the new entrants. 
 
 Following are the initiatives taken / planned to improve its market share: 
 
a) Wireline services: 
 Replacement of old telephony switches by State of the art Next Generation 
Network Switches providing various value added services in landline. 
 Providing Broad Band connections along with landline. 
 Retention of non -payment disconnected numbers by giving ins tallment payment 
options and pursuing the case on individual basis. 
 Five pair cable is being used in place of drop wires to reduce the fault rate.  
 Underground paper core cables are being replaced either by Jelley filled cables 
or by other systems in a phased manner. 
 More and more Remote Switch Units (RSUs) / Digital Line Concentrators 
(DLCs) are being opened to reduce the loop length of cables. 
 BSNL has introduced many new tariff plans for Broadband and Landline –cum-
broadband connections. These tariff plan s are being continuously revised based 
upon the competition in the market.  
 Introduced national STD dialing at local call rates for wireline services and 
reviewing its tariff plans, based upon market scenario.  
 In order to popularize broadband services usi ng wireline, BSNL has introduced 
many value added services such as IPTV, Games on Demand, Video & Music on 
demand, educational content, Broadband - VPN, etc. 
 
b) Wireless Services: 
 Matching and innovative tariff plans and other subscriber friendly schemes are 
being launched. In the process, BSNL has recently launched very attractive 
mobile plans like “PYARI JODI” for BSNL Landline customer and Rakshak 
Plan for Paramilitary forces of the country.  
 Constant monitoring of network to improve the quality of service. 
 Launching of new services and bundling schemes in the network for retention of 
the subscribers. 
 Network outage is being very closely monitored. Network is being optimized. 
 Radio Capacity is being augmented to reduce congestion, enhance capacity and 
improve Quality of Services (QoS).  During 2011-12, BSNL has planned to provide 
20 millions cellular mobile connections 

 
 
 Sales teams are being formed to have regular interaction with Points of Sales. 
 Monthly meetings with franchisees to get feedback on customer issues. 
 Continuously updating its tariff structure for Broadband and Mobile services 
considering the need of customers and the prevailing market conditions.  
 
Regarding concern of the august committee on leveraging Govt. backing, it is 
submitted that BSNL is given “at par” status vis-a-vis other private operators, so as to have a 
level playing field. BSNL is working on the following Govt. backed schemes: 
 BSNL is broadband enabling around 95000 Common Services Centers in rural areas. 
 Providing affordable Broadband connections with USOF subsidy in rural area. 
 Providing broadband connections to Universities and colleges under the National 
Mission for Education Project of Ministry of HRD. 
 
BSNL is also providing Village Public Telephones (VPT) facility in villages of the 
country as per agreement signed between BSNL and USOF, DOT. Various USOF backed 
activities, are detailed below: 
 Provisioning of VPTs under Bharat Nirman 
 Provisioning of VPTs under New VPT Agreement  
 Replacement of MARR VPTs 
 
Target and achievements made in these schemes are as under: 
S
.
 
N
o
. 
USOF Scheme/ 
Activity Target 
Cumulative 
Achievement 
as on 
31.07.2011 
Remarks 
1 
Provisioning of 
VPTs under 
Bharat Nirman 
62302 
(Revised) 62030 
Work likely to be 
completed by 
Feb. 2012. 
2 
Provisioning of 
VPTs under New 
VPT Agreement  
62443 51773 
Work likely to be 
completed by 
May 2012. 
3 
Replacement of 
MARR VPTs 185121 
(Revised) 184696 
Work likely to be 
completed by 
Feb. 2012. 
 
3G services Rolling out: 
BSNL launched its 3G services commercially on 27 th February 2009 in 12 selected 
cities. This was a new service in India and for any new service the entire eco system should 
support promotion of the service.  When BSNL launched 3G Services, the eco system 
comprising of handsets availability, 3G Content Ser vice Providers, Subscriber Awareness etc 
were in a very nascent stage and as such, it took time for the technology / services to 
mature.  Presently, BSNL 3G Service is available in 832 cities as on 13.06.2011  and the eco 
system is maturing progressively b y the day with the initial efforts of BSNL / MTNL and 
subsequently by the combined efforts of private operators as well.  
 
Following actions are being taken for growth of subscribers of 3G services: 

 
 
 The services are being rolled out progressively in more and more cities.   
 The service coverage is being improved in the cities where services have been 
rolled out.  More and more no of B -Nodes for 3G services are being installed 
with optimizing the existing RF coverage. 
 To popularize the services, 3G experience centers with mobile vans were 
established in 15 important towns.  Action is in progress to expand this to most 
of the major cities/towns. 
 Subscribers having 3G enabled handsets are being contacted w ith request for 
subscribing to 3G services. 
 Tariff for 3G services has been rationalized. 
 Migration from 2G subscriptions to 3G subscription has been made almost free 
of any charge. 
 Handset bundling has been done for 3G services. 
 Data card bundling also has been done for 3G services. 
 All the mobile subscribers are made 3G services’ enabled. 
 
MTNL: 
 
There is a general decline in the demand for the fixed lines telephone as there is a 
tendency to shift to mobile services because of its sheer convenience with r egard to 
affordability and availability. This is a worldwide trend that when liberalization takes 
place and monopoly is removed in telecom sector there is a churn in fixed line 
subscribers.  
 
MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the  surrender of land 
line connections. Present day fixed line network does not support many value added 
services like video call etc whereas the same are available in the GSM. This is one of 
the reasons for the churning of the landline subscribers  
 
Regarding 3G wireless services, i t is submitted that even though there is continuous 
growth in MTNL’s wireless subscriber base, there is marginal decline in market 
share, due to increase in competition & number of service provider in Delhi & 
Mumbai. Further, with entry of new players, market share of existing operators get 
shared and market share of some of our competitors has also declined.   
It is further submitted that MTNL is making its best efforts to sustain the growth in 
its GSM Services despite facing fierce competition in its service area. Despite being a 
late entrant in the GSM segment, MTNL mobile subscriber base has grown to more 
than approx 48 lakhs.  
 
MTNL advertised its 3G service and even took the step of upgrading 2G customers to 
3G customers.  However, it may take some time for customers to get accustomed to 
specific 3G services such as video calling, high speed broadband on mobile, 3G data 
cards etc.  Further, 3G services are expected to grow in a big way when sufficient 3G 
content based on the Ind ian conditions is available which will happen after number 
of 3G customers cross a certain threshold level which will make 3G contents cheaper 
and affordable. Cost of 3G handsets is also a major factor.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Steps Taken by MTNL to increase the subscriber base of 3G service: 
 
 MTNL is offering the host of services to the subscribers like Video telephony, 
High Speed Mobile Broadband, Mobile TV, Video Streaming etc.  
 
 To boost the demand for its 3G services, MTNL is also bundling its services with 
data cards & handsets from various vendors.  
 
 In order to provide world class service/ experience to its esteemed customers, 
an Auditor was appointed for carrying out technical audit of the 3G networks 
being deployed in Delhi and Mumbai. The report has already been su bmitted by 
the auditor. MTNL will utilize the suggestion / recommendations of the auditor 
in making the network of global quality.   
 
 To utilize its vast fixed line and Broadband Networks for carrying the GSM traffic 
by way of deployment of suitable FMC (F ixed Mobile Convergence) technologies 
in Delhi & Mumbai, Trial of Femto cell solution in MTNL Mumbai is in progress.  
 
  MTNL has already taken an initiative to educate the customers about 3G 
technology and services/features offered by it. However, due to t he fact that its 
new in Indian market it will take some time to fully educate and convince the 
customers to use 3G connections.  
 
MTNL has always been pioneer in introducing new technologies in the telecom 
sector like ADSL 2+, IPTV, IP/ MPLS, 3G etc. in it s service areas of Delhi and Mumbai. 
Continuous efforts are being made by MTNL on various fronts to reach to the 
masses and increase its revenue earnings: 
  
(i) The laying of fiber is a continuous process which results in the overall 
upgradation of the MTNL network. With the growth of the internet and 
broadband, the demand for the bandwidth is increasing exponentially. The 
advent of the new services like VOD, online gaming, High definition TV has 
given thrust to this demand. 
 
(ii) To meet the ever increasing demand for the bandwidth, achieve higher level 
of customer satisfaction and providing wide range of services to its 
customers MTNL is aggressively laying and extending the reach of optical 
fiber in its network and is planning to deploy GPON based FTTH network. It is 
a centrally managed network designed to provide reliable fiber routes to 
cover all possible destinations within MTNL. This will help in meeting the 
increased bandwidth requirement for both data and video applications. 
 
(iii) In order to att ract more and more subscribers, MTNL is bringing very 
attractive tariff plans in its 2G/3G services for the common man and 
students.  In addition to meet the capacity crunch problem MTNL is planning 
to further expand its 2G and 3G capacity each in Delhi an d Mumbai. MTNL is 
also bundling its services with data cards & handsets from various vendors. 
MTNL has adopted two strategies to provide 3G data cards to its subscribers.  
 

 
 
(iii) Actions are being taken to generate fresh demands by providing quality 
services, cu stomer care & satisfaction, introduction of new services / 
schemes and innovative marketing strategies. For this purpose the following 
steps are being taken:  
 
 Expansion of 2G/ 3G GSM capacity and broadband capacity. 
 Provide Wi-Max and 3G Services on revenue share through franchisees. 
 Capture enterprise business aggressively. 
 
MTNL is also providing the latest 3G services to its customers. 3G being a new 
technology in India, it will take some time to fully educate and convince the 
customers to go for 3G con nections. Moreover 3G network is just one part 
content and end devices such as small phones; tablets etc. are the other 
necessities to make the service popular. 3G services are expected to grow in a 
big way when sufficient 3G content based on the Indian co nditions is available 
which will happen after number of 3G customers cross a certain threshold level 
which will make 3G contents cheaper and affordable. To make the 3G services 
popular among its subscribers, MTNL has allowed all its GSM mobile subscriber 
access to 3G services. 
 
MTNL 2G / 3G services is gaining popularity as is evident from the data usage 
figures  
Period Data usage in GB / Month 
Delhi Mumbai 
 Download Upload Download Upload 
June 10 5547 918 2558 302 
Feb 11 16788 2638 7026 1089 
% 
Growth 
203% 187% 175% 261 
 
(v) Bundling of  3G data cards with MTNL's 3G service - In this case, MTNL 
allows suppliers to sell their 3G data cards  bundled with MTNL's  3G services. 
Before allowing such data cards with MTNL's 3G services, MTNL thoroughly tests 
the data card for its performance in MTNL's 3G network.  
(vi) In order to meet the challenges of wire line broadband and to offer higher data 
throughput to the esteemed subscribers with enhanced quality of service, MTNL 
is in the process of rolling out BWA services in its licensed service areas of Delhi 
and Mumbai. The choice of technology and further roadmap for deployment is 
being decided through appointment of consultant.  
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
  
The Committee observe that under the Newly identified VPTs Scheme, 45783 VPTs 
out of the stipulated target of 62443 VPTs have been installed as on December, 2010.  In 
terms of percentage, the achievement made so far is 73.71 per cent.  As per the initial plan, 
90 per cent of VPTs were to be covered by August, 2010 and the remaining 10 per cent by 
February, 2011.  The Committee have now been informed that the deadline for completion 

 
 
of the Scheme has been ext ended upto February, 2012.  The reasons for not achieving the 
target as per schedule have been attributed to villages being located in extreme remote 
areas, tough terrain, naxalite/insurgency affected areas. The Committee feel that although a 
breakthrough to implement the scheme in these areas is a challenging task for BSNL, 
nevertheless, steps should be taken to ensure the installation of the remaining VPTs by the 
extended deadline of February, 2012. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
It is to intimate that BSNL [the Service Provider who is implementing the scheme] 
has requested to extend the rollout period for the Scheme till May 2012. The request of 
BSNL is under process.  
 
BSNL has reported that 51773 out of the targeted 62443 VPTs under the scheme 
have already been provided. Remaining villages are located in more remote, tough terrains 
and VPTs are to be provided on Digital Satellite Phone Terminal (DSPT) in most of these 
villages. BSNL has reported delay in procurement of DSPTs, road blockages in Monsoon 
seasons, naxal/insurgency activities etc. However, BSNL is being persuaded to install the 
remaining VPTs by May 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that under the TERI project of Lighting a Billion Lives (LaBL) 
financial support is being provided for solar mobile charging stations in 5,000 villages.  As 
per the information furnished by the Department, an agreement to this effect has been 
signed on 29 April, 2010.  As per the agreement, solar mobile charging stations in these 
5,000 villages are to be provided in a phased manner over a period of two years.  The 
Committee hope that the project would be imp lemented within the stipulated timeframe.  
The Committee feel that the model of TERI need to be replicated in other areas.  Even in 
urban areas where mobile charging may not be a problem, the provision of solar mobile 
charging facilities would be a great e ffort in the direction of providing eco friendly green 
telecom in these areas.  More and more thrust need to be given to the use of renewable 
source of energy and providing solar charging stations is a step in the right direction.  The 
Committee hope that the model would be replicated throughout the country. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
It is informed that the current scheme of USOF for providing Solar Mobile Charging 
Stations in rural & remote areas is running on Pilot basis. On successful completion  of the 
Pilot scheme, its outcome/results would be analysed as to whether it can be launched as 
full-fledged scheme or not. Based on the analysis, a nationwide scheme may be envisaged 
for the rural & remote areas wherever required & feasible. 
 
(Ministry of  Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee have consistently been recommending to the Department to take 
the desired initiatives to improve the broadband penetration in the country.  There is not 
been much improvement in this connection in the country.  As per the latest data furnished 
by the Department there are about 10.97 million broadband connections and the 
broadband penetration in the country is just 0.8 per cent.  Broadband penetration is very 
poor if compared to the teledensity of just 67.67 per cent.  As regard the geographical 
spread of broadband connection the country, it has reached 4312 cities, 5865 Block 
Headquarters, 627 District Headquarters covering 1,69,201 villages.  The performance is not 
upto the mark if compared to the target fixed in this regard.  There are only 10.92 million 
broadband subscribers against the target of 20million broadband subscribers as per the 
target set by the Broadband Policy, 2004.  The Government has the plan to cover 2.5 lakh 
village Panchayats in the country with the broadband connectivity by 2012 from where 
broadband connection can be given to Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools and pu blic 
health centres.  As on 31 January, 2011, only 97548 villages could be covered.  So far as the 
position of Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools and public health centres by 
broadband connectivity is concerned, the Department did not bother even to ma intain the 
data. 
 
 The aforesaid status clearly indicates that there are big challenges before the 
Department to improve the broadband connectivity in the country.  Various schemes to 
expand the broadband penetration in rural areas are being undertaken wit h the USO Fund.  
Under the scheme, wireline broadband connectivity in rural and remote areas, 28,000 
exchanges with a capacity creation of 18 lakh connections are to be provided with a roll out 
period of 5 years i.e. by 2014.  As on December, 2010, a total  of 2,53,084 connections have 
been provided and 670 kiosks have been set up in rural and remote areas.  Another scheme 
satellite broadband connectivity for rural and remote areas has been proposed to cover 
rural and remote villages where terrestrial connec tivity is not feasible.  USOF has identified 
about 5,000 such villages.  As per the information furnished by the Department, BSNL has 
raised some technical issues which are under examination.  The USOF is working on another 
scheme i.e. Rural Wireless Broad band Scheme.  Under this scheme, the plan is to provide 
financial assistance by way of subsidy for the wireless broadband such as BTS, by utilizing 
the existing infrastructure available with the Telecom Service Providers.  The Scheme 
propose to provide bro adband coverage to about 5 lakh villages at a speed of 512 kbps.  
While taking note of the various schemes being implemented/proposed to be implemented 
under USOF, the Committee strongly recommend that the proposed schemes should be 
launched expeditiously so as to improve the broadband penetration, particularly in rural 
areas. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As of July 2011, 12.50 million broadband connections have been provided in 4417 
cities, 6124 block headquarters, 627 district head quarters covering 169201 villages. 
 
 Regarding position of broadband connectivity to public health centres, Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare has informed that information on the number of facilities covered 
and the availability of internet facility as per the survey con ducted  during 2007 -08 is as 
under:- 
 

 
 
S.No. Type of Facility No. Covered % having 
internet 
1. District Hospitals 596 57.7 
2. Community Health 
Centres 
4162 35.2 
3. Primary Health Centres 8619 13.2 
Information on broadband facility is not available. 
 
 Efforts are being made to collect the   information   regarding    broadband 
connectivity of Higher Secondary Schools from Ministry of HRD and Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare respectively. Department of Telecommunications as well as its public sector 
unit BSNL is not having any data for the same. Telecom Service Providers are also not having 
any information of category wise of subscribers of broadband data. In addition Ministry of 
Communication and Information Technology has rolled out the Common Servic e Centres 
(CSC) in majority of the states under a PPP mode and Ministry Of Health and Family Welfare 
has requested the States to utilise the CSCs for the health management information system 
application which require data information to be captured from su b-centre and Primary 
health Centre (PHC) level. In addition, several ministries are using/proposing to use CSC’s for 
citizen-centric services. As on July 2011, BSNL has enabled 62738 CSCs out of total 96541. 
 
 
Following initiatives have been taken to impro ve broadband penetration, 
particularly in rural area schemes on rural broadband: 
 
(a) Allotment of Spectrum for 3G and BWA services to the private operators 
through auction.  This will facilitate proliferation of broadband through mobile 
handset and wireless technologies. 
 
(b) Permitting Sharing of infrastructure amongst the Service providers. 
 
(c) The Indian Telegraph Rules have been amended, and stream IV has been 
added under the title “Provision of broadband connectivity to villages in a 
phased manner” to bring pro visioning of broadband connectivity to the rural 
areas under the purview of the USOF. 
 
(d) USOF schemes for supporting shared infrastructure for mobile services in rural 
and remote areas. These towers will also be used to provide Broadband 
connectivity in the newly covered Block/Taluka headquarters.  
(e) USOF, through BSNL, has started ‘Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme’ to 
provide wire -line broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas by 
leveraging the existing rural exchanges infrastructure and copper wire -line 
network. Under this scheme, BSNL will provide 8, 88,832 wire -line Broadband 
connections to individual users and Government Institutions over a period of 
5-years, i.e., by 2014. The estimated subsidy outflow is Rs. 1500 crore in 5 
years. As of July 2011, a total of 3,06,443 broadband connections have been 
provided under this scheme. 
 
(f) The USOF is working on a scheme for providing financial assistance by way of 
subsidy for the wireless broadband active infrastructure such as BTS, by 

 
 
utilizing the existing infrastructure available with the Telecom service 
providers. This scheme is being implemented at pan-India level. 
 
This scheme would provide broadband coverage to about 5 lakh villages at a 
speed of 512 kbps. With the completion of the BWA and 3G Spectrum auction, 
the stage is set for the launch of the scheme. The draft tender has been put in 
public domain for comments from stakeholders. The comments have been 
received and are under examination. 
 
(g) The USOF is working on a scheme called Satellite Broadban d connectivity for 
Rural & Remote Areas for provision of BB connectivity to 5000 identified 
villages which do not have any terrestrial connectivity. Initially, 1200 villages as 
a pilot are envisaged to be provided broadband on this media @ 512 kbps. The 
technical consultant “C -DoT” submitted its report and the formulation of the 
scheme, is in progress. 
 
(h) Department of Telecommunications has formulated a proposal for setting up 
of a National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) to extend the existing optical fibe r 
network up to 2.5 lakh Village Panchayats. The objective is to provide fast and 
reliable broadband connectivity upto Panchayat level by utilizing funding from 
the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and creating an institutional 
mechanism for manage ment and operation of the same for ensuring non -
discriminatory access to all service providers.  
 
 The proposal for creation of a National Optical  Fibre Network (NOFN) for providing 
Broadband connectivity to Panchayats has been recommended by the Telecom 
Commission. The proposal is shortly being submitted to the Cabinet for approval of the 
scheme. 
 
It is informed that BSNL is being asked to maintain the data w.r.t. Secondary and 
Higher Secondary Schools  and Public Health Centres and communicate the same t o USOF 
also. All efforts are being made to launch the schemes expeditiously. 
            
As part of DIT’s scheme of providing broadband connectivity to CSCs, BSNL has provided 
broadband connectivity through Wi-Max technology to 16047 Village Panchayats in  the first 
phase. In the second phase, additional 92364 village Panchayats are planned to be covered 
for which the equipment deployment is in progress.  
 
The Circle wise details of Wi -Max connectivity is enclosed as Annexure 1 (at page 
31).   
         
 The Circle wise CSCs covered through different technologies as on 31.08.2011 is at 
Annexure 2 (at page 32). 
 
The coverage details of Broadband service (DSL) in BSNL as on 31.08.2011 is given 
below. 
 
Sl. No. Parameter Total Covered %age 
covered 
1 DHQ 622 617 99.21 

 
 
2 BHQ 6185 5892 95.27 
3 Cities 4629 4417 95.42 
4 Villages 593601 169201 28.50 
 
BSNL is deploying 1000 Wi-MAX  BTS under Rural  phase Ph -I to cover  16485 village 
Panchayat &  6731 BTS under rural  Ph -II  project to cover  92364 of village Panchayats in 
the country. Against rural Phase -I project 16047 Village Panchayat & against phase -II 39524 
village Panchayats have been covered. The balance village Panchayats are likely to be 
covered during 2011-12. 
 
Data for Higher Secondary Schools and P ublic Health Centers (PHC) etc. is being 
collected. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 

 
 


 
 


40 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee further note that TRAI in the Consultation Paper on National Broadband 
Plan has observed that considering the estimated broadband future requirement, there is a need 
for a urgent focus on creation of robust national infrastructure capable to cater to future 
requirements not only in urban areas but also upto villages.  It has been stated in the Consultation 
Paper that an option being explored by taking optical fibre connectivity to villages.  The Department 
in the reply has stated that the issue is under consideration for formulation of broadband 
connectivity to Panchayats.  With regard to GIS mapping to ascertain incremental OFC length, the 
Committee have been informed that all existing GIS mapping may be done on a GIS platform within 
2 months by USOF to get a better estimate of the required additional OFC and a Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) would be prepared which would include estimation of growth of broadband 
connections in rural areas for next 20 years.  As regards the status of the scheme, the Committee 
note that NIC has mapped about 2,13,000 km of OFC length and over 10,000 OFC stations are on 
the GIS platform.  While taking note of the existing position the Committee strongly e mphasize to 
complete the GIS mapping expeditiously followed by launching of the scheme for National Optical 
Fibre Network for broadband connectivity of Panchayats. 
 
  Action Taken by the Government 
 
1. The proposal for creation of a National Optical  Fibre  Network (NOFN) for providing 
Broadband connectivity to Panchayats has been recommended by the Telecom Commission. The 
proposal is shortly being submitted to the Cabinet for approval of the scheme. 
 
2. The work of GIS mapping is under progress and is likely to be completed by October 2011. It 
has been completed in 10 Circles and is under progress in 16 Circles. As regards RailTel & PGCIL the 
work of mapping is complete. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O .M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee further note that USO Pilot Project for Optical Fibre Network 
Augmentation is being implemented in Assam, North -Eastern States and West Bengal Service 
Areas.  The Committee understand that OFC laying depend on Right of Way (RoW) and 
permission from State Governments.  In this connection, the Department has informed that 
they have taken the matter with all the State Governments and a letter has been written by the 
Secretary, DoT to Chief Secretaries of all the States on 3 October, 2010.  The Committee find 
from the replies that Tripura has allowed free Right of Way subject to reinstatement charges.  
Andhra Pradesh Government is already providing similar Right of Way.  Haryana Government 
has acknowledge the letter.  The feedback from other State Governments is still awaited.  While 
taking note of the initiatives taken by the Department, the Committee emphasize to pursue 
further with remaining State Governments on the is sue of Right of Way so that the project of 
Augmentation Creation and Management of Optical Fibre Network Scheme can be 
implemented effectively thereby increasing the broadband connectivity in the country. 
 
 The Committee during the Study Visit to Arunachal  Pradesh in the month of February, 
2011 had been informed that the work of laying OFC network in Arunachal Pradesh with the 
assistance of Army is on the way and the work is expected to be completed within one month 
i.e. by March, 2011.  When the issue was raised during the course of examination of Demands 

41 
 
for Grants, to the surprise of the Committee, the Department has stated that the scheme is 
likely to be completed by 2013 -14.  The Committee emphasize that the location of Arunachal 
Pradesh having border with China has strategic importance and as such there is an urgent need 
to improve the telecom connectivity and broadband connectivity in the areas.  All the initiatives 
with the assistance of Army/other authorities should be taken to provide better telecom  
connectivity and broadband connectivity in the said area. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The matter is being taken up with other State Governments for issue of similar 
guidelines on Right of Way.  
 
 In respect of Arunachal Pradesh, it is mentioned tha t the issue raised during the 
Parliament Committee visit to Arunachal Pradesh was with reference to providing connectivity 
between Bomdilla & Tawang.  The same has been commissioned with STM -16 connectivity, in 
the month of August, 2011, by using Army cable. 
 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee while appreciating the major initiatives taken by the Department for 
providing broadband connectivity to 20,000 colleges and 419 Universities at an estimated cost 
of Rs.1323 crore, recommend that steps should be taken by the Department to provide 
broadband connectivity as per the earmarked target and make it operational in all the colleges 
and universities to boost the full use of the e -Content as envisaged under National Mission on 
Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT). 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
377 universities and 12188 colleges have been connected by BSNL. During the 21 st 
meeting of the Empowered Committee of Experts (Project Approval Board) of National Mission 
on Education through information and Communications Technology (NMEICT) held on 11 th 
August, 2011, BSNL has requested that PA B may consider providing LCADs, being developed/ 
procured under NMEICT, to those colleges where computers are not available. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that DIT’s Research Programme ‘Technology for 
Indian Language’ is carrying out research to enable the support of Indian Language on ICT 
platform and it has been completed in 22 Indian Languages.  The Committee while appreciating 
the steps taken by DIT would like DoT to coordinate and ensure that software in other 
remaining Indian Languages are also developed at the earliest. 
   

42 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Committee’s recommendation has been noted and matter has been taken up with 
C-DoT for developing the requisite software in other Indian Languages. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee appreciate that the Department has signed an MoU with BSNL on 11 th 
January, 2010 for subsidy support from USOF for provision of broadband enabled RPST Scheme 
to eligible Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) on pilot basis.  Under the pilot scheme Rural Public 
Services Terminals (RPST) is to be provided for each of the 2770 rural wire -line exchanges i.e. 
1959 in the State of Rajasthan (Ajmer & Bhilwara Districts) and 811 in Himachal Pradesh (Shimla 
& Ma ndi Distrcts).  The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Department to 
involve SHGs under the aforesaid scheme.  The Committee emphasize that the aforesaid model 
of involving women SHGs should be replicated in other States also and full -fledged nationwide 
scheme launched in this regard. 
 
 The Committee find that the objective of RPST scheme is to provide Value Added 
Services (VAS) such as (i) banking services such as cash withdrawals and remittances whereby 
the RPST franchisee acts as a bank, ( ii) facilitation of Government disbursements/transactions 
(NREGA, Pensions, PDS etc.), (iii) Railway, Airline and Bus Ticketing, Mobile Top -ups, Utility Bill 
Payments, etc. which will generate additional revenue for the SHG, (iv) retailing Airtime (PCO 
services) and (v) retailing of Life, General and Micro Insurance services such as crop, cattle, 
health and home insurance.  The Committee understand that the Department of Information 
Technology is implementing the scheme Common Service Centres (CSCs) for pro viding support 
to establish one lakh Common Service Centres in six lakh villages of India.  The aforesaid scheme 
of the Department of Information Technology envisages CSCs as the front and delivery point 
before Government, private and social sector service s to rural citizens of India in an integrated 
manner.  The Committee find that there is some sort of commonalty in the objectives of the 
pilot scheme launched by the Department of Telecommunications and full -fledged scheme 
being implemented by the Departme nt of Information Technology.  The Committee urge that 
the Department should study the implementation of both the schemes and ensure that there is 
no duplication in the two schemes.  
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The RPST Scheme has been initiated by USOF as a Gender Budget Scheme of the DOT.  It 
is a pilot project wherein RPSTs are to be provided in only 2770 rural locations (one from each 
rural wire line exchange of BSNL) in Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh. The scheme aims to 
achieve the dual purposes  of providing broadband enabled Value Added Services to the rural 
population while also providing a means of livelihood to women, Self -Help Groups in rural 
areas.  The RPST is relatively a simple device which requires much less power as compared to a 
personal computer.  This device is capable of secure financial transactions as per RBI guidelines 
and can enable the women, Self -Help Groups to act as Business Correspondents of banks and 
provide banking and financial services to the rural public apart from rai lway/bus/airline 
ticketing, mobile recharges etc.  The Common Service Centres are run by Village Level 
Entrepreneurs and are slated to provide a large variety of e -Government Services to the rural 

43 
 
public. Under Bharat Nirman Programme of the Government, 2.5 lakh such centres are to be set 
up across the country. 
  
From the above it may be seen that the two schemes have a different objectives and 
focus area. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee have further been informed that to sort out the issue of approval of 
additional cost of Rs.4957.03 crore for the OFC tender to Army and Navy, the Inter -Ministerial 
Group (I MG) which include representatives from Ministry of Defence, Planning Commission, 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Wireless Planning & Co-ordination (WPC), BSNL and DoT 
under the Chairmanship of DDG (DS), DoT has been requested to deliberate on the iss ue as a 
whole and give its report within two weeks.  The Committee hope that Inter -Ministerial Group 
may have submitted its report by now.  Keeping in view the importance of OFC network for the 
Armed Forces as well as to the fact that vacation of additiona l spectrum is on the condition of 
providing OFC connectivity to the Armed Forces, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
issue of providing additional cost of Rs.4957.03 crore for the OFC tender to Army and Navy as 
well as all other related issues shoul d be sorted out expeditiously and earnest action is taken to 
provide Optical Fibre Cable based network to Army and Navy. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Regarding OFC Network for Defence Services, BSNL had intimated that tenders for 
establishing OFC Network for Defence have been floated. But the lowest cost obtained through 
tenders was very much on higher side as compared to budget allocation. As per the decision of 
Telecom Commission, Ministry of Defence (MoD) was requested to vet and authenticate th e 
proposal of enhancing the cost of project sent by BSNL. As desired by MoD, the matter was 
referred to the IMG on 3.3.2011. On 19.07.2011, final Schedule of Requirements (SoR) and 
Subsystem Level User Requirements were submitted by Army and Navy to BSNL. Subsequently, 
BSNL submitted revised cost estimate of RS. 13602 Crores to IMG on 12.08.2011. 
 
Thereafter, IMG has submitted its report on 23.08.2011. The matter will shortly be 
placed before the Telecom Commission  for taking a view on BSNL’s proposal seeki ng budget 
enhancement of Rs 5503 Crores (Rs. 13602 Crores – Rs. 8098 Crores), over and above the 
budget of Rs 8098 Crores approved by Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure for alternate 
communication network for Defence services for release of spectrum. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Committee note that during Eleventh Plan, the Department envisages an important 
project i.e. Undersea cabling between Mainland and Andaman & Nicobar (UM & AN) in order to 
provide an alternate and more importantly reliable communication link to avoid communication 
black out in a disaster.  It was proposed to have a submarine cable link from Mainland to 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  The scheme was initially proposed to be funded by Government of 

44 
 
India and executed by M/s Millennium Telecom Limited, a joint venture company of BSNL and 
MTNL.  During the year 2009-10 Rs. 61 crore provided at BE stage was reduced to Rs. 52 crore at 
RE stage.  The utilization during the year was nil.  Again during the year 2010 -11 Rs.161.84 crore 
were provided at BE stage.  At RE  stage, the allocation was reduced to zero.  During the year 
2011-12 again total allocation of Rs. 0.01 crore has been provided for the project.  With regard 
to non -execution of such an important scheme, the Committee in the Action Taken Notes to 
Eighth Re port had been informed that M/s Millennium Telecom Limited board appointed a 
Committee for rechecking the financial viability of the project and the Committee in its report 
had decided that it may not be possible to invest such a huge amount by BSNL and MT NL alone.  
Keeping in view the high cost of the project, it was suggested by the Committee to consider the 
possibility of forming a consortium with the telecom operators of other countries where MTNL 
is proposing to have its landing stations.  As per the l atest position as indicated during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants 2011 -12,  Planning Commission had constituted a 
Technical Committee to consider various options in this regard.  The Technical Committee in 
consultation with Andaman and Nic obar Islands Administration has, inter -alia, recommended 
that six islands viz. Port Blaire, Little Andaman, Havelock, Car Nicobar, Kamorta and Great 
Nicobar should be connected to mainland by submarine Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) through a 
branching cable fr om the existing submarine cables.  The Committee have further been 
informed that Planning Commission has decided that the project may be implemented by the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration either directly or through the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Integrated Development Corporation (ANIIDCO) as considered appropriate.  It has been 
informed that appropriate allocation for the submarine OFC project would be made out of the 
total allocation for Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  The Committee deplore the wa y the 
implementation of one of the scheme is being delayed and the onus has now been shifted to 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration mainly due to financial constraints.  The 
Government do not seem to have learnt lesson from the recent Tsunami in  Japan.  The 
Committee while deploring the way the scheme is being shuttled from the Centre Government 
to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands even when specific allocations for the scheme were 
provided in the Eleventh Plan allocations and specific outlay was e armarked during the first 
three years of the Eleventh Plan.  While deploring the situation, the Committee strongly 
recommend that immediate action may be taken to implement the scheme without any further 
delay. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
At present, t he scheme – “Undersea Cabling Between Mainland and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands” (UM&AN) is not being executed by Department of Telecommunications and no 
budget provision has been made by DoT in this regard. The scheme is now being implemented 
by Andaman & Ni cobar Islands (ANI) Administration, as decided by Planning Commission. The 
details of the development are as below: 
 
1. Post- Tsunami, in a meeting of the National Disaster Management Authority, 
held in June 2005, chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister and atte nded by Hon’ble 
MOC&IT, it was observed that the Andaman & Nicobar Islands are currently 
connected only by satellite media to the mainland and in case of any emergency 
or damage to the satellite equipment, it is possible that these areas are cut -off 
from mainland. During the Tsunami, the entire communications in these islands 
were disrupted as the alignment of the receivers got dislodged. Similar is the 
situation whenever there are earthquakes in the area. These islands being of 
strategic importance, the ne ed was felt for alternate and more importantly 
reliable communication link between mainland and major islands in Andaman & 
Nicobar group of islands to avoid communication blackout in a disaster.   

45 
 
 
2. Accordingly, a case was initiated for laying of a branc hing cable to Port Blair and 
other islands of Andaman & Nicobar Islands under budgetary support and it was 
proposed to provide a spur route to Andaman & Nicobar Islands at the cost of 
Rs. 522 Crores through branching of main submarine cable proposed by M/s  
Millennium Telecom Limited (MTL), a joint venture of BSNL/MTNL. 
Subsequently, it was found by M/s Millennium Telecom Limited that their main 
cable project from West Bengal to Singapore is not financially viable. 
Accordingly, it was decided by MTL to explo re the possibility of forming a 
consortium as it may not be possible to invest such a huge amount by the BSNL 
and MTNL alone. However, BSNL/MTNL could not make any progress towards 
formation of consortium. 
 
3. Subsequently, Planning Commission had constitu ted a Technical Committee 
under the chairmanship of Shri Subodh Kumar, Additional Secretary, 
Department of Telecommunications (DOT) in October 2010 to consider various 
options for providing a reliable and secure telecommunication connectivity to 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and make appropriate recommendations after 
examining the existing bandwidth capacity vis -à-vis the projected demand for 
the bandwidth.  
 
4. The Committee has submitted its report to Planning Commission on 23 rd 
December 2010. The committee i n its report has recommended that the 
connectivity to ANI may be provided through a spur route branched from the 
existing submarine cable available in the region through a tender process to be 
executed by ANI Administration. The Committee, in consultation with A&NI 
Administration has, inter-alia, recommended the following:-  
 
(a)  Six Islands viz Port Blair, Little Andaman, Havelock, Car Nicobar, Kamorta 
and Great Nicobar should be connected to mainland by submarine 
optical fibre cable (OFC) through a branching cable.  Cable landing 
stations at these six locations will meet the  communication needs of all 
the 18 islands other than Katchal and Teressa Islands.    
 
(b)  The Katchal and Teressa Islands can be served by 1 satellite transponder.  
As a result the remaining 13 transponders can be released back to ISRO.   
 
(c)  The cost of OFC connectivity providing 10 Gbps bandwidth (as against 1 
Gbps bandwidth presently available through transponders) has been 
estimated to be Rs. 355.50 crores for a 15 years period plus O&M 
charges @ 5% i.e. about Rs. 20 crores per year.  In addition, t he cost of 
hiring 1 transponder will be Rs. 6 crores per annum.  The total cost over 
the 15 years period is estimated to be Rs. 745.50 crores.  This is 
substantially lower than the present cost of Rs. 1260 crores.  Further, 
adjusting for the increased 10 G bps bandwidth would be provided 
through OFC connectivity,   the cost of using transponders would be 
prohibitive.  
 
(d)  The project should be implemented by the A&N Administration through 
one of its Corporations so that there is complete ownership of the 
project.  

46 
 
 
5. The recommendations of the Committee have been examined in the Planning 
Commission.  Planning Commission has accorded “in principle” approval to the 
recommendations of the Committee and Andaman & Nicobar islands 
Administration has been request ed by Planning Commission to take immediate 
necessary steps  in accordance with the extant rules and guidelines  for 
implementing the recommendations of the Committee for providing submarine 
optical fibre cable connectivity to the Andaman & Nicobar Islands ( copy of the 
Report is enclosed).  In order to ensure complete ownership of the project, it 
may be implemented by the A&NI Administration either directly or through the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Integrated Development Corporation (ANIIDCO) as 
considered appropriate.  
 
6. Planning Commission has also informed that the Annual Plan allocation for A&N 
Islands for 2011 -12 has been increased to Rs.1434.84 crores from Rs. 958.30 
crores in 2010 -11.  The increase of Rs. 476.54 crores has essentially been 
earmarked fo r project related expenditure including expenditure on the 
submarine OFC project. Since the Annual Plan for 2011 -12 were under 
discussions, appropriate allocation for the submarine OFC project has been 
made out of the total allocation for A&NI.”    
 
7. As per information furnished by Planning Commission, the scheme has been 
included in the State Plan of ANI for execution and implementation. The above 
said Committee of Planning Commission, in its report, has recommended that 
ANI Administration should obtain a National Long Distance (NLD) Service license 
to fulfill the telecom regulatory and licensing conditions for providing bandwidth 
to the telecom service providers and customers. 
 
8. With the above decision of the Planning Commission, the responsibility of 
providing reliable communication link to A&N Islands through submarine cable 
has been passed on to A&N Administration; and DoT has no role to play in this 
regard. 
  
9. Accordingly, the scheme mooted by DoT regarding “ Undersea Cabling from 
Mainland to Andaman & Nicobar Islands” (UMA&N) for an amount of Rs. 522.06 
Crores has been closed. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee further note that there is a proposal for laying of submarine cable of 955 
kms. for which the project estimate for connectivity of Ernakulam with various Islands of 
Lakshadweep including Kavarati was sent to DoT with an estimated cost of Rs. 435.69 crore.  
Apart from this, USOF has taken up the proposal from BSNL for upgrading the satellite media to 
all Islands of Lakshadweep to 34 Mb capacity.  BSNL has submitted the requirement of Rs. 33 
crore & Rs. 41 crore for CAPEX & OPEX respectively.  T he Committee have now been informed 
that USOF is evaluating various options for augmentation bandwidth to various Islands of 
Lakshadweep.  The Committee emphasize that the decision in this regard should be taken 
expeditiously.  

47 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The options of augmentation of backhaul  connectivity between Kerala mainland and 10 
inhabited Islands of Lakshadweep, i.e. sub -marine OFC & satellite backhaul, were discussed in 
detail. After detailed discussion and considering the fact that th e population of Lakshadweep 
Island is about 66,000, it is was agreed upon that the telecom demand of this population, even 
in the next five years, may be met by satellite connectivity. 
 
Further, the difference in Capex between OFC (Rs. 500 Crore) and satel lite connectivity 
(Rs. 25 Crore) is very huge whereas Opex is almost of the same order. The implementation time 
of the sub-marine OFC will also extend over a longer period while satellite network roll out may 
be done quickly. Accordingly, USOF is working o n a scheme for augmentation of satellite 
connectivity to Lakshadweep Islands. 
 
There is plan to upgrade all the 10 inhabited Islands to 34 Mb IDR but at present, ISRO is 
having a paucity of satellite bandwidth on INSAT as well as on foreign satellites. The  matter has 
been taken up with ISRO. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
While evaluating the financial achievement of C -DoT, the Committee find from the data 
made available by the Department that the allocations made to C -DoT at BE stage are being 
reduced at RE stage.  Even reduced allocations could not be utilized fully during each of the year of 
Eleventh Plan.  During the year 2007-08 the percentage utilization with regard to RE under IEBR was 
68.69 per cent and the said utilization under GBS was 96.97 per cent.  During the year 2008 -09 
there were shortfall in utilization of outlay under GBS component as compared to RE was 89. 48 per 
cent.  Coming to the year 2009 -10, the BE under GBS and IEBR component was drastically reduced 
at RE stage.  The GBS was curtailed from Rs.300 crore to Rs. 140 crore and the IEBR was curtailed 
from Rs. 45 crore to Rs. 30 crore.  The reduced allocati ons even could not be utilized and the 
percentage utilization as compared to RE was 90.70 per cent under IEBR and 71.43 per cent under 
GBS.  During the year 2010 -11, the position is further worse.  BE allocations have been drastically 
reduced at RE stage both under GBS and IEBR component and the expenditure up to February 2011 
is just 11.46 per cent as compared to RE under IEBR and 43.71 per cent under GBS component.  The 
Committee find that C -DoT is the telecom research and development centres of the Gover nment 
and besides developing solutions, one of the mandate of C -Dot is to provide optical and satellite 
transport and access technologies and solutions required for strategic sectors.  The Committee 
deplore the continuous under utilization of outlay by suc h an important organization.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for under spending and how far it could 
affect the important programmes of C-DoT. 
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The observations of the Committee with regard to reduction in the total outlays as per Budget 
Estimate (BE) may have to viewed in the light of the following facts:- 
 

48 
 
o The shortfall in the utilization in 2007 -08 was primarily due to the fact that it was the 
first year of the current plan period during which many R&D programmes, took longer 
time to reach completion than anticipated.  
o Thus, though there was a shortfall in the realization of internal resources during 2007 -
08, the actual realization during 2008 -09 was higher than that in the Revised Estimates 
(RE).  
o As was indicated in the action taken note against para 26 of the fourth report of the 
committee (2009 -10), the efforts made by C -DOT in realizing old dues resulted in the 
realization of Rs. 72.26 crores during 2010 -11, thereby increasing the availability of 
Internal Resources. Such accruals from realization of old outstandings resulted in 
adhering to the commitments made.  
o As for FY 2010-11, the BE of Rs. 309.00 crores included an outlay of Rs. 171.20 crores for 
the National Roll out under the Centralised Monitoring Systems (CMS) Project. This 
outlay had to be reduced in the RE for the year, due to non -receipt of requisite approval 
of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). As a result, the revised outlay for the year 
2010-11, became Rs. 182.80 crores, including a much reduced outlay of Rs. 45.00 crores, 
for the National Roll Out of the CMS Project. While so revisin g the outlay for the year, it 
was contemplated that, where the CCS approval is received by 31.12.2010, the centre 
would be able to spent Rs. 45.00 crores in the three months upto 31.03.2011, on the 
CMS project. 
o  But the CCS approval was received only on 12.07.2011. 
  
 Keeping in view that it is the Telecom Technology Research Centre of the Govt. of India, C -DOT 
has been developing solutions with a view to taking them to the market in the shortest possible 
time, achieve success in the efforts in the indigenization of telecom technologies and contribute 
towards self reliance in the field of telecommunications. 
 During the year 2010 -11, Internal Resources actually realised were Rs. 35.47 crores, as against 
Rs. 30.00 crores, included in the RE for the year. Thus, it may be observed that, though Internal 
Resources for 2010-11 were lower than the estimate of Rs. 40.00 crores as per the BE, the same 
were higher than the estimate as per the RE for the year. Efforts are on to continue to mobilize 
internal resources as per the BE for the future years. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 The Committee note that in order to address the issue of pesky calls, the 
Department/TRAI have taken various steps which include technical upgradation of network to 
filter the unwanted telemarketing calls/SMSs and have brought about a regulation entitled ‘ The 
Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2010’.  The 
Committee are, however, surprised to note that as per the Department most of the service 
providers except BSNL and MTNL are ready to implement the Regulation.  As per the BS NL, the 
Regulation cannot be implemented as they are of the opinion that the Regulation to be brought 
out under Regulations 20(2)(h) and 20(2)(i) is not technically feasible for the BSNL at this stage.  
The BSNL has also has opined that it would entail a h uge avoidable capital burden and it is 
totally unwarranted for BSNL to implement the Regulation as they have no role with regard to 
unsolicited commercial communications.  MTNL also informed the Committee that they have 
also similar problems to BSNL regard ing the implementation of the Regulation.  However, if at 
all they have to implement the TRAI Regulation, 2010, it will take them about one year time for 
arranging the filtering facility in their network.  The Committee in their earlier Report had 

49 
 
recommended that expeditious action should be taken by the Department so that the 
subscribers get respite from the pesky calls.  However, the above observation clearly indicates 
that the Department has not been able to resolve the problems of pesky calls and therefore, the 
Committee once again recommend that the Department should thrash out all the problems 
associated with pesky calls and at the same time address to the various difficulties expressed by 
the various service providers to meet the requirements of TRAI Regulations 2010. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Regulations 20(2)(h) and 20 (2) (i) have provisions to ensure the filtering of Unsolicited 
Commercial Calls and SMS so that no call or SMS is sent to any customer registered on National 
Customer Preference Register (NCPR) unless he has opted for it.  Matter was discussed at the 
consultation stage and analysis revealed that technical solutions are available. 
 
 BSNL vide its letter No.8 -8/200-PHM/MSE dated 25th February, 2011 has requested that 
sub-regulation 20(h) of regulation and other relevant clauses of above noted regulation which 
provide for filtering of calls by access provider, may be relaxed and a time period of at least nine 
months may be given for full implementation.  MTNL has requested vide its letter number 
MTNL/RA/TRAI/Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regln/ 2010 dated 
7th March, 2011 extension of a time period of three months to implement the regulation. 
 
 A considerable time of more than six months has already pa ssed since the date of 
request from BSNL or MTNL.  Service provider’s association has requested to the Authority that 
four to six weeks time will be required from date of allocation of numbering series for fixed line 
networks for implementation of regulati ons.  In this regard it is pertinent to note that Hon’ble 
MOC & IT has assured the Parliament on 19 th August, 2011 to implement “The Telecom 
Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2010 dated 1st December, 2010 
within a period of six wee ks.  Standing committee has also recommended that expeditious 
action should be taken by the Department so that the subscribers get respite from the pesky 
calls.  Accordingly, the Authority is implementing all the provisions of regulations with effective 
from 27th September, 2011. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that in spite of concerns s hown by the 
Committee year after year for improving the deteriorating condition/performance of BSNL, the 
PSU has been plagued by the various problems.  The scrutiny of the various documents with 
regard to the performance of BSNL reveal that the persistent problem of non -utilisation of 
Outlay has continued even during 2010 -11.  The utilisation status of IEBR with respect to 
Revised Estimate in the last four years of the Eleventh Plan upto February 2011 is only 45.07 per 
cent.  The Committee further note with  regret that the revenue earned by BSNL has declined 
considerably in the last four years.  Year after year the revenue has declined and during 2009-10 
it has incurred a loss of Rs.1823 crore and for the year 2010 -11 the provisional unaudited figure 
as on 2 8th February, 2011 projects a loss of Rs.5220 crore.  For the year 2011 -12, the PSU has 
projected a loss of Rs.2380 crore as per MoU target.  Besides, there are many areas of concern 
which include huge outstanding arrears, surrender of telephones, impact of M obile Number 
Portability, etc. As per the documents furnished by the Department BSNL has an outstanding 
dues of Rs.587.95 crore as on 31 st January, 2011.  Circle wise analysis of surrender of BSNL 

50 
 
phone indicates that the net achievements for wireline duri ng the last four years has been 
negative which means disconnection has always been more than connections.  During 2007 -08, 
it was -2186308 and in 2008 -09, it was -2205865.  For the year 2009 -10, the net achievements 
was -1515871 and for the year 2010 -11 upto January, 2011, the net achievement is -2353240.  
The same trend was seen for the WLL phone and as on January, 2011, the net achievement was 
-762920.  Regarding Mobile Number Portability, the Committee are disheartened to note that 
as on 23 rd March, 2011 a total of 5,00,123 subscribers have ported -out of BSNL and 1,83,961 
subscribers has ported-in into BSNL GSM Network.  The Committee also note that BSNL inspite 
of commercially launching the 3G services on 27 th February, 2009 has not been able to carve a 
formidable position for itself.  From the above observations, it clearly indicates that a lot needs 
to be done to improve the performance of BSNL.  The Committee feel that BSNL being the 
Public Sector Undertaking should have taken various benefits given by the Government tactfully 
and should have competed with the private sector service providers more forcefully.  With the 
declining growth of the public sector in the network expansion as mentioned in the earlier part 
of the Report the PSU need to review the  various aspects such as the quality of service, 
competitive price, easy reach and availability of its various products by its clientele.  The 
Committee feel that besides the various schemes/projects taken up by BSNL with the help of 
USOF, it should also e xplore the possibility of capturing the rural market more vigorously.  Not 
only that, BSNL should effectively provide broadband connection to the Community Service 
Centres (CSCs) in coordination with Department of Information Technology so as to ensure the  
various e -Governance programme carried out under the National e -Governance Plan are 
implemented effectively. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Capital Funds Allocated & Utilized during the Last four Years & the Current Year 2011 -12 
is furnished below: 
                                (Rs. In Crores) 
Financial Year Funds Allocated  Fund Utilized 
2007-08 13846.5 7239.43 
2008-09 17813.5 10876 
2009-10 14001.19 12681 
2010-11 * 10151.7 24646 * 
2011-12 * 15277.63 1259.41 
 
Note:  
1. The figures of funds utilized for the year 2010-11 is provisional. 
2. The funds utilized for the year 2011-12 (upto 31.07.2011) is provisional. 
3. Rs. 18500.38 Crores paid to DOT as one time Spectrum Charges in respect of 3G 
& BWA spectrum are included in the funds utilized during 2010-11. 
4. This allocation includes all Capital Expenditure. 
Under utilization of allocations made under IEBR 
 
The outlays involve several components.  One of the components may be related to the 
release of the payments of vendors under the ongoing projects.  It may be noted that there are 
defined rollout obligations/targets against which the payments of the vendor s are released in 
these projects. Some of the rollout targets/obligations could not be completed by the vendors 
in time because of several reasons like delay in provisioning of electricity connections by state 
electricity authorities, delay in municipal cl earance, delay in permission provided by state 
governments, delay in commissioning by the vendor etc.  As per the tender terms and 

51 
 
conditions payments will be released once these targets/obligations are met by the vendors.  
Therefore, the provisions made i n the outlays for these payments may get shifted to the next 
financial year. 
 
Sir, effective utilization of outlays is primarily linked to timely completion of tendering 
process for procurement and execution in case of turnkey projects. BSNL has made all o ut 
efforts for effective utilization of outlays by ensuring effective and timely planning and 
estimation of requirements and formulation/ floating of tenders and thereafter the completion 
of tendering process, rigorous monitoring of project execution by re gular periodic  review 
meeting at all level at BSNL corporate office as well as field unit. However the shortfall in 
effective utilization of outlays is most of the time due to unforeseen and unavoidable situations 
whereby the tendering process gets delaye d/ stalled and the subsequent execution of project 
also gets affected.  
 
Measures being taken to ensure optimum utilization are as under: 
 
a) Change in procurement policy related to Price Formula; Vendors tie up; Fixing of 
‘Block of Three Years’ for procureme nt etc to curb the delay in procurement of 
equipment. 
b) Resorting to strict and tight schedule for timely availability of equipment. 
c) Periodical monitoring of implementation of all major projects viz achievement of 
targets. 
Reasons for decline in revenue 
 
 The major contributors towards decline in BSNL revenue are 
 Reduction in land line revenues due to tariff revisions 
 Economically unviable rural operations as social obligation 
 Outgo of Rs 18,501 / -Crores as payment towards 3G and BWA spectrum charges, resulting 
in loss of interest income. 
 Withdrawal of subsidies, compensation etc. 
 Maintenance of legacy telegraph system 
 Lack of use of latest proper IT systems for automation of processes, in decision making and 
MIS 
 
Reason for outstanding arrears 
 
The reasons for huge outstanding are given as under: 
 
(i) BSNL is not  having monopoly in telephone services, now -a-days and the customers 
migrate to other private operators after making heavy calls and not paying their 
telephone bills to BSNL 
(ii) The limitation has been cha nged to 3 years as per Limitation Act than DOT (Central 
Govt.) and after 3 years it is not possible to file court cases against the defaulters for 
recovery of TR outstanding. 
(iii) Even within 3 years under the Limitation period, the possibilities of recovery is  very 
less in court cases. Huge expenditure is involved in filling civil suits for stamp duty 
and advocate fee etc. In many cases where, the court cases have been decided in 
favor of BSNL, the recovery is very difficult. 
(iv) After migration to CDR billing, bills were issued in arrears and the customers did not 
pay their telephone bills and switch over to mobile connections of other operators 

52 
 
and disconnections due to non payment could not be made in time which resulted 
in increasing in TR outstanding. 
 
Following steps are taken to reduce the outstanding arrears: 
 
(i) CDR billing has been implemented in more than 90% SSAs and are now 
streamlined. 
(ii) The disconnection due to non payment has made now in time. 
(iii) The bills are stopped in CDR beyond the date of disconnection of incoming 
facility, due to which fictitious bills are not generated now. 
(iv) The Circles / SSAs were instructed to made sincere efforts for recovery of old 
outstanding and in case of outstanding is not recoverable than the same should 
be written off as per rules.  
 
Surrender of Telephones: 
 
The reasons for surrender of telephones are  
 
 Trend of shifting of wired line customers towards cheaper and more convenient  
mobile (due to ease of use/mobility feature),   
 Closure due to nonpayment of telephone bills/economic reasons. 
 Surrender of landline connections by customers having more than one 
connection.  
 Frequent disturbance of services due to large scale damages of u/g cable by 
various utility agencies doing digging operations, cable thefts and cable faults 
etc 
 Unavailability of various attractive features in phones compared to mobile 
phones etc. 
 
Mobile Number Portability 
 
As regards MNP (Mobile Number Portability) scenario in BSNL, cumulative net 
subscribers ported out of BSNL as percentage of total subscribers  as on 30.06.2011 is 
approximately is 0.7%. On month to month basis net subscribers ported out from BSNL is 
reduced from 0.17% of total subscriber base in March, 2011 to .07% in June, 2011. The 
following steps have been taken by BSNL to prevent churn -out a nd consequent increase in 
subscriber base under MNP scenario:  
 
(i) Forgoing port fees from subscribers coming into BSNL network. 
(ii) Circles have formed Special Cell to contact customers and address their grievances 
on war footing.   
(iii) Special arrangements have been made in call centres.   
(iv) Aggressive Data Plans (GPRS & 3G). 
(v) Competitive prices for all wireless products.  
(vi) Additional incentives for sales channels. 
(vii)  Wide publicity through media highlighting the advantage of availing services from 
BSNL namely Trusted Brand, Transparent Billing, Widest Network, competitive Rates 
etc. 
 
 

53 
 
3 G Services: First mover advantage: 
 
BSNL launched its 3G services commercially on 27 th February 2009 in 12 selected cities. 
This was a new service in India and for any new service the entire eco system should support 
promotion of the service.  When BSNL launched 3G Services, the eco system comprising of 
handsets availability, and its Cost c ompetitiveness, 3G Content Service Providers, Subscriber 
Awareness etc were in a very nascent stage and as such, it took time for the technology / 
services to mature.  Presently, BSNL 3G Service is available in 832 cities as on 13.06.2011. The 
eco system i s maturing progressively by the day with the initial efforts of BSNL / MTNL and 
subsequently by the combined efforts of private operators as well.  
 
Following actions are being taken for growth of subscribers of 3G services: 
 
 The services are being rolled out in more and more cities.   
 The service coverage is being improved in the cities where services have been 
rolled out.  More and more no of B -Nodes for 3G services are being installed 
with optimizing the existing RF coverage. 
 To popularize the services, 3G experience centers with mobile vans were 
established in 15 important towns.  Action is in progress to expand this to most 
of the major cities/towns. 
 Subscribers having 3G enabled handsets are being contacted with request for 
subscribing to 3G services. 
 Tariff for 3G services has been rationalized. 
 Migration from 2G subscriptions to 3G subscription has been made almost free 
of any charge. 
 Handset bundling has been done for 3G services. 
 Data card bundling also has been done for 3G services. 
 All the mobile subscribers are made 3G services’ enabled. 
 
CSCs connectivity:  
 
           BSNL is providing on demand Broadband connections to Common Service Centres using 
various technologies like ADSL2+,WiMAX and EVDO etc. Broadband coverage is planned for 
around 1,00,000 Common Service Centres (CSCs) across the country out which approx 63,000 
CSCs have been made feasible through various technologies. 
   
Initiatives on Govt. Projects / CSCs (Community Service Centers)/USO Funded schemes: 
 
a) BSNL has target to provide broadband connectivity to 250000 Gram Panchayats. As on 
31-05-2011, BSNL has covered 1,22,605 Gram Panchayats through broadband.  
b) BSNL has covered around 63000 CSCs using various technologies. Work for providing the 
remaining CSCs using DSL & Wireless technology is in progress. 
c) USOF is extending subsidy to BSNL for offering Broadband Services from existing 
wireline rural & remote telephone exchanges. BSNL has provided  total of 2.80 Lac rural 
broadband connections . 
i. USOF Subsidy t o provide wireline broadband connectivity in 28672 rural and 
remote exchanges . Subsidy support from USOF for wireline Broadband 
connections (Rs. 4800/ - per as front loaded and Rs. 175/ - per quarter per 
connection upto two years), CPEs (Rs. 850/ - per) and c omputer/ computing 
devices (Rs. 4500/ - per) limited to a maximum number of 31 connections / 

54 
 
computing devices per DSLAM (on net addition basis) for a total number of 
28,672 DSLAMs spread over the rural & remote areas.  
A total of 21839 PCs / computing devices have been installed till May’2011. 
 
ii. USOF subsidy for setting up Broadband Kiosk  in all 28,672 rural exchange areas 
(one each in a Rural exchange area). Subsidy support of RS. 20,000/ - per Kiosk 
per quarter for a period of three years from USOF is available for setting up the 
Broadband Kiosk.  
BSNL has established 4817 such kiosks till 31.05.2011 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that MTNL has not been able to put its  house 
in order to ensure that precious funds meant for the development of telecom sector in the 
country are optimally and judiciously utilized. The above observation of the Committee can be 
substantiated by the fact that in the last four years, it has bee n able to utilize only 61.08 per 
cent of the Outlays with respect to the Revised Estimates as on February, 2011. Further, the 
PSU has incurred huge financial loss since the year 2009 -10. During 2009 -10, it had incurred a 
loss of Rs. 2610.97 crore and during 2010-11 it has incurred a loss of Rs. 1727.38 crore upto 31 st 
December, 2010. As per MoU target, the PSU has projected a loss of Rs. 1140.11 crore for the 
year 2011 -12. It has also a huge outstanding arrears of Rs. 2303.77 crore as on 28 February, 
2011. The Committee also note that year after year the surrender of telephones is also 
increasing especially in Mumbai. The surrender of telephone in Mumbai during 2008 -09 and 
2009-10 were -66,118 and -82,606 respectively. For the year 2010 -11 till February, 201 1, the 
total number of phones that have been surrendered in Mumbai sector is reported to be -
51,763. In Delhi the gross connection both for wireline and wireless has declined over the years. 
During 2007 -08, the total gross connection was 1,48,966, however,  declined to 89,559 
connections as on February, 2011. The Committee also note with dissatisfaction that after the 
implementation of Mobile Number Portability, a total of 34698 subscribers have ported out of 
MTNL and only 7718 subscribers have ported in MTN L GSM Network. From the above 
observations, it clearly indicates that MTNL has to really gear up all its energies to overcome the 
various lacunae as pointed out by the Committee and take corrective actions immediately. 
Needless to say that the PSU should c rease out all the grey areas and set realistic and 
achievable targets and accordingly project their financial Outlay to ensure their effective and 
optimal utilisation. The Committee hope their concerns would be taken into account while 
initiating various schemes/projects by MTNL during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Every Year MTNL tries to draft a more realistic plan where it hopes to spend as much of 
its plan projections as feasible and because of these continuous efforts, the percent utilization 
of funds for the year 2010-11 has increased to 98% (Planned outlay: Rs 1281.84Cr, Expenditure: 
Rs 1257.07Cr) from 88.36% during 2009-10 &  67%  during 2008-09. 
 
It is factually correct that MTNL has been incurring loss since 2009 -10. However, the 
main reason for loss is very high working staff strength against the actual requirement and 

55 
 
consequently increased staff cost due to wage revision, increase in provision for retirement 
benefits and amortization of 3G and BWA spectrum cost.  
 
Other reasons which led to decline in the revenue earnings by MTNL: 
 
 General reduction in tariff including per second tariff plan. 
 MTNL is providing services in Delhi and Mumbai only and unable to offer Pan 
India tariff plans unlike its competitors who have presence in other circles.  This 
reduces the attractiveness of MTNL’s Tariff Plans. 
 Increase in competition from Private Operators. 
 Churn in landline.  
In Para 33, the outstanding of MTNL as on 28.02.2011 has been shown as Rs.2303.77 
crores. However, as per the official records, the outstanding amount is Rs.1151.89 crores. This 
has further reduced and the outstanding dues of MTNL in r/o Basic, GSM and CDMA as on 
30.06.2011 are given below:- 
 
Declining outstanding arrears of MTNL in r/o of Basic, GSM and CDMA services:- 
(Amt. in Crores) 
Period MTNL 
31.03.05 1286.21 
31.03.06 1272.68 
31.03.07 1218.43 
31.03.08 1188.62 
31.03.09 1173.73 
31.03.10 1119.60 
31.03.11 1103.49 
30.06.11 1127.98 
 
From the above it can be seen that the outstanding arrears of MTNL has been declining 
over the years. There is a reduction of Rs.158.23 crores from the year 2004 -05 in spite of heavy 
annual billing of Rs.3500 crores approximately and launching of new servi ces on frequent basis. 
Despite other choices now available to customers due to competition which reduces MTNL’s 
ability to realize outstanding through disconnection, MTNL has still been able to bring down 
total outstanding. Over the years, all efforts are being made to control outstanding in spite of 
customer’s ability to move to other operators if there is too much pressure to pay MTNL.    
 
Regarding surrender of landline connections, it is submitted that there is a general 
decline in the demand for the fixed lines telephone as there is a tendency to shift to mobile 
services because of its sheer convenience with regards to affordability and a vailability. This is 
worldwide trend that when liberalization takes place and monopoly is removed in telecom 
sector there is a churn in fixed line subscribers.  
 
MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of land line 
connections. Present day fixed line network does not support many valued added services like 
video call etc whereas the same are available in the GSM. This is one of the reasons for the 
churning of the landline subscribers  
 
Continuous efforts are being made by MTNL on various fronts to reach to  the masses:-  
 
(i) The laying of fiber is a continuous process which results in the overall 
upgradation of the MTNL network. With the growth of the internet and 
broadband, the demand for the bandwidth is increasing expon entially. The 

56 
 
advent of the new services like VOD, online gaming, High definition TV has given 
thrust to this demand. 
(ii) To meet the ever increasing demand for the bandwidth, achieve higher level of 
customer satisfaction and providing wide range of servi ces to its customers 
MTNL is aggressively laying and extending the reach of optical fiber in its 
network and is planning to deploy GPON based FTTH network. It is a centrally 
managed network designed to provide reliable fiber routes to cover all possible 
destinations within MTNL. This will help in meeting the increased bandwidth 
requirement for both data and video applications. 
(iii) In order to attract more and more subscribers, MTNL is bringing very attractive 
tariff plans in its 2G/3G services for the com mon man and students.  In addition 
to meet the capacity crunch problem MTNL is planning to further expand its 2G 
and 3G capacity each in Delhi and Mumbai. MTNL is also bundling its services 
with data cards & handsets from various vendors. MTNL has  adopted two 
strategies to provide 3G data cards to its subscribers.  
(iv) Actions are being taken to generate fresh demands by providing quality services, 
customer care & satisfaction, introduction of new services / schemes and 
innovative marketing strategies. For  this purpose the following steps are being 
taken:  
 Expansion of 2G/ 3G GSM capacity and broadband capacity. 
 Provide Wi-Max and 3G Services on revenue share through franchisees. 
 Capture enterprise business aggressively.  
 
(v) Bundling of  3G data cards with  MTNL's 3G service - In this case, MTNL 
allows suppliers to sell their 3G data cards  bundled with MTNL's  3G services. 
Before allowing such data cards with MTNL's 3G services, MTNL thoroughly tests 
the data card for its performance in MTNL's 3G network.  
 
(vi)  In order to meet the challenges of wire line broadband and to offer higher data 
throughputs to the esteemed subscribers with enhanced quality of service, 
MTNL is in the process of rolling out BWA services in its licensed service areas of 
Delhi and Mum bai. The choice of technology and further roadmap for 
deployment is being decided through appointment of consultant.  
 
Following steps have been taken by the Company to improve operation and to earn 
more income: 
 
 Introduction of various schemes to attract new Landline subscribers. & 
sustaining existing Landline base.  
 New Plans have been introduced to excite interest of customers of others 
operators to port in to MTNL's network. 
 More emphasis on adding GSM and Broadband. 
 Introduction of Flexible tariff policies.  
 Extensive marketing is being done for MTNL's services. 
 Rationalization of expenditure to reduce Administrative and Operative cost. 
 Efforts are being made by MTNL to earn additional revenue through gainful 
utilization of its existing infrastructure and assets. 
 Close monitoring of faults is being maintained. Emphasis has been given on the 
improvement of the quality of service. Stress has been given on the redress of 
the subscriber’s complaints by increasing nu mber of positions in Customer Care 

57 
 
Centre, providing single window at the Sanchar Haats and improving quality of 
service. 
 In order to offer better services and high data speed up to 21.1 Mbps to MTNL’s 
3G subscribers , MTNL is in the process of expanding / augmenting the existing 
3G networks in Delhi and Mumbai from HSDPA to HSPA+. This will also provide 
better network coverage and capacity. 
 3G data Cards are being sold by MTNL for accessing high speed internet. 
 MTNL is in the process of deploying Broadband wireless access services 
(BWA/LTE) in Delhi and Mumbai.  
 To meet the ever increasing demand for the bandwidth, achieve higher level of 
customer satisfaction and providing wide range of services to its customers, 
MTNL is aggressively laying and extending th e reach of optical fiber in its 
network and is planning to deploy GPON based FTTH network. 
 To offer better quality of service to the customers, MTNL has planned to phase 
out the legacy TDM networks and migrate towards all IP based converged 
network(s). Fur ther, to take advantage of IP network and to improve the 
services the company intends to create POP (through which data, voice, 
enterprise and other services will be provided to the subscribers) on fiber within 
1 km of radius of the subscriber, agglomeration is commercially feasible. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
 The Committee note that several measures have been put in place by the Department 
to improve the telecom expansion in the North -East areas which inter-alia includes increase in 
installations of number of Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs), providing OFC conn ectivity with 2.5 
G rings to cover all District Headquarter/Sub District Headquarters and en -route towns of 
Assam, NE -I and NE -II and expansion of broadband service in area using high speed ADSL2+ 
technology.  However, the Committee are constrained to poin t out that during the last four 
years there have been under achievements in the financial targets.  Out of the total Outlay of 
Rs. 2255.43 crore provided during the last four years of the Eleventh Plan, the percentage of 
utilization as on 31 st January, 2011 is only 61.19 per cent.  The Committee also note that during 
2010-11, out of the approved Outlay of Rs.384.20 crore only Rs.198.23 crore could be utilized as 
on January, 2011.  Further, under achievements of physical targets have also been noticed 
which inter-alia include Net Switching Capacity Lines (Wired+WLL+CMTS), Wireline and Wireless 
Connections, VPTs, Broadband capacities and Broadband connections.  Out of the target of 
6,50,366 Net Switching Capacity Lines, only 1,63,857 could be achieved as on 31 st December, 
2010.  During the said period, the fixed line had a negative growth of -98,886, where as, the 
achievement made in wireless was only 4,88,420 out of the target of 11,05,000 connections. 
With regard to the VPTs as per Census 2001, only 415 VPTs could be achieved out of the 
stipulated target of 2,477 VPTs.  The broadband capacity had made an achievement of only 
16,388 ports out of the target of 40,367 ports, whereas, the broadband connections could be 
made to only 26,194 out of the target of 79,18 5 connections.  This clearly indicates that the 
measures taken by the Department are not adequate and there is a need to give more focus 
attention so that this part of the Country which is devoid of various communication 
infrastructure do not remain cut off from the rest of the Country. 
 
The Committee observe that preparation for Twelfth Plan would commence from 1 
April, 2012.  As such, there is an urgent need to review the implementation of various 

58 
 
projects/schemes being implemented in North Easter Region particularly related to telecom and 
broadband connectivity during the Eleventh Plan so that the necessary corrective action can be 
taken.  In this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that a Committee may be 
constituted in consultation with the Mi nistry of Development of North -Eastern Region with the 
instruction to give the report within six months.  The said Committee may look into various 
aspects related to North-Eastern Region particularly the telecom and broadband connectivity in 
the context of  preparation and finalization of Twelfth Plan.  The desired action in this regard 
may be taken and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The North East Region (NER) comprises of eight States viz. Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim. The NE Region has a strategic 
situation. All-round development of the region is of utmost importance for the country. With 
this view, special focus has been given to the development of this region. Th is region is 
characterized by extremely tough terrain with very limited transport and other infrastructure. 
At the very outset it was appreciated that to bring this region into the national mainstream, it 
will be essential to substantially improve the telecommunication facilities.  
 
The region comprises of three Territorial Telecom Circles, viz. Assam (covering the State 
of Assam), NE -I (comprising of States of Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura) and NE -II (includes 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland). The eighth State of NE Region is 
Sikkim which is under the Territorial Circle of West Bengal. The Long Distance 
Telecommunication Network is maintained by Eastern Telecom Region (ETR). To ensure rapid 
implementation of various schemes in NER a CGM (NE Task Force) is posted at Guwahati. 
 
Under the Special Component Plan, BSNL makes provision for the development of 
telecom facilities in N.E. Region. During the 11th Five year plan (year wise) the financial 
allocation and expenditure incurred by BSNL  is as under:  
 
North Eastern Region 
  (Rs. In crore) 
Sl. No. Year Funds Allocated Expenditure incurred 
1. 2007-08 403.48 307.63 
2. 2008-09 990.56 466.06 
3. 2009-10 477.19 424.47 
4. 2010-11 268.83 141.35 
5. 2011-12 497.19* 75.39* 
 
* Figures of expenditure upto 31.07.2011 are provisional on the basis of cash drawal 
authorization. 
 
Target and Achievements of NE Region for the year 2010-11  
S. 
No Details Unit 
Assam NE-I NE-II Sikkim TOTAL NE 
Region 
Target Achv. Target Achv. Target Achv. Target Achv. Target Achv. 
1 Switching capacity  

59 
 
1(a) Wired lines lines 0 -18,360 0 -14,900 0 -1,876 0 0 0 -35,136 
1(b) WLL lines 0 24,250 0 7,950 0 17,000 0 0 0 49,200 
1(c) Mobile lines 0 86,500 0 78,579 0 51,690 0 7,450 0 224,219 
  
Total 
Switching 
Capacity 
lines 0 92,390 0 71,629 0 66,814 0 7,450 0 238,283 
2 DELs                       
2(a) Wired lines Nos 0 -52,141 0 -53,298 0 -3,756 0 -3,631 0 -
112,826 
2(b) WLL Nos 0 963 0 -406 0 5,719 0 94 0 6,370 
  Fixed   6,544 -51,178 -
13,534 -53,704 11,224 1,963 1,000 -3,537 5,234 -
106,456 
2(c) Mobile Nos 260,000 341,122 93,000 132,935 113,000 228,687 53,000 10,236 519,000 712,980 
  Total DELs Nos 266,544 289,944 79,466 79,231 124,224 230,650 54,000 6,699 524,234 606,524 
3 Broadband 
Capacity ports 0 10,960   256 0 3,296 0 2,356 0 16,868 
4 Broadband 
connections Nos 31,400 22,277 23,100 10,155 19,000 4,180 3,685 807 77,185 37,419 
5 Internet 
connections Nos 0 128   -44,940 0 2,507 0 7 0 -42,298 
6 VPT Nos 0 229   1,281 0 971 0 -8 0 2,473 
7 TAX Kccts 0 40   16 0 48 0 0 0 104 
8 OFC Rkms 150 129 40 0 75 1,225 0 -69 265 1,285 
 
Following are the reasons for under achievements of Physical targets during the year 
2010-11. 
1. Low demand of landline broadband connections in rural areas.  
2. Slow growth of IT enabled services due to lack of consumer awareness. 
3. High cost of personnel computers. 
4. The whole North East region is a disturbed area, where accessibility is difficult due to 
hilly terrain, prevailing law and order conditions, climate etc.  
 
Present Status 
 As on 30.06.2011 the total number of telephones exchanges in NE Region are 1221 
equipped capacity is 41.38 lakh  lines (wire line+WLL+GSM Mobile) and total nos. of telephone 
connections are 37.04 lakh (wire line+WLL+GSM Mobile).    
 
Broadband coverage of NE states is as under: 
 
Circle State DHQ Cities Villages 
No of 
Exchan
ges 
ADSL 
Covered 
Total Covered Total Covered Total Covered Total Covered 
Assam Assam 26 26 125 125 25124 6995 432 432 
NE-I Meghalaya 7 7 16 16 5782 275 89 44 
  Mizoram 8 8 22 13 707 100 66 32 

60 
 
  Tripura 4 4 23 23 858 160 89 56 
NE-II Arunachal 
Pradesh 16 12 17 15 3863 34 54 53 
  Nagaland 11 11 9 9 1278 1154 41 13 
  Manipur 9 9 40 16 2315 701 61 1 
WB Sikkim 4 4 12 12 450 275 58 10 
 
Detail of VPTs in North East Region along with achievement made during 2010-11 & 2011 -12 
(upto July 2011) is as under: 
 
S. 
No. Circle 
Total No. of 
Inhabited 
uncovered 
Villages  
( Census 2001) 
Villages 
covered 
with VPT 
facility as 
on 
31.7.2011 
VPT provided during 
2010-11 
VPT provided during 
2011-12  
(upto July 2011) 
Under 
Bharat 
Nirman 
Under New 
VPT 
Agreement 
Under 
Bharat 
Nirman 
Under New 
VPT 
Agreement 
1 Assam 25124 24280 0 229 0 58 
2 NE-I 7347 6418 114 1281 0 148 
3 NE- II 7456 6000 18 971 0 13 
4 Sikkim 450 429 0 -8 0 0 
  Total 40377 37127 132 2473 0 219 
  
Efforts are being made to cover all the uncovered villages under the USOF agreement as 
per the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
 
Telecom Expansion in the North-East Sector  
As for wireline is concerned, no switching capacity target is given for North East Se ctor 
keeping in view the already available sufficient spare capacity. However, churn of wireline 
connections is continued in North East also. The main reasons for this churn are trend of  
shifting of wireline customers towards cheaper and more convenient  mobile (due to ease of 
use/mobility feature),  frequent disturbance of services due to large scale damages of u/g cable 
by various utility agencies doing digging operations, unavailability of various attractive features 
in phones  compared to mobile phones. 
 
Efforts to contain the churn and to attain the positive growth of wireline in North East 
Sector, various measures like provisioning of Broadband along with landline, attractive tariff 
plans, modernization of exchanges/ external network, introduction of new services like PRBT, 
providing CLIP instruments etc are being taken. Close coordination is being maintained with the 
local authorities and civic bodies to avoid cable breakdown due to various developmental 
activities being undertaken. 
 
Road Map ahead with target dates: 
 
BSNL plan to provide 5.65 lakh telephone connections and 150124 nos. Broadband 
connections (wireline+wireless) in NE Region during 2011 -12. The physical targets & 
Achievement up to 30-06.2011 of NE region is given below. 
 
State-Wise  Plan and Achievement for NE Region of BSNL for the year 2011-12   

61 
 
 
S. 
No. Parameter Unit  
Physical Target during 2011-12  Grand 
Total 
(Targets) 
Achievemen
t upto 
30.06.2011 ASSAM NE-I 
Total 
NE-II 
Total SIKKIM 
1 Net addition in Switching Capacity  
1 (a) Wired line Lakh 
Lines 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 -0.05 
1 (b) WLL Lakh 
Lines 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.03 0.09 0.13 
1 (c) Mobile Lakh 
Lines 0.64 0.87 0.65 0.04 2.20 0.35 
  Total Lakh 
Lines 0.64 0.87 0.71 0.07 2.29 0.43 
2 Net addition in Telephone Connections 
2 (a) Wired line Lakh 
Nos. 0.06 -0.08 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.12 
2 (b) WLL Lakh 
Nos. 0.30 0.10 0.09 0.01 0.50 0.02 
2(c) Mobile Lakh 
Nos. 2.77 1.00 1.35 0.04 5.16 1.16 
  Total Lakh 
Nos. 3.13 1.02 1.45 0.05 5.65 1.30 
3 VPTs Nos. 274 1,920 1,180 20 3,394 149 
4 Broadband 
Capacity Ports 0 17,800 3,739 4,992 26,531 320 
5 Broadband 
Connections Nos. 36,000 7,000 11,000 3,494 57,494 6241 
6 OFC RKMs 300 150 400 10 860 340 
 
  
The work on providing OFC connectivity to all DHQs and SDHQs of Assam is in progress. 
Out of 354 locations, 127 locations have been connected. Besides this, the following steps have 
been taken to strengthen the transmission network in NE Region:- 
 
a)  Large scale deployment of Optical Fibre cable. Presently, about 20,000 Route Kms 
of Fibre is available in NE Region. 
b) Deployment of high capacity SDH radio links (3+1), STM-16, for all state 
Headquarters for redundancy. 
c)  Deployment of SDH radio links for important locations and difficult areas. 
d)  Deployment of 2Mb/ 8 Mb Satellite links to provide connectivity to remote 
areas, especially in Arunachal Pradesh. 
e)  Bandwidth has been hired from PGCIL for improving reliability of the network. 
f)  936 Kms. of Dark fibre has been hired from Oil India for improving connectivity of 
Assam. This fibre link is very stable as at has been laid along 
the pipeline of OIL. 10 G DWDM system has been installed on this cable. 
g)  2.5 G DWDM systems have been deployed in all State headquarter. 
h)  All state headquarters, except Gangtok, Aizwal and Agartala have been 
connected on self healing SDH rings. 
i)  Digital Cross Connects (DXCs) have been deployed at important locations. 

62 
 
j) Primary Reference Clock has been deployed at Guwahati and Silchar, and 
SSUs have been deployed in all SSA Headquarters. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
 The Committee note that the total quantity of e -Waste generated during 2007 was 
3,32,979 metric tones which is expected to increase to about 8 lakh metric tones by 2012.  The 
e-Waste generated by mobile phones during 2007 is stated to be 1655 metric tones.  A number 
of Research and Development have been initiated at the various National Institutions in India 
which inter -alia include development of processing technology for recycling and reuse of 
electronic waste, environmental ly sound methods for recovery of metals from Polychlorinated 
Biphenyls (PCBs) and recovery and conversion of plastic from Waste Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment (WEEE) to value added products.  The Committee also appreciate to note that the 
National Metallurgical Laboratory at Jamshedpur has successfully recycled upto 1 metric tones 
of e-Waste on pilot basis which include e-Waste out of mobile phones and is now attempting to 
take it to possible commercial application.  The Committee appreciate the initia tives taken by 
the various organizations to deal with the issue of e -Waste, nevertheless, they would like the 
Department to continue its efforts to overcome the potential threats of e -Waste taking into 
account that it contents hazardous constituents that n egatively impact the environment and 
human health.  The Department in coordination with DIT should also strive to have to place a 
legislation mandating electronic manufactures and importers to take back used electronic 
products at the End -of Life (EoL) bas ed on the principle of Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) and the Committee informed accordingly. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Department of Information Technology is continuing its efforts to promote R&D to 
develop technological solutions for e lectronic waste (e -waste) management (including mobile 
phones) in environmental friendly manner. 
 
 It may kindly be noted that the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF), 
Government of India is the nodal agency for making legislation to address the envi ronmental 
related issues including Electronic waste.  MoEF has notified (S.O. 1035) the electronic wastes 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 2010 on 12th May 2011 to address the safe and environment 
friendly handing, transporting, storing, recycling of elect ronic waste and also to reduce the use 
of hazardous substances during manufacturing of electrical and electronic equipments.  These 
rules will be enforced from 1st May 2012. 
 
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee regarding legislation is already ta ken 
care of in Chapter II, Section 4 of the above rules, which include the ‘Responsibilities of the 
producer’ mandating that electric manufactures and importers take back used electric products 
at the End-of-life(EoL) based on the principle of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR). 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
  

63 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 

64 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 ) 
 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate allocations that include both Internal and 
External Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) are for Rs.19881.09 crore 
during the year 2011-12 against the allocation of Rs.18135.10 crore during the previous year.  So far 
as the trend of utilization of outlay earmarked at BE stage is concerned, it has been observed that 
the allocations earmarked at BE stage are being reduced at RE stage and the actual utilization is far 
lesser than the allocatio ns made at RE stage.  The Committee have consistently been expressing 
concern over the aforesaid trend and exhorting the Department to take corrective action.  In spite 
of that the status of utilization of funds during the year 2010 -11 has further worsened . The 
allocations made for Rs.18135.10 crore at BE stage were drastically reduced to just Rs.11860.84 
crore at RE stage.  Not only that the utilization as on February 2011 is just Rs.6507.60 crore i.e 54.87 
per cent of the allocations made at RE stage.  In  case the utilization status is compared to the 
allocations made at BE stage, it just comes to 35.88 per cent. 
 
 If the financial performance of the Department during the Eleventh Plan as a whole is taken 
into consideration, the proposed allocations for the five years both for IEBR and GBS are for 
Rs.103526.96 crore.  During the first four years of the Eleventh Plan, the Department could utilize 
just Rs.41676.36 crore which is little more than 40 per cent of the allocations.  In spite of the 
continuous pursuance of the issue, the Department does not seem to have bothered to undertake 
detailed analysis of the reasons for under utilization of the scare resources.  The reply of the 
Department that the projects do not come up or get delayed sometimes due to re asons beyond 
control further substantiates the aforesaid observation of the Committee.  The detailed analysis of 
the various Plan schemes and the performance of two Public Sector Undertakings viz. MTNL and 
BSNL has been done in the subsequent paras of the Report.  Here the Committee express serious 
concern over the trend of under utilization of resources.  Moreover, it seems the Department has 
not taken the observation of the Committee seriously.  The Committee again exhort the 
Department to analyze the imp lementation of various Plan schemes so as to ensure that the 
budgetary resources provided for various schemes are effectively utilized and the schemes are 
implemented in a proper way.  The Committee strongly emphasize to undertake the review of the 
various schemes of the Department so as to understand the bottlenecks in implementation of 
various schemes.  The desired corrective action may accordingly be taken and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
BSNL: 
 
  IEBR Allocated & Utilized during the last five Years & the Current Year 2011 -12 is furnished 
below: 
                                (Rs. in Crores) 
Financial Year IEBR Allocated  Fund Utilized 
2007-08 13846.5 7239.43 
2008-09 17813.5 10876 
2009-10 14001.19 12681 
2010-11 * 10151.7 24646 
2011-12  15277.63 1259.41 

65 
 
 
Note:  
5. The figures of funds utilized for the year 2010-11 is provisional. 
6. The funds utilized for the year 2011-12 (up to 31.07.2011) is provisional. 
7. * Rs.18500.38 Crores paid to DOT for one time Spectrum  Charges in respect of 3G & 
BWA during 2010-11 year. 
8. This allocation includes all Capital Expenditure. 
No budgetary support is provided by Government to BSNL. 
 
Under utilization of allocations made under IEBR and GBS: 
 
The outlays involve several component s.  One of the components may be related to the 
release of the payments to vendors under the ongoing projects.  It may be noted that there are 
defined rollout obligations/targets against which the payments of the vendors are released in these 
projects. Som e of the rollout targets/obligations could not be completed by the vendors in time 
because of several reasons like delay in provisioning of electricity connections by state electricity 
authorities, delay in municipal clearance, delay in permission provided  by state governments, delay 
in commissioning by the vendor etc.  As per the tender terms and conditions payments will be 
released once these targets/obligations are met by the vendors.  Therefore, the provisions made in 
the outlays for these payments may get shifted to the next financial year. 
 
The effective utilization of outlays is primarily linked to timely completion of tendering 
process for procurement and execution in case of turnkey projects. BSNL has made all out efforts 
for effective utilization o f outlays by ensuring effective and timely planning and estimation of 
requirements and formulation/ floating of tenders and thereafter the completion of tendering 
process, rigorous monitoring of project execution by regular periodic  review meeting at all level at 
BSNL corporate office as well as field unit. However the shortfall in effective utilization of outlays is 
most of the time due to unforeseen and unavoidable situations whereby the tendering process gets 
delayed/ stalled and the subsequent execution of project also gets affected.  
 
Measures being taken to ensure optimum utilization are as under:- 
 
(b)    Change in procurement policy related to Price Formula; Vendors tie up; Fixing of   ‘Block 
of Three Years’ for procurement etc to curb the delay in procurement of equipment. 
(b)     Resorting to strict and tight schedule for timely availability of equipment. 
(d)    Periodical monitoring of implementation of all major projects for achievements of 
targets. 
 
MTNL: 
 
The financial performance of MTNL during the last four years is given below:- 
 
Table -1                   
  (Rs. in Crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Budget Estimates (IEBR) 2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 1204.10 
Revised Estimates 1692.33 1304.28 1352.01 1281.84 
Actual utilization  932.46 871.12 1194.70 1257.07 
Percentage  of utilization w.r.t. 
Revised Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 88.36% 98.06% 
 
Note: No budgetary support is provided by Government to MTNL. 

66 
 
MTNL has been formulating its annual plan taking into consideration the experience it had 
gained during the previous years. Meetings are held with the units to review the progress of the 
ongoing projects. Further the status of the new / upcoming projects to be taken up during the next 
year, are reviewed and the funds are allocated based on the expenditure likely to be booked under 
various heads. MTNL has been making its best efforts for making estimate s and projections as 
realistic as possible based on available information.  
 
Thus, every year MTNL is trying to formulate a more realistic plan where it hopes to spend 
all its plan outlay for the achievement of its physical targets. It is quite evident fro m above table 
that MTNL has progressively improved the amount of capital expenditure incurred vis -à-vis the 
proposed outlay and the utilization is 98.06%  in 2010-11. 
 
At the time of initial planning, provision of funds have also to be kept for the new and 
upcoming projects likely to come in future. However, if the projects do not come up or are delayed 
due to unavoidable circumstances in such cases the funds allotted ag ainst such projects remain 
unutilized and results in lower expenditure as compared to outlay.  
 
Further, in the telecom sector which is driven by stiff competition, fast changing 
technologies and falling prices of the telecom equipments, it is becoming inc reasingly difficult to 
predict/ forecast the requirements well in advance. As an abundant precaution, certain provisions 
are kept in the projections which do not always get spent. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecomm unications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee find that rural teledensity as on 31 st March, 2010 was 24.31 per cent which 
has grown to 32.19 per cent as on January, 2011.  During the corresponding period, the urban 
teledensity has shown a tremendous growth.  It grew from 119.45 per cent to 150.20 per cent.  
What is disheartening to the Co mmittee is the fact that in the last five years rural teledensity has 
not shown the kind of growth which has been witnessed in the urban areas.  In the last five years 
the urban teledensity has shown positive growth of 120.64 per cent which is almost four times that 
of the growth of rural teledensity.  The Committee find this highly disturbing.  Taking into account 
that in line with NTP, 99, the Universal Service Support Policy came into effect from 1 st April, 2002 
with the mandate to improve rural telephon y.  However, in spite of the rigorous work done in the 
last 9 years with the help of USOF, rural telephony has not shown the kind of growth which is 
expected.  The Committee understand that the telecom connectivity has played an important role 
in the overa ll economic growth of the country.  To achieve the inclusive growth there is an urgent 
need to give more attention to rural areas.  As such the initiative being taken by the Department 
and BSNL should further be geared up so as to fill up the gap between u rban and rural teledensity.  
The Committee would also like the Department to explore the possibility of introducing various new 
services to capture the rural market and steps be taken to make a significant inroads for 3G and 
BWA services in these areas. 
   
 
 

67 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Following initiatives have been taken on rural connectivity/broadband: 
 
i) Allotment of Spectrum for 3G and BWA services to the private operators through 
auction.  This will facilitate proliferation of broadband through mobile handset and 
wireless technologies. 
 
ii) Permitting Sharing of infrastructure amongst the Service providers. 
 
iii) The Indian Telegraph Rules have been amended, and stream IV has been added 
under the title “Provision of broadband connectivity to villages in a  phased manner” 
to bring provisioning of broadband connectivity to the rural areas under the purview 
of the USOF. 
 
iv) USOF schemes for supporting shared infrastructure for mobile services in rural and 
remote areas. These towers will also be used to provide Br oadband connectivity in 
the newly covered Block/Taluka headquarters. 
 
v) USOF, through BSNL, has started ‘Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme’ to provide 
wire-line broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas by leveraging the existing 
rural exchanges infrastru cture and copper wire -line network.  Under this scheme, 
BSNL will provide 8, 88,832 wire -line Broadband connections to individual users and 
Government Institutions over a period of 5 -years, i.e., by 2014. The estimated 
subsidy outflow is Rs. 1500 crore in 5  years. As of July 2011, a total of 3,06,443 
broadband connections have been provided under this scheme. 
 
As on 31.03.2011, BSNL has the 28.16 Million rural GSM connection out of total 86.32 
Million GSM connection, which is 32.62 % of total GSM (Rural+ Urban) connection.  
 
As on 31.08.2011, BSNL has the 29.79 Million rural GSM connection out of total 90.48 
Million GSM connection, which is 32.92 % of total GSM (Rural+ Urban) connection. 
 
BSNL has planned to cover all the villages with GSM services having pop ulation greater than 
1000 in coming years, subject to techno -commercial viability of BSNL. Out of 6.1 Lakh villages, BSNL 
has already covered 3.95 Lakhs villages, having population more than 1000. To further augment the 
GSM capacities, process to procure additional 15 Million GSM lines has already been initiated. 
 
BSNL, subject to techno commercial feasibility, will continue to participate in the schemes 
launched by USOF, in providing services to urban & rural masses of the country. 
 
The 3G Services is presently planned in cities only due to techno-Commercial reasons. 
 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 

68 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 The Committee in 8 th Report on Demands for Grants 2010 -11 had recommended that the 
issue regarding debarring a person from the BPL list on possessing a telephone connection should 
be taken up by the Department with the Ministry of Rural Development and the State 
Governments.  When the issue was pursued further during the examination of Demands for Grants 
of the year 2011 -12, the Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Rural Development.  
As per the status report given by the Ministry of Rural Development, the pos ition is not very clear.  
As per the Ministry of Rural Development the existing criteria/methodology for identification of BPL 
households i.e criteria/ methodology for BPL Census 2002 was adopted on the recommendation of 
an Expert Group.  In this method, 1 3 socio -economic indicators reflecting the levels of living and 
quality of life of the rural population were used to identify the poor households.  While elaborating 
on the 13 indicators, at one place these have been stated to be Land Holdings, Type of Hou se, 
Availability of Clothing, Food Security, Sanitation, ownership of consumer durables viz. TV, Electric 
Fan, Kitchen appliances, Cooker, Radio etc., Literacy status if highest literate, Status of Household 
Labour, Means of livelihood, Status of Children,  Type of indebtedness, Reasons for migration and 
Preference for Assistance.  The telephone connection thus do not find direct mention in the list.  
However, at another place in the case of BPL Census 2002 conducted in the year 2004 in the State 
of Karnataka, it has clearly been mentioned that telephone connection is one of the parameters.  
The family having telephone connection along with other household equipments like Television, 
Radio, Fan, Refrigerator, 2/4 wheelers etc. were given 4 marks.  In Karnatak a, families who scored 
14 & less than 14 points are considered BPL families. 
 
 The Committee observe that in case where a person having telephone connection as is 
evident from the practice in Karnataka is debarred from the BPL list, to achieve the desired level of 
teledensity in rural areas may be a big problem.  The Committee find that this is a serious matter 
which could have got the attention of the Department suo -moto.  The Committee deplore even 
when the issue was raised by the Committee in their said report, the Department did not bother to 
get the clear -cut position from the Ministry of Rural Development.  While expressing unhappiness 
over the way the Department has dealt with the matter, the Committee strongly recommend to 
take up the matter with the  Ministry of Rural Development, particularly when the methodology for 
the proposed forthcoming BPL 2011 Census is being finalized. 
   
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
Information obtained from the Ministry of Rural Development regarding “Having Telephone 
connection as one of the criteria to debar a person form BPL list” is as follows: 
 
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development. The Ministry of Rural 
Development has clarified that it provides financial and technical support to States/UTs  for 
conducting the BPL Census to identify the rural households living below the Poverty Line who could 
be assisted under its various programmes. The BPL Census is conducted by the respective 
States/UTs and the BPL lists are prepared and maintained by the respective State Government/UT 
administrations. Last such BPL Census was conducted in 2002. 
 
For conducting the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Rural 
Development constituted an Expert Group, to advise it on the suitable methodol ogy which 
consisted of academicians, experts, representatives of the civil society organizations and senior 
officials of the central and state governments associated with management of the rural poverty 
alleviation programmes, as members. The Expert Group submitted its report on 21 st August 2009 
under chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena. The Report of the Expert Group was posted on the 

69 
 
Ministry’s website www.rural.nic.in   soliciting comments and suggestions. It was circulated among 
the State Governments/UT admi nistrations and the concerned Central Ministries for their 
comments. The Ministry also consulted the issue of finalization of methodology with experts in the 
related field. In accordance with suggestions of experts MoRD has conducted a Pilot survey to fiel d 
test alternative methodologies and to arrive at the methodology for conducting forthcoming BPL 
Census. Results of pilot study were discussed with States/UTs and methodology/criteria so arrived 
was placed before the approval of Cabinet which include “Hous eholds owning landline phones” as 
one of the exclusion criteria. 
 
With approval of Union Cabinet the Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC 2011) has been 
commenced for collecting Socio -economic and caste data of households in the rural and urban 
areas of t he country. Socio economic data collected from SECC 2011 will be utilized by respective 
States/UTs for identifying BPL households in rural areas for 12 th Five Year Plan. The SECC -2011 
would be conducted from 30 th June, 2011 to 31 st December, 2011 in a phas ed manner throughout 
the country. However the Criteria for identification of rural BPL households under the Socio 
Economic and Caste Census (SECC-2011) have not yet been finalized.” 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The aforesaid scheme was launched with the help of USOF with objective to provide subsidy 
support for setting up and managing 7871 number of infrastructure sites (towers) in 500 Districts 
across 27 States for provision of mobile services in the specified rural and remote areas where there 
is no existing fixed wireless or mobile coverage.  The targets were further scaled down to 7363.  The 
agreements effective from 1 June, 2007 were signed with the successful bidders in May, 2007.  The 
roll out period which was initially one year, was further extended till December, 2009.  Even when 
the extended period has already been over, 211 towers are yet to be set up.  The physical targets of 
setting up of 265 towers during 2010-11 could not be fully met.  The physical achievement was only 
138 towers as on December, 2010. 
 
 As per the information furnished b y the Department, the infrastructure so created is to be 
shared by three service providers for provision of mobile services.  So far as the status of utilization 
of the infrastructure so created under the scheme is concerned, the data furnished by the 
Department indicates that out of the target of 22161 Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) only 13866 
i.e. 62.57 per cent of BTS could be commissioned by different service providers as on December, 
2010.  The Committee are surprised to note the replies of the Depar tment as furnished on 18 
March, 2011 whereby it has been stated that most of the towers under this scheme are likely to be 
commissioned in a phased manner by March, 2011.  The Committee fail to understand how the 
Department would ensure the commissioning of most of the BTS within a few days.  The Committee 
express serious concern over the way the scheme is being implemented.   The Committee 
recommend that all out efforts should be made to ensure that all the targeted towers are set up 
and commissioned so that rural and remote areas could get the telecom connectivity. 
   
 
 
 

70 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
It is informed that 7289 out of the proposed7353 mobile towers under the scheme have 
been commissioned. Infrastructure Providers who are installing the mobi le towers in North East 
states i.e. BSNL and KEC International Limited have been allowed to commission the remaining 
towers by 31 August 2011 keeping in view the difficulties being faced by them in the region. Regular 
meetings are being held with Infrastru cture Providers & Mobile service providers to review the 
progress and to resolve the issues leading to delay, which are in the purview of the USOF.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that the illegal telecom networks are mushrooming 
in the country.  As per the cases reported so far 500 clandestine/illegal setups are operating in 
various parts of the country.  The actual position in this regard may even be worse.  After analyzing 
the State -wise position with regard to illegal operation of telecom networks in the country, the 
Committee observe that such cases have been reported in 16 States.  The position is worse in 
Andhra Pradesh (120) followed by Tamil Nadu (100), Delhi (61), Maharashtra (54), Karnataka (31) 
where the number of illegal operations is very high.  The Committee expr ess serious concern over 
such a high number of illegal telecom networks in the country.  These illegal networks cause a great 
loss to the Government because they need not pay the licence fee.  Not only that they are security 
threat to the country.  The Com mittee understand that the illegal operations are busted by TERM 
Cells.  The raids are conducted along with the persons from Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and 
the cases are handed over to LEAs simultaneously.  The Committee are concerned to note that the  
Department has not maintained the data with regard to dates when these cases were referred to 
LEAs.  The Committee strongly recommend to collect such information and apprise the Committee 
so as to understand the action taken against the illegal operators.  
   
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The date of raids has been submitted along with the list of cases provided earlier. The raids 
have been conducted along with the persons from Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and the cases 
are handed over to LEAs simul taneously. In general, the date of raid can be taken as the date of 
handing over of the case to LEA. The TERM Cells have been asked to mention the dates on which 
the cases were handed over to LEAs for rechecking the same. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

71 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
As per para 10.2(1) of the Licence Agreement, the licen sor may without prejudice to any 
other remedy available for the breach of any conditions of licence, by a written notice of 60 
Calender days from the date of issue of such notice to the licencee, terminate these licences under 
specified circumstances which include failure to perform any obligations under the licence including 
timely payments of fee and other charges due to the licensor, failure to rectify within time 
prescribed, any defect/deficiency/correction in service/equipment as may be pointed out by the 
licensor, if licensor goes into liquidation or ordered to be wound up and if the licence is 
recommended by TRAI for termination of licence for non-compliance of terms and conditions of the 
licence.  The Committee are surprised to note that the Departme nt has not maintained data with 
regard to licensees issued notices for not agreeing to the aforesaid obligations as per the Licence 
Agreement.  When the specific information was asked, the Department in a very vague manner has 
stated that compliance to dif ferent conditions of licensees are dealt with in various wings/units of 
DoT and compilation of violations by approximately 260 existing UAS licensees is not readily 
available.  The Department has further mentioned that it would take sometime to collect the  data 
desired by the Committee. 
 
 The Committee further find that 120 new licences of 2G spectrum for Unified Access Service 
were issued by the Department in January, 2008.  Para 35.2 of the Licence Agreement specifically 
provides for roll out obligations and penal provisions for violation .  As per the Agreement, for delay 
in roll out of more than 52 weeks, the licences may be terminated under the terms and conditions 
of the Licence Agreement.  The Committee further note that in the delay of less than 52 weeks, the 
licensor is entitled to r ecover LD charges at the specified rates as mentioned in para 35.2 of the 
Licence Agreement.  When asked for the specific information about the number of operators who 
are yet to start 2G operations after obtaining the licence, the Department at one place has 
mentioned the name of 6 licensee companies viz. S. Tel Private Limited (Jammu and Kashmir), Spice 
Communications Limited (Andhra Pradesh), Spice Communications Limited (Haryana), Spice 
Communications Limited (Maharashtra), Idea Cellular Limited (Karnat aka) and Idea Cellular Limited 
(Punjab).  It has been mentioned that the licensees have been allocated start up allocations after 
award of UAS but have not yet registered with Telecom Enforcement and Resource Monitoring 
(TERM) Cells of Department of Teleco mmunications for coverage testing of their network to meet 
the roll out obligations as per licence conditions.  As per the information furnished by the 
Department, till date no UAS licence has been terminated.  At another place it has been mentioned 
that r ecently TRAI recommended for cancellation of 74 UAS licences for violation of roll out 
obligation conditions.  With regard to issue of show cause notices, there is no clarity with regard to 
number of licencees who have been issued show cause notices.  At one place it has been mentioned 
that show cause notices for termination have been issued to 5 licensees and for additional 5 
licensees notices are under approval.  In the same para, it has been mentioned that in addition to 
above, 3 show cause notices for c ancellation of UAS licences have been issued for violation of roll 
out obligation conditions and 2 more show cause notices for termination are under approval. In the 
next line, it has been mentioned one show cause notice for termination has been issued for  
violation of the licence conditions and intra -service area merger guidelines and 5 more notices of 
similar violations are under legal vetting.  Not only that it has also been mentioned 64 cases have 
been referred back to TRAI for their reconsideration in the context of licence conditions.  To add 
this the analysis of the detailed statement sent by the Department along with the written replies 
reveal that against the column of date of issue of show cause notice to the licencees at 5 places viz. 
Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. Ltd. (Delhi), Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. Ltd. (Mumbai) show cause notices 
have been stated to be issued on 7 March, 2011.  Again in case of Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. 
(Assam), Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. (Kerala) and Sistema Shyam TeleS ervices Ltd. (West 
Bengal) show cause notices have been stated to be issued on 5 March, 2011.  In case of Spice 

72 
 
Communications Limited (Andhra Pradesh) and Idea Cellular Limited (Karnataka), it has been 
mentioned that show cause to the licencee is under ap proval.  In the column of remarks of AS Cell, 
DoT against 7 licensees roll out has been shown within one year from the date of startup spectrum 
allocation and in 2 causes it has mentioned as more than 52 weeks.  The aforesaid licensees are 
apart from the l icensees to whom the show cause notices have been stated to be issued in the 
detailed statement. 
 
 The aforesaid position clearly indicates that there is lot of confusion with regard to the 
number of licensees who could not meet the roll out obligations an d to whom the show cause 
notices have been issued.  Not only that, out of 74 UAS licenses recommended for cancellation by 
TRAI for violation of roll out obligation condition, the Department acted in respect of only 10 odd 
licensees.  Remaining 64 cases hav e been referred back to TRAI for their reconsideration in the 
context of licence conditions.  The Committee note that 120 2G licenses were issued on January, 
2008 and already more than three years have passed.  During these three years no action seems to 
have been taken to cancel the licenses of the defaulter licensees as clearly stipulated in the terms 
and conditions of the licenses.  Show cause notices were issued only during the month of March 
and April, 2011 and that too in respect of only 5 or 6 licensees.  What is surprising to the Committee 
is that no UAS licnese has ever been terminated till now even when cancellation of the license is a 
legal binding as per the license agreement as acknowledged by the Department.  To add to this, one 
of the conditions of cancellation of notice as per para. 10.2(1) of the License Agreement the details 
of which have already been given above is to terminate the licence if so recommended by TRAI for 
termination for non compliance of the terms and condition of the license .  The Committee fail to 
understand the inaction on the part of the Department with regard to cancellation of as many as 74 
UAS licenses as recommended for cancellation by TRAI for violation of roll out obligation conditions.  
The Committee deplore the way the Department and its various wings are functioning. 
 
 The Committee may further like to highlight that 120 new Licenses of 2G spectrum for 
Unified Access Services were issued at a very reasonable price.  Even then, the licensees fall to meet 
out the roll out obligations.  The scarce resource that is spectrum remained idle with the service 
providers which was a clear loss to the customer for the benefit of whom the spectrum was 
allocated.  What is really disappointing to note is that LD charges are imp osed if the delay in roll out 
is upto 52 weeks is more a favourable position where neither the penalty is imposed nor 
cancellation is done as is apparent from the aforesaid position.  The Committee strongly disapprove 
the inaction of the Department which m ade the default above 52 weeks a gainful position.  While 
deploring the way the Department and its various Wings have failed to ensure compliance of the 
roll out obligation by the service provides, the Committee strongly recommend that strict action 
should be taken against the defaulter licensees. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
  
Sub-Para 1: As mentioned in the report in Para 99 & 100, some of the recent violations details had 
already been made available to the committee. However, various cells of the Do T/ TRAI have been 
requested to compile the data on priority as desired by the committee and the same would be 
made available, as early as possible.  
 
Sub-Para 2: In respect of the observations about the number of Show Cause Notices issued to UAS  
licensees for violation of the various license conditions, earlier replies were given as per the specific 
question of the committee.  Their seems to be confusion because in the said question, committee 
had referred to 120 UAS Licences and in subsequent question, Co mmittee has referred to all UAS 
licensees. It is to mention that TRAI had sent the recommendations in respect of 145 UAS Licences 
only. The remarks in the annexure (sent to the committee earlier) were meant for further clarity 

73 
 
and were based on the status at that time.  The desired information is attached again, in the 
tabulated form now, along with complete details as per annexure-II (at page 54). The list consists of 
details of 24 show cause notices (SCNs)  issued for termination. Out of these 15 SCNs hav e been 
issued for violation of roll out obligations and 6 SCNs have been issued for violation of substantial 
equity related conditions/ merger guidelines. Three more SCNs are proposed to be issued as per 
legal advice, as the matter is sub-judice.  
 
Sub-Para 3:  TRAI vide its letters dated 18th November 2010 and 22nd December 2010 
recommended for cancellation of 43 Unified Access Service (UAS) licenses as per licence conditions 
and to consider the cancellation of another 31 UAS licenses after legal examinatio n out of 145 UAS 
licences.  These 145 UAS   were granted from the year 2006 to 2008. Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) had examined the recommendations of TRAI as per the UAS License 
conditions in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice. The Sho w Cause Notices were issued to 
the Licensees who have not registered with TERM Cell for roll out testing even after delay of more 
than 52 weeks from the due date for meeting the 1st year rollout obligations.   
 
As per proviso -5 of section 11(1) of TRAI Act - 1997, ”if the Central Government having considered 
that recommendation of the TRAI, comes to a prima facie conclusion that such recommendation 
cannot be accepted or needs modifications, it shall, refer the recommendation back to the Authority 
for its rec onsideration and the authority within fifteen days from date of receipt of such reference 
forward to the Central Government its recommendation after considering the reference made by 
that Government. After receipt of further recommendation if any, the Central Government shall take 
a final decision” 
 
Since the government came to a prima facie conclusion that TRAI recommendations may need 
modifications, the reference was sent back to TRAI for its reconsideration as per TRAI Act, 1997 for 
other cases. 
 
After reconsideration, TRAI vide its letter dated 14th July 2011 has recommended for cancellation 
of 53 licences. Out of these 53 licences, show cause notices have already been issued to 15 
licensees and to 3 more licensees SCNs shall be issued as per legal advice because the matter is sub-
judice. The details of 15 show cause notices issued for violation of roll out obligation condition are 
mentioned in the annexure -II. Now, it has been decided to issue the SCNs for termination of 
licenses for remaining 35 UAS licensees also as recommended by TRAI. 
 
TRAI in its recommendation dated 14.07.2011 has also recommended to seek legal opinion once 
again on the issue of cancellation of another 30 UAS licences. Accordingly, case is being sent to law 
Ministry for legal opinion.   
 
After issuing of UAS licenses in the year 2008, an amendment dated 10 Feb. 2009 in respect of 
rollout obligation conditions was issued.  Since this amendment had financial implications, 
therefore, the matter was referred to Ministry of Finance for ge tting their views in the matter. 
Ministry of Finance had given their view in December 2010. Action has been taken in these cases 
immediately after receipt of views /comments of Ministry of Finance. As per amended license 
conditions, data required for calcu lation of LD/ cancellation of the licenses, such as, date of 
allocation of frequency, average delay in SACFA clearance, date of registration by Telecom service 
Providers (TSPs) with TEC/ TERM cells for roll out testing were collected from various unit of t he 
DoT and notices were issued to various licensees after compilation and computations for imposition 
of LD & cancellation of licenses, as applicable.                                                                
 

74 
 
Sub-Para 4 :  In respect of the 120 new Li censees, the LD was imposed as per licence conditions 
wherever there was  delay in compliance of rollout obligations beyond the due date. In respect of 
Licensees where delay in registration with TERM Cell was more than 52 weeks from due date for 
meeting the roll out obligations, in addition to levying the maximum amount of LD i.e. Rs. 7 Crores, 
Show Cause Notices for termination of the UAS Licences has also been  issued. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications  O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
The Department has also informed the Committee that the decision for termination for UAS 
licence was being taken after considering the replies of show cause notice by the competent 
authority.  In this connection, the Committee would like to be apprised about the date of furnishing 
the replies by the defaulter licensees.  The Department has also informed that ma ny licensees have 
filed the petitions in the Hon’ble TDSAT against the imposition of LD charges and matter is 
subjudice.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of such licensees and the 
details of their grievances.  The Committee would a lso like to be apprised of the dates when the 
petitions in TDSAT by these licensees have been filed. 
 
 The Committee further find that with regard to the allocation of 3G spectrum the stipulated 
roll out period is within 5 years of the effective date.  The  aforesaid provision has been made as per 
the amendments of UAS Licence Agreements issued from 1 September, 2010.  The Committee 
consider 5 years too long a period for the roll out obligation.  The Committee are unable to 
understand such a great difference of roll out period between 2G and 3G.  In case of 2G, the roll out 
has to be effective within 52 weeks i.e. one year and in case of 3G upto 5 years the service 
providers can hold up the roll out.  The Committee may also like to highlight that spectrum is a 
scarce and non-renewable natural resource.  The best way is the efficient and effective utilization of 
the resource.  The aforesaid provision of 5 years for roll out obligation of 3G spectrum would result 
in blocking of the scare resource.  The Committee  are of the strong opinion that the aforesaid 
provision need to be reconsidered by the Department in the light of the observations made above. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
Sub-Para 1: 
 
The details of the Licensees to whom SCNs were issued and date of receipt of their reply is 
mentioned in Annexure-II (at page 54).  The details of licensees who have filed petitions against the 
imposition of LD charges, dates of filing of petitions in TDSA T and the details of their grievances are 
attached as Annexure-I  (at page 49 to 53). 
                                                                       
 Sub-Para 2:   
 
The rollout obligation in case of 3G being part of Notice Inviting Applications (NI A), it cannot 
be altered at this stage. 
 

75 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
 

76 
 
  

77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
The Committee observe that in spite of the security agencies expressing serious concern 
over the encrypted data of Blackberry and its security risks, the Government have not been able to 
resolve the problem.  The Committee note that Research in Motion (RIM ) through its Blackberry 
Services offers Voice, SMS, BlackBerry Internet Services (BIS), Blackberry Messenger (BBM) and 
BlackBerry Enterprise Solution (BES) services.  However, due to its nature of highly encrypted data, 
the Security Agencies want intercep tion of these services in readable format.  The Committee have 
been apprised that out of the various services provided by Blackberry, the Blackberry Messenger 
and BlackBerry Enterprise Solution services cannot be intercepted in readable format, even if the  
encrypted message is made available by the service providers.  The Committee note that the 
deadline to access the data in the requisite format from the BlackBerry company have been 

79 
 
extended time and again from 31 st August to 31st October, 2010 and then to  31st January and again 
to 31 st March, 2011.  The Committee have now been informed by the Department regarding the 
constitution of the Committee to look into all types of encrypted communications.  The expected 
date for submission of the Report by the afor ementioned Committee was 20 th April, 2011.  The 
Committee express unhappiness over the way the extension after extension are being given to 
resolve such an important issue related to security of the country.  Constitution of Committee for 
the purpose is another delaying tactics.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that no compromise 
can be made when it is the question of the security of the Nation.  As such, the issue need to be 
taken strongly with BlackBerry so that the matter is resolved.  The Committe e would also like to 
recommend to analyse the position internationally to know how the issue has been addressed in 
other countries. 
   
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
 As a Research Organisation in the field of Telecommunications, C -DOT has, over the past few 
years ; 
o  Developed a Centralized Monitoring System for Law Enforcement Agencies (LEA’s) for 
lawful interception.  
o Designed IP. Based Network elements for secured communication.  
o Assisted the government in the monitoring of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) gateways.  
o Associated with the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) for evaluation of network elements 
/ telecom equipment for security.  
o Developed Pilot Models of a converged Multi Technology Centralised Interceptions 
Systems  
 
 Though it is desirable t hat C -DOT, as a Public Funded Research Association, is formally 
authorized to participate, either directly or indirectly, in the development of telecom security 
related projects, the centre is not formally authorized to involve itself with reference to the  
services rendered by agencies like Research in Motion (RIM). 
 The government will, therefore, be in a better position to furnish an appropriate response to 
this query.  
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications  O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I) 
 
 

80 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee note that various Panchayats are being consulted through the Ministry of 
Rural Development to involve them in the process of social audit for the telecom facilities provided 
with the Government funding.  Further, instructions have been issued to all field units i.e. 
Comptroller of Communications Accounts (CCAs) to interact with State/Local Bodies to obtain the 
feedback with regard to the functioning of the Village Public Telephones & Rural Community 
Phones that have been installed by BSNL.  Further, agreeme nt has been signed by USOF 
Administrators with Indian institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) for impact assessment of 
the service provided by BSNL to obtain feedback from beneficiaries and Gram Panchayats.  While 
appreciating the steps taken by the Depar tment, the Committee impress that feedback received by 
the CCAs should be analysed and the desired concrete action be taken.  The Committee should also 
be kept apprised about the follow up action taken in this regard. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Feedback received from CCAs with regard to the functioning of the Rural Community 
Phones (RCPs) has been analysed. No feedback requiring corrective action has been received, so far. 
Further, Pilot phase of the impact assessment study of the USOF wireline broa dband is under 
process. This study envisages feedback from beneficiaries and Gram Panchayats. The Hon’ble 
Committee shall be kept apprised about follow up action taken in this regard. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Tele communications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee find that even when the issue of radiation from telecom towers is being 
debated in the country as well as internationally and the adverse affect of radiation from cellular 
phones and towers are being reported by various studies, the Inter -Ministerial Committee has 
broadly relied on the studies according to which the direct link between exposure to radio 
frequency radiation from mobile towers and healt h could not confirm a cause -and-effect 
relationship between radiation radio frequency radiation and health.  The Committee further note 
that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has constituted an Expert Group to study the possible 
impact of communication towers on birds and bees.  The Committee would like to know about the 
results of the aforesaid study being undertaken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests.  
Besides, the Committee also emphasize that there is an urgent need to undertake more studi es as 
well as to follow the studies being undertaken internationally so as to find out the impact of 
telecom towers on overall eco-system. 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that out of 1770 BTS tested by Telecom Engineering 
and Resources Monitoring (TE RM) Cells, no BTS was found non -compliant to the radiation norms 
set by International Commission for Non -Ionising Radiation Protection (ICNIRP).  The Committee 
understand that testing of BTS by TERM Cells do not seem to reflect the ground position which ma y 
not be so satisfactory.  The aforesaid observation of the Committee is further reinforced by the fact 

81 
 
that as many as 59,000 BTS are yet to self -certify conforming to limits/levels as prescribed by 
ICNIRP. Self -certificates in this regard are to be submi tted by the telecom service providers to 
respective TERM Cells of DoT and penal provision for non -submission has been made.  The 
Committee are unable to understand non -submission of self –certification for such a good number 
of BTS even when the penal prov ision has been made for non -submission.  The Committee in this 
regard would like to be apprised of amount of penalty imposed on the service providers for non -
submission of the certificates during the last five years.  The Committee would also like to 
recommend that the mobile towers should be tested for complying to the specific radiation norms 
as set by ICNIRP by some independent agency so as to know the real picture in this regard.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 An Inter-Ministerial Committee was constituted to examine the effect of EMF radiation on 
health by mobile phone towers and handsets.  The report of the Inter -Ministerial Committee was 
placed on the DOT website calling for feedback from stake -holders.  The comments/feedback 
received have bee n duly examined and are under submission to the competent authority for 
appropriate action in the matter. 
 
 The Ministry of Environment and Forest has constituted an Expert Group to Study the 
possible impact of communication towers on birds and bees.  Comm ents on the draft report 
received from the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MOEF) has been furnished on 15.07.2011.  
The present status is being ascertained from MOEF. 
 
With regard to BTS tested by TERM Cells, it is submitted that the testing is done based on 
the procedure prescribed by Telecom Engineering Centre of Department which have been 
formulated based on the internationally established practices for measuring the radiations. The 
equipments used for testing by TERM Cells are having valid calibration certificate from OEM 
(Original Equipment Manufacturer) or any national / international accredited Lab. In view of above, 
it is felt that the testing being carried out by TERM Cells is by using the appropriate equipments and 
procedures, therefore, the test results of TERM Cells may be fully relied upon.       
 
Regarding issue of imposition of penalty on the Telecom Service Providers, it is submitted that the 
requirement of  self certification was first introduced in the License Agreement by Amendment 
dated 4 th November 2008, as per which the self certification was to be provided after the 
procedures for the same were prescribed by Government. The procedure for measuring the EMF 
Radiation was prescribed by DoT in November 2009 for the first time. Therefore, prior to November 
2009, there was no requirement of submitting certificate in this regard. The initial self certification 
of existing sites was allowed to be submitted till  31.03.2011. Department is in process of finalising 
the modalities to impose penalty in case of non-submission of self certificate. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 

82 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
  
 Power supply is the major constraint in expending the telecom network in rural areas, 
particularly in the remote and difficult areas.  The Committee have been recommending in their 
reports for the use of new and renewable energy sources for powering the mobile infrastructure 
sites.  In this connection, Pilot Projects to establish the viability of powering of Shared Mobile 
Infrastructure Sites in rural areas through solar/solar-wind Hybrid Installations with Subsidy support 
from Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and USOF towards solar/solar -wind hybrid power 
installations in 28 USOF shared mobile infrastructure sites has been initiated by the Department.  As 
per the information furnished by the Department, the re sults obtained from these sites would help 
to establish technical feasibility and financial viability of utilization of renewable energy in shared 
mobile sites in rural areas.  So far as the progress of the aforesaid project is concerned, the 
Committee find that Expression of Interest (EOI) was floated in June, 2009.  A draft agreement to be 
signed with the GTL/BSNL/RCIL/KEC/BSEL/QTIL Infrastructure Providers (IPs) was prepared and 
vetted but the successful Infrastructure Providers (IPs) are yet to confirm their willingness to sign 
the agreement.  The Committee find that there is some disagreement in the rates quoted by the 
bidders.  According to the Department, the exorbitant rates have been quoted by the bidders vis -à-
vis prevailing market rates as well as  the benchmark rates given by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. Accordingly, it was felt necessary to incorporate a stipulation in the agreements, 
to the effect that the prevailing rates of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy would be compared 
with the representative rates and the lower of the two would be taken.  The Department has also 
stated that none of the bidders is agreeable to incorporation of this stipulation in the agreement.  
The Committee hope that the Department would resolve the afore said issue and the pilot projects 
would be implemented with great success followed by nationwide programme in this regard.  The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that finding ways to use the renewable energy sources for 
telecom infrastructure powering would be a great boost to expanding the telecom network in rural 
areas and would definitely result into meeting the targets of teledensity in rural areas.  
   
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
 It is informed that: 
 
(1) 20 pilot projects have been undertaken by BSN L out of which 10 have been 
completed and 10 are under process. 
 
(2) Based upon the results of the pilots, the matter of scaling up the results to a full -
fledged scheme would be considered. 
 
(3) USOF shall be incorporating the aspect of use of Renewable Energy wherever 
possible in its future schemes.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 In the background of the finding of survey by World Bank according to which every increase 
of 10 per cent in broadband connectivity leads to a growth of GDP by 1.38 per cent, the Committee 
in their Eighth Report had emphasized the need o n the part of the Department to conduct a survey 
to know of the impact of broadband in the growth of GDP in India.  The Committee have been 
informed that the Department is initiating a survey to ascertain the impact of broadband in the 

83 
 
growth of GDP in the  country.  The Committee emphasize that the survey in this regard should be 
done expeditiously and the outcome thereto intimated to the Committee. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Expression of Interest (EOI) documents for outsourcing the study on Impact of 
Broadband in the Growth of GDP in India is under finalization. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee fur ther find that as per the Licence Agreement, if the roll out delay is 
less than 52 weeks, the licensor is entitled to recover LD charges as specified in the para 35.2 of 
the Licence Agreement for Provision of Unified Access Service.  In the detailed statem ent 
furnished to the Committee the penalty amount calculated as per the licence conditions is 
Rs.311.55 crore.  In reply to question asking about the amount calculated by the Department by 
invoking the penal provision for the non roll out of services after  availing the 2G spectrum, it 
has been stated that an amount of approximately Rs. 220 crore has been calculated by the 
Department.  The word ‘approximately’ indicates that even about the penalty calculated from 
the licensees, the Department is not sure of the amount.  The difference between penalty 
calculated and the money collected is to the tune of Rs. 91.55 crore.  It means that the defaulter 
licensees have not even deposited the LD charges with the Department.  The Committee while 
expressing serious con cern would like to strongly recommend to take strict action against the 
defaulter licensees.  Besides, the details of such licensees who did not even pay the LD charges 
may also be intimated to the Committee.  The Committee would also like to emphasize tha t 
accountability of the officials in this regard should also be fixed.  The Committee may be kept 
informed about the action taken in this regard. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 While replying the questions, it was mentioned that the amount of LD imposed against 
120 UAS Licensees (issued in Jan. 2008) is Rs. 311.55 Crore and out of this Rs. 220 Crore 
(approximately) have been collected by DoT.  The exact amount collected from thes e 120 UAS 
Licensees by DoT till 2.5.2011 was Rs. 220.39 Crore against the LD.  The difference between LD 
imposed and collected to the tune of Rs.  91.16 Crore is mainly due to court orders.  After issue 
of demand notices for imposition of LD most of the Li censees filed petitions in TDSAT against 
the imposition of LD. TDAST in its interim orders, directed the petitioners to deposit 60% of the 
demanded amount in many cases.  The details of the Licensee who did not file petitions in 
TDSAT but deposited less than demanded amount are as follows:  
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Licensee 
Name of 
Service 
area 
Amount 
of LD 
imposed 
in Rs. 
Crores 
Amount 
of LD 
paid in 
Rs. 
Crores 
Main grievance of the 
Licensee 
1 Loop Telecom 
Limited 
West 
Bengal 
6.75 NIL Spectrum allotted in 
partial number of 
DHQs 
2 Vodafone 
Essar 
Spacetel 
Orissa 0.25 NIL Average SACFA delay 
is incorrect 

84 
 
Limited 
3 Vodafone 
Essar 
Spacetel 
Limited 
Bihar 0.30 NIL Average SACFA delay 
is incorrect 
4 Vodafone 
Essar 
Spacetel 
Limited 
J&K 0.45 0.35 Average SACFA delay 
is incorrect 
5 Vodafone 
Essar 
Spacetel 
Limited 
North 
East 
7.00 3.35 Average SACFA delay 
is incorrect and 
number of DHQs in 
North East LSA 
 
These licensees had given the representations to DoT against the LD demand notices 
and the same are under examination. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that the Department did not notice any security 
threats due to import of SIM cards before the matter was pointed out by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs.  What surprised the Committee more is the fact that neither the Department thought of any 
potential security threat that could have been emanated from the SIM cards nor asses any security 
threats that could have come due to the use of imported SIM cards in the Country.  It was only after 
the security issues were raised by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the Department has sought 
information in this regard from  the different Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) in the Country.  The 
Committee also note that the Government is making efforts to promote indigenous production of 
telecom equipments, however, as per the Department the import of telecom equipments cannot be 
dispensed with.  The Committee feel that the importing of SIM cards and telecom equipments from 
the different countries especially China is a big threat to the National security and, therefore, 
recommend that all initiatives to have indigenous SIM cards a s well as other telecom equipments 
should be explored and the Committee informed accordingly. 
   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The Department is accessing the possible security threats due to import of SIM Cards. Large 
numbers of SIM Cards have been imported by Telecom Service Providers in addition to procuring 
the same from indigenous manufacturers/suppliers. Department is exploring the possibilities of 
indigenous procurement of SIM Cards by all TSPs. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Techno logy/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
The Committee in their Eighth Report had recommended that the Department should 
address the issue raised by the security agencies that the intercept message should not get affected 
due to the Mobile Number being ported from one operator’s network to other while implementing 
the Mobile Number Portability.  Subsequently, the Committee have been informed that various 
rounds of discussions were he ld and views of the Security Agencies/Ministry of Home Affairs were 

85 
 
sought on the final procedure before issuing the instructions.  The views of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs/ Nodal Security Agency have been received and necessary secret instructions have b een 
issued to the Service Providers addressing the security concerns in the porting process.  However, 
the Committee are disheartened to note that there have been numerous instances across the 
country where the subscribers are making calls on their officia lly deactivated SIMS even after 
availing of Mobile Number Portability raising concerns of abuse and possible security risk.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that instead of taking instant corrective measures to remedify the 
situation, the Department has  simply informed that a close watch on the matter is kept by the 
TERM Cells of the DoT and based on the feedbacks from the Telecom Service Providers and the 
subscribers, various instructions have been issued to resolve the problem.  While deploring the 
state of affairs concerning the Mobile Number Portability and security risk, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should again take up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and determine the potential security threats at the earliest.  The Committee also recommend that 
the various provisions of the ‘Telecommunications Mobile Number Portability Regulations 2009 as 
amended’ should be followed by the various Telecom Service Providers in letter and spirit. 
   
 Action Taken by the Government 
 
 It is submitted that TRAI has one of its functions as monitoring the Regulations issued by it. 
The observations of Hon’ble Committee have been communicated to TRAI for effective 
implementation of Telecommunications Mobile Number Portability Regulation 20 09 and its 
amendments. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. 
No. 16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that inspite of various steps taken by the 
Department to transform ITI from a sick company to a vibrant institution, the revival plan of ITI has 
not borne fruit. The Committee note that the strength of ITI lies in the strategic area of 
communication for Defence and the same has b een epitomized by the prestigious Army Static 
Switch Communication Network (ASCON) Project. It has also executed satellite project such as 
Carnation for Army, Earth Stations for Airforce and Civilcon for Ministry of Home Affairs. However, 
the Committee are constrained to note that for the entire Eleventh Plan, the Planning Commission 
has made an allocation of only Rs. 2.01 crore out of the total Outlay of Rs. 105.87 crore provided for 
the entire Eleventh Plan. Some of the initiatives taken by the Department  include ‘Revival Plan 
2009’ which led to release of a sum of Rs. 2820 crore for discharging its liability to clean up its 
balance sheet as per the revival package, the policy of Reservation Quota of 30 per cent of the 
BSNL/MTNL purchases of the telecom eq uipments from ITI, release of Rs. 180 crore during March, 
2011 towards the working capital for ITI. Further, the Committee also note that the Department has 
given various advice to ITI which include chalking out of concrete strategic plan for its revival b ased 
on a thorough review of its working, operation, establishment, marketing strategy, setting long 
term goals through value proposition by designing a road map and initiative to bring out some 
unique value which ITI could present to its prospective custo mers, technology mapping and 
benchmarking vis -à-vis the current market scenario. The Committee feel that the various 
suggestions and advice given by the Department to ITI for its revival are in the right direction and 
feel that Department as well as ITI sh ould take the revival plan forward so that the objectives of 
setting up ITI i.e. to develop strategic area of communication for Defence is met. 
   
  

86 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
(i) The report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) on  
‘Demand for Grants’ (2011-12) on ITI is an observation by the committee on its present 
sick status in spite of having taken several steps by the Department of 
Telecommunication for the revival of the company. 
(ii) The Department of Telecommunications in its Re vival Plan (2009) had released Rs.2820 
Crores in August 2009 to M/s ITI Ltd for discharging its liabilities and to clean up their 
balance sheet as per revival package approved by the CCEA.  An additional amount of 
Rs.180 crores was released in March, 2011 towards the working capital margin.  
However Rs. 2.01 Crores had been allotted in the 11 th Five Year Plan to ITI by the 
Planning Commission.  ITI had to manage the capital expenditure using internal 
resources for absorption of some of the new technologies like National Population 
Register (NPR), Solar Panel Projects etc. 
(iii) As part of the revival package a proposal for Joint Venture for manufacturing new 
technology products at three ITI locations had been approved.  However, the formation 
of Joint Venture coul d not materialize since ITI failed to get any offer against the 
Expression of Interest (EoI) for the Joint Venture proposal even after extension of the 
EoI. 
(iv) ITI has taken diversification strategy to improve its top line as well as the bottom line.  
One of the strategies being pursued aggressively is in the Defence Sector, e-Government 
and Contract Manufacturing.  It has already got into big project of NPR (National 
Population Register) as part of the consortium for bio -metric cards required by RGI 
(Registrar General of India).  Further, ITI is laying its hand in non -conventional energy 
sources under MNRE. 
(v) ITI had requested a budgetary support of Rs.135 crores for the year 2011 -12 to upgrade 
its manufacturing infrastructure and induct new technologies.  Howev er, an amount of 
Rs.1 lakh only has been provisioned by the Planning Commission for the current 
financial year. 
(vi) ITI has been requesting through the Department of Telecommunications for 
Governmental financial aid for up -gradation of the existing facilities and induction of 
new technologies for the revival of the company.  ITI have requested for: 
 
 Reservation quota from Defence Ministry similar to the one approved by Ministry 
of communication for its two PSUs i.e. BSNL & MTNL. 
 Funding support as proposed for 2011 and 12th Five Year Plan. 
 Allocation of Government funded Telecom & IT Projects to ITI only. 
 
(vii) The Department of Telecommunications has constituted a Core Group to examine, 
identify and devise the revival plan of ITI based on priority analysis.  The cor e is working 
out the details for the revival of ITI Ltd.  Another committee headed by Member 
(Services) has also been constituted to explore the various possibilities of synergizing 
the working of the PSUs under DoT, namely BSNL/MTNL/ITI/TCIL/C -DOT.  This 
committee would be analyzing the inputs received from BSNL and other divisions of 
Department of Telecommunications before finalizing a restructuring plan. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of Telecommunications O.M. No. 
16-3/2011-B dated 4th November, 2011) 
 
 
 
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
20 March, 2012 Chairman, 
30 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology. 

87 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th March, 2012 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Committee Room  ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
10. Shri Tapas Paul 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
12. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
13. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
14. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot 
15. Shri P. Rajeeve 
16. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Action Taken Report on 
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
  
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the Draft Action 
Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Department o f 
Telecommunications. The Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Report without 
any modification. The Committee th en also authorized the Chairman to present the 
Report to the House at a date convenient to him.  
  
 
4. xxx    xxx     xxx 
 
5. xxx    xxx     xxx 
6. xxx    xxx     xxx 
7. xxx    xxx     xxx 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx Matters not related to the Report. 
 
 

89 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
Annexure-II as referred in the Action Taken Notes on the Recommendation No. 22 of the Original Report 
 
Sl. No.  Name of the 
Service Area 
Name of Licensee Date of 
issue of 
show cause 
notice for 
cancellation 
of licenses 
Date of reply Remarks 
1 Andhra Pradesh Aircel Ltd. 31.03.2011 27.05.2011  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice issued 
for violation 
of roll out 
obligation 
conditions. 
2 Gujarat Aircel Ltd. 31.03.2011 27.05.2011 
3 Rajasthan Aircel Ltd. 31.03.2011 27.05.2011 
4 Haryana Dishnet Wireless Ltd. 02.06.2011 28.07.2011 
5 Kolkata Dishnet Wireless Ltd. 02.06.2011 28.07.2011 
6 Madhya Pradesh Dishnet Wireless Ltd. 02.06.2011 28.07.2011 
7 Punjab Dishnet Wireless Ltd. 02.06.2011 28.07.2011 
8 Delhi Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. Ltd. 07.03.2011 06.05.2011 
9 Mumbai Etisalat DB Telecom Pvt. Ltd. 07.03.2011 06.05.2011 
10 Karnataka Idea Cellular Ltd. 11.05.2011 18.08.2011 
11 Assam Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. 05.04.2011 12.05.2011 
12 Kerala Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. 05.04.2011 12.05.2011 
13 West Bengal Sistema Shyam TeleServices Ltd. 05.04.2011 10.05.2011 
14 Andhra Pradesh Spice Communications Ltd. # 11.05.2011 18.08.2011 
15 North East Vodafone Essar Spacetel Ltd. 02.06.2011 21.06.2011 
16 Punjab Idea Cellular Ltd. 24.02.2011 31.03.2011 Notice issued 
for violation 
of substantial 
equity 
condition and 
merger 
guidelines. 
 
17 Karnataka Idea Cellular Ltd. 01.06.2011 Reply awaited* 
18 Delhi Spice Communications Ltd. # 01.06.2011 Reply awaited* 
19 Andhra Pradesh Spice Communications Ltd. # 01.06.2011 Reply awaited* 
20 Haryana Spice Communications Ltd. # 01.06.2011 Reply awaited* 
21 Maharashtra Spice Communications Ltd. # 01.06.2011 Reply awaited* 
22 Maharashtra Spice Communications Ltd. #   Submitted for 
legal advise 
for issue of 
SCN as 
matter is sub-
judice and 
the same is 
awaited. 
 
23 Haryana Spice Communications Ltd. #   
24 Punjab Ideal Cellular Ltd.*  
Note: 
 
# As informed by companies, M/s. Spice Communications Ltd. Amalgamated with M/s. Idea Cellular 
Limited vide orders dated 26.11.2009 and 05.022010 passed by Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat and 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi respectively. The matter is sub-judice. 
 
* M/s. Idea Cellular Ltd. Has approached the TDSAT and the matter is sub-judice. 
 
 
 
  

90 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIRST REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 3 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- .:-  2, 3, 4, 6, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 35 
& 36 
 
 Total 20 
 Percentage 55.56 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24 & 29  
 Total 08 
 Percentage 22.22 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 10, 12, 17, 23, 28, 30 & 34  
 Total 08 
 Percentage 22.22 
 
 
 