 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on                  
Demands for Grants (2009-10)] 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                                    NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
9 
 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on                  
Demands for Grants (2009-10)] 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
 May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENT 
  Page No. 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
  
INTRODUCTION  (iii) 
  
  
Chapter       I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
Chapter      II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
23 
Chapter     III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of replies of the Government…………………………………………………………………. 
 
44 
Chapter     IV Recommendation/Observations in respect of which rep lies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
48 
Chapter     V Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
60 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Funds allocation for the year 2009-10 for North-East Region......................... 
 
66 
II. State/Circle wise details of requests received from various quarters for setting 
up of upgradation f Posts Offices (as on January 2008)……………… 
 
68 
III. Total Business transacted by the Franchisee Outlets from April to June, 
2009…………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
70 
IV. Information on spill over post office building projects of Tenth Plan completed 
during 1st and 2nd year of Eleventh Plan……………………….. 
 
71 
V. Information on spill over Staff Quarters projects of Tenth Plan completed 
during 1st and 2nd year of Eleventh Plan……………………….. 
 
76 
VI. Information on spill over Administrative Office building projects of Tenth Pl an 
completed during 1 st and 2 nd year of Eleventh 
Plan………………………………………………………………………………………….................... 
 
77 
VII. Details of number of the employees trained during the first three years of the 
Eleventh Plan……………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
78 
VIII. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
…………………………………………………………….. 
79 
 APPENDIX*  
 Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Standing Committee On Informatio n 
Technology (2009-10) held on 4th May, 2010.......... 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Not included in the cyclostyled copy of the Report. 
 
(i) 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-2010) 
    
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh  -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
*5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
**9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Abdul Rahman 
12. Shri Prem Das Rai 
  #13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
15. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19. Shri C. Sivasami 
20. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
 @23. Vacant 
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
25. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
26. Shri Prabhat Jha 
27. Shri P. Rajeeve 
28. Shri Shriram Pal 
29. Shri N.R. Govindarajar 
30. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
31. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
 
** Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 10th September, 2009. 
# Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 13th October, 2009. 
* Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 19th November, 2009. 
@ Consequent upon retirement of Shri Dharampal Sabharwal from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.  
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2009 -10) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Ninth Report on Action Taken by the  Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their First Report 
(Fifteenth L ok Sabha) on „ Demands for Grants (20 09-10)‟ of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2009 and laid on 
the Table  of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The M inistry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Posts) furnished their Action Taken Notes on 23 
March, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 4th May, 2010. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations / 
Observations contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given at Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Informati on Technology deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their First 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) pertaining to 
the Ministry of Communications and Informat ion Technology (Department of 
Posts). 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha  on the same day. It contained 51  
Recommendations/Observations.   
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Reco mmendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts) and these 
have been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 14, 21, 24, 26, 29, 38, 39, 42, 44, 
45, 46,48, 50 & 51 
 
 Total 22 
 Chapter II 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para Nos:-  13, 33, 34 & 39  
 Total 04 
 Chapter III 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Para Nos:-6,10,11,12,15,16,19,22,23,28,30,31,37,40 &47  
 Total 15 
 Chapter IV 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of 
interim nature:- 
 
 Para Nos:- 17,20,25,27,32,35,36,41,43 &49  
 Total 10 
 Chapter V 
 

4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be giv en to 
implementation of the Recommendations /Observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The 
Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations / 
Observations contained in Chapter - I and final action taken replies to the 
Recommendations contained in Chapter - V of this Report should be furnished 
to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
A. PLAN OUTLAY  
(Recommendation para.10) 
6. The Committee had expressed serious concern over the persistent problem of  
under-spending of Plan outlay of the Department.  During Tenth Plan (2002 -07) 
Budget Estimates were Rs. 1,273 crore i.e. almost 1/3 rd of the proposed allocation of 
Rs. 3619.83 crore.  Even then the allocated outlay could not be spent fully resulting 
into under-spending of Rs. 398.33 crore which was around 26 per cent of the 
allocation.  Out of the total allocation of Rs. 4,180 crore for the Eleventh Plan, the 
expenditure reported was Rs. 1,075.64 crore which is 26 per cent of the total outlay 
even when half of the Plan period had already passed.  During the year 2008 -09, BE 
was Rs. 600 crore that was less than half of the proposed allocation of Rs. 1,492.57 
crore.  The BE was further reduced by Rs. 200 crore at RE stage.  Even this reduced 
allocation could not be spent fully and there was shortfall of Rs. 81.17 crore.  Worst 
was the position during the year 2009 -10.  BE during th e year 2009-10 was Rs. 620 
crore which was even less than 1/3 rd of the proposed allocation i.e. Rs. 2,100 crore.  
Expenditure position upto July, 2009 as intimated in the written note was only Rs. 22 
crore i.e. 3.5 per cent of the allocation.  The Committee had observed that there were 
serious problems in planning and implementation of the various Plan schemes and as 
such emphasized on the need to review the situation scheme -wise and project -wise. 
The Committee had desired that corrective action in this regard should be taken 
immediately and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
 

7. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 “The amount of utilization of Rs.388 crore mentioned during the 
deliberations  was not related to the current year, but it relates to the 
year 2008-09 where the actual amount utilized  was Rs. 318.83 crore  as 
against the  RE outlay of  Rs.400 cror e.  Further, as per the observations 
of the committee, the Department would like to inform that the Physical 
targets for the activities are fixed keeping in view the funds made 
available for the activity. The main reason for variation between the 
targets  and fund utilization is due to the facts that once the activity is 
implemented the physical targets are achieved but reflection of funds 
utilized in the books of the Department takes place only after the bills are 
adjusted by the DGS&D, Cheques are present ed by the vendors, 
submission of bills by Civil Wings etc. which is actually not completed  
within the Financial year thereby causing reflection of under utilization of 
funds. However, all efforts are being made to ensure complete booking of 
expenditure by  seeking timely submission and adjustment of the bills 
within the close of the financial year”. 
 
8. The Committee have consistently been raising concern over the 
persistent problem of under -spending of plan outlay of the Department. 
The Department in the action taken note has stated that reflection of funds 
utilized in the books of the Departments takes place only after the bills are 
adjusted by the DGS&D, cheques are presented by the vendors, submission 
of bills by Civil Wings etc. which is actually not co mpleted within the 
Financial Year thereby causing reflection of under utilization of funds. The 
Committee feel that if the bills are not  adjusted by DGS&D during a 
particular financial year it would definitely be adjusted in the next financial 
year.  Since the problem of under-spending has persisted during each year 
since Tenth Plan, the reasons submitted by the Department as non booking 
of expenditure within the financial year are not understandable.  Moreover,  
the  spending  of   just  3.5   per   cent of   the   allocation    during  the  
first  six  months  of   the   year    2009-10   cannot   be   accepted  at  all .  
Not   only that  th e  Department  did   not   bother   to   indicate   the   
status   of   utilization    of outlay 

 during the year 200 9-10 at the time of submission of action taken notes  
even when the issue of under spending was highlighted in the First Report 
of the Committee. The Committee are really disappointed to note  the way 
the Department has dealt with the recommendation of the Committee.  The 
Committee again emphasize that there are serious problems in 
implementation of various plan schemes of the Department which need to 
be looked into  and corrective action taken accordingly.  As such the 
desired action should be taken without a ny further loss of time and the 
Committee apprised accordingly. 
(Recommendation Para. 11) 
9. The Committee had noted that as many as 14 schemes still remain to be 
approved even when two and a half year s                                                                                                 
of the Plan period had already gone. Three major schemes viz  Computerization and 
networking of Post Offices, Setting up of Automatic Mail Processing Centres and 
Support for payment of wages under NREGS for which substantial allocation was 
provided were yet to be approved by the competent authority. The Secretary 
herself had acknowledged that procedures were the problem area which were not 
considered as a focus area. While expressing serious concern over the way th e 
projects were planned by the Department, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that the process of evaluation/restructuring of the schemes and 
obtaining various clearances etc., should be over before 1 st April of the first year of 
Five Year Plan so that the targets set under the different schemes were realistically 
achieved.  The Committee had urged that the Department should properly 
coordinate with the Ministry of Finance so that the clearances for these 14 schemes 
are obtained immediately.  The Commit tee also reiterated that their concerns 
should be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
 10. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 “The Plan Scheme namely „Support for Payment of NREGS beneficiaries 
through Post Offices‟ was introduced during the year 2008-09. An amount of 
Rs.22.18 crore was spent during the year 2008-09  out of the total approved  
allocation of Rs.80 crore. During the current year 2009 -10, EFC has been 
approved for Rs.100 crore”. 
                               

11. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants had observed that as many as 14 schemes still remained to be 
approved and as such emphasized to properly coordinate with the Ministry 
of Finance so that clearances for these scheme s are obtained immediately.  
The Department in the action taken note has made reference to only one 
scheme i.e. Support for payment of NREGS beneficiaries through Post 
Offices for which EFC has been approved for Rs. 100 crore.  The 
Department did not bothe r even to indicate the status of the 14 schemes , 
approval for which was reported as pending during the course of the 
examination of Demands for Grants of the year 2009 -10.  The Committee 
while expressing unhappiness over the long time being taken for 
clearances of the schemes, would like to emphasize that the remaining 
schemes should be approved expeditiously particularly when almost three 
years of the Eleventh Plan have already passed .  Besides as recommended 
earlier, the Department should take all the ini tiatives to streamline the 
planning process so that the situation of losing substantial part of the plan 
period in taking clearances is not repeated during the Twelfth Plan. 
B. MISMATCH BETWEEN THE PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENT 
(Recommendation Para 12) 
12.  The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the year 
2008-09 had expressed concerns over the mis -match between the physical and 
financial achievement during Tenth Plan period. At that time, the Committee had 
been informed that the last e stimates with regard to electronic equipments were 
not correct.  During the examination of the Demands for Grants of the year 2009 -
10, the Department changed its stand and stated that the reason for mis -match 
between physical and financial achievement duri ng Tenth Plan period was due to 
the fact that DGS&D bills were not adjusted well within the stipulated time. The 

Committee observed that the Tenth Plan period was over by 31 st March, 2007 and 
as such there was no point in change of reasons as given in the month of 
February/March, 2009.  The Committee fe lt that they were misled by Department 
who resorted to giving different versions for the under -spending of the outlay 
without analyzing the actual reasons concerning the implementation of different 
schemes.  The Committee while noting that this is a serious matter stressed the 
Department to explain the position to the Committee.   
13. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
 “As far as estates management is concerned it is stated that the re is no 
direct correlation between the physical targets and the financial outlay as 
the cost involved is calculated on a project-to-project basis, which in turn, 
depends upon the tentative schedule of accommodation and CPWD 
schedule of rates, drawings and  preliminary estimates.  Also, physical 
achievements have exceeded the financial allocations in cases where 
construction was commenced in Tenth Plan but completed in the first year 
of Eleventh Plan”. 
 
14. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing conce rn over the 
mismatch between the physical and financial achievement under different 
plan schemes of the Department.  During Tenth Plan, the Department had 
achieved cent per cent physical targets whereas the financial achievement 
was 68.7 per cent.  With re gard to the reasons for the gross mismatch 
between physical and financial achievement, the Department has been 
giving different versions.  During the course of examination of Demands 
for Grants 2008 -09, the Committee had been informed that the estimates 
with regard to electronic equipments were not correct.  Then during the 
course of Demands for Grants of 2009 -10, the Department stated that the 
mismatch was due to the fact that DGS&D bills were not adjus ted within 
the stipulated time. The  Department in the action taken note has changed 
its stand altogether and now it has been stated that physical achievements 
have exceeded the financial allocations in cases where construction  

commenced in Tenth Plan but completed in the first year of Eleventh Plan.  
The Committee note that all the plan schemes of the Department do not 
relate to construction work.  The Committee are unable to understand how 
the reasons for under -spending of outlay and mismatch between physical 
and financial achievement under various plan schemes during Tenth Plan 
can change over the years particularly when the Tenth Plan had been over 
three years back.  The Committee again disapprove the way they are being 
misled by the Department. The  Committee emphasize that the 
review/evaluation of various Schemes of the Department should be 
undertaken immediately to know the various shortcomings affecting the 
programmes so that corrective action can be taken. The desired i nitiatives 
in this regard should be taken at least now and the Committee informed 
accordingly. 
C.     SETTING UP OF AN EXCLUSIVE RURAL DIVISION 
(Recommendation Para.15) 
15. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee contained  in 56th Report an 
exclusive Rural Business Division has started functioning at the Directorate w.e.f. 29th 
May, 2008. The Committee in their First Report had observed that in pursuance of 
Article 243G of the Constitution  more and more funds were being directly released to 
PRIs under different Central/State sector schemes.  As a result, India Post s has to play 
an important role in providing financial services to the local bodies in rural areas.  
Besides with the launching of some of the flagship schemes like NREGA, a lot of 
opportunities are being created for the Department to expand the area of activities in 
rural areas.  As such, the Committee have emphasized that the required initiatives 
should be taken for capturing the rural market.  
16. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
“Besides, NREGS, Rural Business Division deal with the collectio n of rural 
price data and tie- up with State Bank of India. The Department of Posts 
has entered into a tie-up with the State Bank of India to sell its asset and 
liabilities products through identified Post Offices. The Scheme is 
operational in 19 Postal Circles throughout the country.” 

  
17. The Committee in the First Report while expressing satisfaction over 
the setting up of an exclusive Rural Business Division had emphasized to 
take the desired initiatives to capture the rural market particularly when a 
lot of opportunities are being created for the Department to expand the 
area of activities in rural areas with the launching of some of the flagship 
programmes like NREGA.  Instead of taking the desired initiatives on the 
suggested lines, the Department in the action taken note has simply stated 
that besides NREGA, Rural Business Division dealt with the collection of 
rural price data and tie - up with State Bank of India. While expressing 
unhappiness over the way the issue has been addressed by the 
Department, the Committee again emphasize to take concrete actions to 
capture the rural market by way of multi pronged strategy which include 
financial inclusion and aggressive marketing strategy.  The desired action 
in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly. 
D.  OUTLAY PROVIDED TO NORTH-EAST 
(Recommendation Para.16) 
18.    As per the norms, 10 per cent of the Plan allocation has to be provided to the 
North East.  The Committee found that even when 10 per cent allocation of the outlay 
was exclusively being earmarked for the North East, it was not giving the desired 
results as most of the outlay in a year remain ed unspent and was being transferred to 
non-lapsable pool of resources. While noting that the whole scenario of 
implementation of the schemes in the North East needed a review, the Committee had 
emphasized to find out the difficulties being faced in the implementation of various 
schemes and take the concrete action.   
19.     The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
“During 2007-08, funds to the extent of Rs.32.54 crore was allocated 
under Revenue (Plan) segment  and Rs. 17.82 crore under Capital (Plan) 
segment out of which Rs.29.44 crore and Rs.5.40 crore amounting total 
to Rs.34.84 crore were utilized. Funds to t he tune of Rs. 15.52 crore  
was transferred to Non Lapsable funds.   During the year 2008-09, Rs.60 
crore was earmarked for North East which consists of Rs.26.90 crore 

Revenue (Plan) and Rs.33.10 crore Capital (Plan). The allocation at RE 
stage was reduced to Rs.41.06 crore with the breakup of Rs.29.60 crore 
under Revenue and Rs.11.46 crore under capital. Out of this, Rs. 16.38 
crore under Revenue and Rs. 2.50 crore under capital making total to Rs. 
18.88 crore were utilized.  All efforts are being made by the Department 
for earmarking 10% of the Budget allocation for North East and also for 
maximum utilization of funds. In some cases the scope of implementing 
some  of the schemes  in North East is not feasible due to environmental 
and developmental condition of the Region. However, the Department is 
taking all necessary steps for maximum utilization of funds earmarked 
for the North East. Funds allocation for the year 2009 -10 in respect of 
North East Region are shown in Annexure-I”. 
 
20.  The Committee note f rom the latest data made available by the 
Department with regard to outlay for plan schemes earmarked for North East 
region that during the year 2007-08 funds to the tune of Rs. 15.52 crore were 
transferred to non - lapsable funds.  Further during the year 2008-09, Rs. 60 
crore were earmarked at BE stage.  The allocation was reduced to Rs. 41.06 
crore at RE stage and the expenditure was Rs. 18.88 crore which is less than 
half of the allocated amount at RE stage.  Worst was the position under the 
Capital head. O ut of Rs. 11.46 crore under the Capital head, the utilization 
was just Rs. 2.50 crore.  Even when the under spending of outlay in North 
East was highlighted in the First Report of the Committee, the Department 
has indicated environmental and development al condition of the region 
responsible for limited scope of implementation of the scheme in such areas.  
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to undertake a proper study 
of the North East region so that the various problems concerning the 
implementation of the programmes are properly addressed.  While reiterating 
the earlier recommendation, the Committee emphasize to take all the desired 
initiatives so that postal facilities in the North East region are adequately 
strengthened. 
 
 
 

E. OPENING OF NEW POST OFFICES 
(Recommendation Para.19) 
 
21. The Committee had noted that as on January, 2008, 634 proposals for 
opening of new Post Offices were received out of which 207 requests were found 
justified. Besides during the year 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, 707 req uests were 
received for opening of new Post Offices/upgradation of Post Offices, out of which, 
142 requests were found justified. New Post Offices could not be opened as SFC 
was not approved. While noting that SFC has now been approved, the Committee 
had emphasized that the Post Offices which were found justified should be set up 
expeditiously and the Committee informed accordingly. The Committee also desired 
to be apprised about the State/UT wise position of the requests and the status of 
setting up/upgradation of Post Offices in this regard.  
 
22. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
 “Opening of Post Offices depends not only requests received and 
requirement evaluated but also on target allotted under Plan Scheme and 
availability of manpower. While a large number of requests for opening of 
Post Offices were received during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, only 
about one third of the requests were found to fulfill the norms prescribed 
by the Department. Notwithstanding the aforesaid,  no action could be 
taken to open these Post Offices in view of the fact  that new creation of 
posts of BPMs is not permitted despite Plan targets having been allotted 
to the Department.   Targets for opening of 105 Sub Post Offices by 
relocation / redeployment (50 new Sub Post Offices by redeployment and 
55 by relocation) and 50 Branch Post Offices by relocation have been 
allotted to the Circles in December, 2009. Besides, target for opening of 
300 Franchise outlets has been issued to the Circles for provid ing basic 
postal facilities in urban areas and upcoming urban areas”. 
 
 23. The Committee note from the latest data with regard to requests received 
from various quarters for setting up/upgradation of post offices that during 
the year 2008 -09, 504 requests were received out of which 106 were found 
justified.  Similarly, during the year 2009 -10, 203 requests were received out 
of which 36 were found as justified. During the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants 2009 -10, the Committee had been informed t hat new 
post offices could not be opened as SF C for the scheme was not approved. 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2010 -11, the 
Committee have been informed that two schemes viz `Opening of Branch 

Post Offices‟ and `Opening of Sub Post Offices‟ could be approved only during 
the last quarter of the financial year 2009 -10.  The Committee find that now 
when the schemes have been approved, the Department in the action taken 
note has changed its stand and stated that no action with regard to  opening 
of post offices could be taken in view of the fact that creation of new posts of 
BPMs is not permitted despite plan targets having b een allotted to the 
Department. While expressing unhappiness over the callous attitude of the 
Department towards such an  important issue, the Committee strongly 
emphasize that the various issues like creation of posts of BPMs should be 
taken up with the competent Ministry/Department so that the said targets of 
opening of post offices, sub post offices are achieved.  Th e desired action in 
this regard should be taken expeditiously and Committee informed 
accordingly.    
 
F.    RELOCATION OF POST OFFICES 
(Recommendation Para. 22 & 23) 
 24.   While noting that new Post Offices and sub -Post Offices were first  opened and 
then relocated due to  un-viability,  the Committee had observed that the discretionary 
power provided to Chief Post Master General to relax the norms for opening of Branch 
Post Offices was not being judiciously used. In this regard, the Committee desired to 
be apprised of the number of cases of relocation of POs and SPOs during Tenth Plan 
and in the Eleventh Plan so as to understand the matter and comment further in this 
regard.  
The Committee felt that solution to the problem of relocation lie d in opening of 
mobile Post Offices. As such, the Committee emphasized that Mobile Post Offices 
equipped with all the possible postal services and equipments could be of great help to 
the people residing in the far -flung tribal, hilly and other difficult areas particularl y in 
the unfavorable weather conditions which make it impossible for the m to go outdoors.  
More so the financial institutions and banks may also not be interested to open 
Branches in these areas due to the commercial considerations.  Another solution 
suggested by the Committee was holding of the weekly bazaars of postal services at 

prominent places in rural areas like Panchayat Headquarters.  Close coordination with 
the local bodies c ould solve the problem of space for these weekly bazaars.  Besides 
providing the postal facilities at the doorstep of the customers, the said mechanisms 
could also address the problem of relocation of Post Offices and  save money spent in 
this exercise.  The Committee had hoped that since the Secretary had agreed to 
consider this suggestion of the Committee, concrete action would follow.  
25. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
“Tenth Plan Policy Imperatives had directed the Department that all units 
which do not fulfill the norms and where the resources  are underutilized 
need to be closed down. Instead of restoring to closing down the Post 
Offices, the Department has taken the alternative route of 
rationalization/relocation of some of the Post Offices for optimum 
utilization of the resources. So, during the 10 th Plan period   210 Post 
offices not fulfilling the distance norm were relocated to other needy 
areas. During 11 th Plan, physical target for relocation of 55 SOs and 50 
BOs have been issued to the Circles. Financial allocation for the purpose is 
Rs. 2.75 lakh and 0.5 lakh respectively. This is one time expenditure”.  
 
“Out of 1,55,015 Post offices ( as on 31.3.2009), 1,39,144 Post Offices are 
located in rural areas. Thus 89% of the Post offices are functioning in rural 
areas. Average area and populat ion served per Post Office are 21.21 
sq.km and 7175 respectively. This compares favourably with other 
countries including advanced ones. Postal facilities in terms of  regular 
delivery of mail at the door step of every customer, collection of letters 
from letterboxes and selling of stamps /stationery are provided by the 
Department in every village irrespective of  terrain through delivery agents  
while on their regular visit to respective beats.   The Department is 
constantly in process of providing postal facilities through various means 
like opening of new BOs, alternative means of providing basic postal 
facilities  through PSSKs, relocation of Post Offices  to needy areas etc. 
Licensed Stamp Vendors and licensed postal agents  are also functioning 
at many places.   When Department of Posts is able to network all the 
Rural Post Offices , the Branch Post Masters will be provided with the 
handsets and will be able to transact his business  anywhere in his 
jurisdiction”. 
 
26. The Committee in the First Report had observed that the discretionary 
power provided to Chief Post Master General to relax the norms for opening 
of Branch Post Offices was not being judiciously used due to which the new 
post offices made neighbo uring post offices unjustified and the need t o 
relocate the post offices arose. During the course of examination of Demands 
for Grants 2009 -10, the Committee had been apprised that relocation was 
done in a very rare and an unavoidable circumstance.  From the data 

mentioned in the action taken note, t he Committee find that as many as 210 
post offices were relocated during the Tenth Plan. During Eleventh Plan, 
physical target for relocation of 55 SOs and 50 BOs have been issued to the 
Circles. The aforesaid data further reinforces the observation of the  
Committee regarding non - judicious use of discretionary power provided to 
Chief Master General s regarding relocation of post offices. As such the 
Committee feel that the whole issue of relocation of post offices need a re -
look by the Department.   
 To address to the problem of relocation of post offices, the Committee 
in the First Report had made an important suggestion to open Mobile Post 
Offices and Weekly Postal Bazaars. The suggestion though agreed to by the 
Secretary during the course of deliberations  on Demands for Grants of the 
previous year has now been found not acceptable to the Department on the 
pretext that the postal services in the country compares favourably with 
other countries including advanced ones. The Committee are unable to 
comprehend the complacency of the Department with regard to the existing 
network of Post Offices even when there is a Plan Scheme of the Department 
for opening of Post Offices and relocation of Post Offices. Besides as observed 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee, o nly 1,37,508 out of 5,95,113 inhabited 
villages have Post Offices and only 1,15,881 Gram Panchayats out of a total 
of 2,34,755 have Post Offices. The Committee are really disappointed to note 
the way the Department has addressed to one of the important sug gestions 
of the Committee related to providing postal services to the last person of the 
society. The Committee strongly recommend that all the desired initiatives 
should be taken so that new Post Offices are opened as per the proposals 
given by various St ate Governments/UTs. Besides the suggestions of the 
Committee to open Mobile Post Office and Weekly Postal Bazaars should be 

reconsidered and implemented. The Committee should be informed about the 
concrete action taken in this regard. 
 
G. BANKING AND MONEY TRANSFER OPERATIONS 
 
(Recommendation Para.30) 
27. The Committee ha d suggested to consider adding the word `Bank‟ with the 
India Post in its nomenclature to make the public aware that Post Offices also provide 
Banking facilities.  Besides, the Committee had also recommended for the utilisation of 
various prominent places like Panchayat Headquarters, dispensaries, schools and 
Gram Sabha meetings for  the advertisement of the various schemes of the 
Department in order to enlarge its customer base in rural areas. 
28. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:             
 “Department of Posts is carrying out banking activity on behalf of 
Ministry of Finance as an operative agent of the Small Savings Schemes. 
Ministry of Finance make the rule pertaining to all Small savings Schemes 
under the powers vested with it through the Government Savings Bank 
Act 1873, Government Savings Certificates Act 1959 and Public Provident 
Fund Act 1968. Under these Acts , Department‟s mandate is limited to the 
collection and disbursement of the money deposited there in and 
maintenance of records. Hence, it may not be appropriate to add the 
word “Bank” with India Post as the Banks are governed by separate set of 
Acts /Rules which is/are all together different from th e Acts/Rules 
followed by the Department to carryout banking activity”. 
  
29. The Committee had suggested in the First Report for adding the word 
„Bank‟ with India Post so as to make the public aware that Post Offices 
also provide banking facilities. The De partment has not consented to the 
suggestion of the Committee on the ground that their mandate was limited 
to the collection and disbursement of money deposited in savings accounts 
and maintenance of records. The Committee during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants (2010-11) had been informed that the 
aforesaid matter was not consulted with the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee while pursuing the matter in the Fifth Report had observed as 
under:- 

“To the surprise of the Committee, the Departmen t has stated 
that the matter was not consulted with the Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee find that even on the small issue related to 
banking operations the Department has been frequently 
expressing their limitations due to issues regarding autonomy. On 
such a vital suggestion of the Committee, the Department did not 
feel the necessity of consulting the Ministry of Finance and out  
rightly rejected the suggestion of the Committee. This explains 
the callous attitude of the Department to the important 
suggestions given by the Committee.” 
 
 The Committee while reiterating their observation as expressed 
above would like the Department to reconsider their suggestion and 
implement the recommendation of the Committee after due consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance. 
 H. ROLE OF POST OFFICES IN THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para.31) 
30.    The share of the Posts in the disbursement of wages all over the country was 
46.14 percent.  However the State-wise data in this regard indicat ed that in Andaman 
and Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and  Uttarakhand, the 
percentage share was even less than 20 percent.  Further in Chandigarh, Dama n and 
Diu, Lakshadweep, Nagaland and Puducherry the percentage share was nil.  The 
Committee have expressed the desire to know the State specific reasons for the low 
percentage of involvement of Posts in the disbursement of wages under NREGA in the 
said States.  The Committee ha d urged the Department to work hard and take all the 
initiatives to increase its share in all the States/UTs. 
31. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
“The Department of Posts is involved  in the disbursement  of wages to 
labourers under  one of the flagship programme  of the Government i.e. 
NREGA. The share of the Posts in the disbursement of wages  all over the 
country  for the Financial Year 2009 -10  upto the month of February, 
2010 is 41.3 %. However, the S tate-wise data in this regard indicates 
that in Andaman and Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh , Meghalaya, Punjab 
and Uttar Pradesh  the percentage share is even less than 20 percentage. 
Further in Chandigarh, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Nagaland, 
Pondicherry  and Tamilnadu the percentage share is nil. In Lakshadweep. 
Chandigarh and Daman & Diu no NREGS wages were disbursed either 

through banks or through post offices. Further, in the state where 
disbursement of wages through post offices is low, disbursement is done 
through nationalized banks, local co -operative banks or by other means 
or in cash”. 
 
32. The Committee while noting that in some of the States, the share of 
Posts in the disbursement o f wages under NREGS was even less than 20 
per cent had emphasized that the Department should work hard and take 
all the initiatives to increase its share in all the States/UTs.  The 
Department did not bother to take note of the recommendation of the 
Committee even when average overall percentage share of the Posts in the 
disbursement of wages all over the country has declined from 46.14 per 
cent as informed during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 
of the previous year in the month of October, 2009 to 41.3 per cent. The 
Committee express unhappiness over the way the Department has tried to 
sidetrack one of the important recommendations of the Committee.  The 
Committee exhort the Department to make sincere efforts to increase its 
share of disbursement of NREGS wages.   
I. PROJECT ARROW   
(Recommendation Para.40) 
33.  The Committee had noted that though initially the Project Arrow was proposed 
to be extended to 4500 Post Offices after the pilot phase,  the proposal was stalled 
due to fund constraint .  The Committee further noted that no separate funds were 
earmarked for the Project Arrow under Eleventh Plan outlay and the expenditure 
was being met from the outlay provided for computerization and networking.  The 
Committee did not appreciate the reasons of fund constraints particularly when the 
proposed outlay for the computerization and modernization ha d remained unspent 
during the first two years of Eleventh Plan.  Out of the total allocation of Rs. 
2011.50 crore only Rs. 281.87 crore could be utiliz ed.  The Committee ha d 
expressed the view that the funds remaining unspent could have been utilized for 
the Project Arrow which have been a success experience.  The Committee ha d 
recommended that the initial plans of extending the facility to 4500 Post Off ices 

should be maintained and the detailed strategy in this regard should be chalked 
out.  The Committee ha d also urged the Department to apprise the Committee 
whether the approval of the Ministry of Finance was obtained for using the outlay 
earmarked for computerization and networking in the Project Arrow. 
 
34. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:                
“„Project Arrow‟ plan activity was introduced only after the 11 th Plan 
Outlays were approved and hence no fund could be ma rked to the 
activity. When the activity was launched as a pilot project funds to the 
extent of Rs. 12 crore was utilized from various other activities.  During 
Phase-I of the project funds to the extent of Rs.74 crore were utilized 
from the outlay availabl e under „Computerization & Networking of Post 
Offices‟ to cover 500 offices. The funds were diverted as the activity 
„Computerization & Networking of Post Offices‟ was not approved till then. 
Further, when the Department proposed to cover 4500 offices unde r 
Project arrow funds to the extent of Rs.887 crore  was requested  out 
which Rs.512 crore was sought as additional outlay from Planning 
Commission over and above the 11 th Plan Outlays.         Since the funds 
could not be provided by the Planning Commissi on, as requested, the 
scheme was restricted to cover only 500 Post Offices with an outlay of Rs. 
65 crore which was again met from the outlays available under the 
activity „Computerization & Networking of Post Offices‟. No further 
diversion of fund is poss ible at this stage as all plan activities have been 
approved including „Computerization & Networking of Post Offices. With 
no additional funds being provided for meeting the demand, the 
Department is not in a position to extend the facility of „Project Arr ow‟ to 
4500 Post offices even though the activities under Project arrow have 
been widely appreciated both by customers and Postal staff.   However, 
despite all the constraints the Department will extend Project Arrow to 
500 more Post Offices in 2010 -11. Th us 1500 Post Offices would be 
covered under Project Arrow”.  
 
35. The Committee note that the Department propose s to cover 4500 
Post Offices under Project Arrow and funds to the extent of Rs. 887 crore 
was requested out of which Rs. 512 crore was sought as  additional outlay 
from Planning Commission over and above the Eleventh Plan outlay. The 
Department has further mentioned that since no additional funds  were 
provided, the Department was not in a position to extend the facility of 
project Arrow to 45 00 Post Offices even thought the activities under 
project Arrow have been widely appreciated by customers and postal staff.  
The Committee regret to note the situation whereby the allocations are 
being provided for the schemes which are not performing/under 

performing in the Department thereby re ndering major portion of the plan 
outlay as unspent  and the Project Arrow which has performed well is not 
being allocated the requisite outlay. The Committee again emphasize that 
the concerns of the Committee should be co nveyed to the Ministry of 
Finance so that adequate outlay is provided and the physical targets in this 
regard are achieved. 
 The Committee in the earlier recommendation had desired the 
Department to inform whether the approval of the Ministry of Finance wa s 
obtained for using the outlay earmarked for computerization and 
networking in the Project Arrow.  In the action taken note no clarification 
in this regard has been given by the Department. Rather it has been stated 
that an outlay of Rs. 65 crore for Project Arrow was made from the outlay 
available under the activity computerization and networking of Post 
Offices. The Committee like the Department to clarify whether the approval 
of the Ministry of Finance for diversion of funds from computerization and 
networking of Post Offices to Project Arrow was taken from the Ministry of 
Finance. 
J. ISSUES PENDING WITH THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Recommendation Para.6) 
36. The Department received remuneration for the services performed on behalf of 
the Ministry of Finance in Saving Bank and Saving Certificate functions and 41 per cent 
of the revenue came from SB/CC remuneration. The Department had explained that as 
per the recommendation of the Expert Committee set up in 1993-94 by the Ministry of 
Finance, the rate of remu neration was enhanced @ 10 per cent per year upto 2000 -
01.   During the year 2007 -08, the rates decreased to as low as 3 per cent, 4.6 per 
cent in 2008 -09 and 5 per cent in 2009 -10. In this regard, the Committee ha d 
persistently been raising the issue of h ike in the rate of remuneration being received 
by the Department.  With regard to the latest position , the Department had informed 
that the Ministry of Finance ha d agreed to constitute again an Expert Committee to 
review the rate of remuneration in the lig ht of pay revision due to the 

recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission.  The Committee h ad recommended that 
the issue should be pursued further with the Ministry of Finance so that the 
Department received its due share of remuneration. 
 
(Recommendation Para.28) 
37. The Committee further noted the  fact that the Post Offices were not providing 
the competitive rate of interest on the various small saving schemes. During the 
course of the examination of Demands for Grants (2009 -10) the Committee had been 
informed that the Department of Posts provide d rate of interest @ 7.50 percent 
whereas SBI was giving 9 percent rate of interest.  Disappointed with the fact that in 
spite of such apparent difference, the Ministry of Finance was not ready to move from 
its stand o f not reviewing the rate of interest even when the representation s in this 
regard as received in the Prime Minister Office  were being forwarded to them.  The  
Committee had pointed out that the stand of the Ministry of Finance not to review the 
position was quite dismal. The Committee had strongly recommended that the issue of 
revision of rate of interest under POSB scheme should again be taken with the Ministry 
of Finance and the concerns of the Committee duly communicated to the Cabinet 
Secretary and the Ministry of Finance.   
(Recommendation Para.37) 
38.    The Committee ha d persistently been recommending in their Reports to give 
autonomy to the Department particularly with regard to taking initiatives to extend 
their clientele and introduce new products on their own.  The Committee had observed 
that in this regard,  the Cabinet had finally given approval on 13 December, 2007 for 
appointment of two public sectors Fund Managers, Formation of Investment Division 
and sanctioned and creation of Ex cadre posts fo r the Investment Division.  T he likely 
date of implementation of above decision as informed by the Department was 1 
October, 2009. The Committee ha d expressed  the hope that the autonomy provided 
to the Department would provide similar level playing field to PLI/RPLI and the 
revenue by way of interest and returns through investments of the Department would 
increase.  
(Recommendation Para. 47) 
39. The Committee found that the Department ha d appointed a consultant who 
would study the international experience with regard to functioning of regulatory 
mechanism there and would recommend accordingly.  The Committee felt that with 

the increased activities of the Department, entry of strong private sector in the 
core functioning of the Department, likely increase in  Banking and insurance 
activities with the Post Bank becoming reality and the autonomy provided to 
insurance sector, there was an urgent need to take expeditious decision on the 
issue of regulatory mechanism.   
40. The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
 ”Ministry of Finance has decided to set up an Expert Group headed by 
chief Advisor (Cost), Department of Expenditure to review the rate of 
remuneration paid to the Department of Posts for operating Small 
Savings Schemes in which repre sentation has been given to the 
Department of Posts. Formal orders constituting the expert group is yet 
to be issued by Ministry of Finance. The issue will be presented before the 
said group by the Department.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para.6) 
 The Department in the action taken note has also stated: 
“The issue has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance at number of 
times but Ministry of Finance  has not agreed to raise interest rate of 
Small Savings Schemes. Views expressed by the Committee are being 
communicated to the Cabinet Secretary and Ministry of Finance”. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Para.28) 
 The Department in the action taken note has further stated as under: 
“As per the Cabinet decision, UTI asset Management  Company and SBI 
Funds Management Pri vate Limited have been appointed as  Funds 
Managers. Agreement was signed with the two Funds Managers on 
October,6, 2009. The CIO of the Investment Division taken on loan basis  
from RBI, has joined on October, 9 th, 2009. Accordingly, investments of 
net accretions to POLIF and RPOLIF finally started w.e.f. November,2009 
as per IRDA Regulation. As regards providing autonomy to DOP to expand  
clientele and introduce new products , the matter is still under 
correspondence with the Ministry of Finance regarding  removal of 
restrictions imposed on DOP for extension of scope so as  to cover other 
clientele, introduction of new products/schemes etc”. 
(Reply to Recommendation Para.37) 
 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:  
“The Department has appointed a consultant to aid it in the preparation 
of a draft legislation to replace the existing Indian Post Office Act,1898. 
In this context, the consultant is required to carefully identify and 
evaluate  various options  for administering and regulatin g the Postal 
Services  and make recommendations. One of the aspects to be 
considered in this regard along with other proposals  is the creation of a 
regulatory authority . While legislating, the need or otherwise of a 
regulatory mechanism will also be exam ined.  Banking and insurance 
activities of the Department of Posts are agency functions. Since sectoral 

regulations are already in place, incorporating these activities of the 
Department into the ambit of regulation may lead to regulatory overlap”.  
(Reply to Recommendation Para.47) 
 
41. The Committee find that the Department of Posts undertake Banking 
and Insurance operations as an agency function on behalf of the Ministry of 
Finance. In this context some of the issues raised in the aforesaid 
recommendations viz,  enhancement of rate of remuneration for agency 
services done by the Department ; provision of  competitive rates of interest 
provided under various Small Savings Schemes ; providing autonomy to the 
Department of Posts particularly with regard to taki ng initiatives to extend 
their clientele and introduce new products on their own;  and set ting up of 
regulatory mechanism are long  pending with the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee note from the replies that the final action on the matter has still 
not been taken. In this context the Committee may like to highlight that while 
examining the Action Taken Notes on the Sixty -second Report on 
„Management of funds by the Department of Posts through banking and 
insurance activities‟, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
Department of Posts and Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial 
Services of the Ministry of Finance at their sitting held on 4 th March, 2010 in 
connection with the long pending issues with the Ministry of Finance which 
include the matter raised in the aforesaid recommendation. The Secretaries of 
the said Departments at the aforesaid sitting were requested to settle the 
issues within one month.  The Committee hope that the aforesaid matter 
would have been settled now and the final decision arrived at. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the decision arrived at on the matter raised in the 
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee. 
 

 
Chapter II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para. 1) 
The Department of Posts under the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology is entrusted with the task of providing quality and basic 
postal service on regular basis to all the users at all points in the country at 
affordable prices as part of its Universal Service Obligation.  To fulfil the entrusted 
task, the Department has a huge network of 1,55,035 Post Offices, out of which 
1,39,173 are in rural areas and the remaining 15,862 are in urban areas.  The 
postal network in India is the largest network in the world.  Besides providing postal 
services, banking and insurance services are also being provided by the 
Department.  From the year 2007-08, Department has been given the responsibility 
to disburse the wages to NREGS bene ficiaries through Post Office saving bank 
accounts.  In addition, India Post also meets the emerging needs of specific 
segments of society like commerce, industry Government and institutional bodies 
who demand faster, cheaper and better services.  The earn ings of the Department 
are in the form of revenue from postal operations, SB/CC remuneration and 
recoveries.  The requirements relating to the revenue expenditure of the 
Department are provided for in the  grant for working expenses. The deficit of the 
Department is met from the budgetary support by the general revenues.  Similarly, 
the capital expenditure of the DoP is also met from the general revenues.  The 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Posts for the year 2009 -10 are for Rs. 
12,478.90 crore which include Rs. 12,090 crore as Revenue Outlay and  Rs. 388.90 
crore as Capital Outlay.  The Committee in this report have analyzed the 
performance of India Post in the context of the outlay provided to the Department 
as per the Demands for Grants 2009 -10. The observations/recommendations 
arising out of the in-depth examination of various aspects related to examination of 
Demands for Grants 2009-10 are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
                 The number of Pos t Offices  as on 31.03.2009  are 1,55,015. 15,871 
are in Urban areas and 1,39,144 in Rural areas. 
                    
Para-wise compliance  to the Observations/ Recommendations/ and Suggestions  
of the Committee are discussed hereinafter.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
 
(Recommendation Para. 2) 
In terms of Direction 73A, the Minister concerned has to make a statement in 
the House regarding the status of implementation of recommendations contained in 
the reports of Departmentally Related Standing Committees with regard to his/her 

Ministry/Department once in six months.  With regard to the 56 th Report, the 
Minister initially made the statement in the House on 15 December, 2008.  The 
detailed scrutiny of the st atus of implementation as indicated in the statement 
revealed various infirmities.  Besides the statement indicated nothing beyond what 
was stated by the Department four and a half month back in the action taken 
notes.  Accordingly, the Ministry was reques ted to take the necessary action for 
making a revised statement by the Minister giving up-to-date recommendation-wise 
status of implementation.  The revised statement was made on 25 February, 2009.  
The Committee note that the inputs made in the statement by the Minister under 
Direction 73A is an important tool to ensure Executive‟s responsibility to the 
Legislature.  As such utmost care should be taken by the Ministry that updated 
status with regard to various recommendations of the Committee is indicated in the 
statement. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Observations  / Recommendation of the Committee have been paid due 
regards and the information included in the ATN reveals updated status of the 
subject matter. Care will be taken off in future also.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated 20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para.3) 
The Committee note that the total revenue receipts during the year 2007 -08 
were for Rs. 5,494.90 crore against the net working expenses of                     Rs. 
7,006.34 crore leaving a gap of  Rs. 1,511.44 crore.  Further during the year 2008 -
09 as per the updated data provided by the Department, the total revenue receipts 
i.e. Rs. 5,862.33 crore against net working expenses of                      Rs. 9,455.41 
crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 3,593.08 crore.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
        It is fact that the total Revenue Receipt during the year 2008 -09 is 
Rs.5862.33 crore against the net working expenses of the Department Rs.9455.42 
crore which re sulted  in deficit of Rs. 3593.09 crore during the year. Though the 
Postal Receipts during the Year 2008 -09 is increased by Rs. 367.43 crore in 
comparison to Postal Receipts for the Year 2007 -08  but the simultaneous increase 
in gap between the net working  expenses and Postal Receipts of the Department 
during the year is due to payment of enhanced  Pay and Allowances,  regular as 
well as 40% arrears on account of implementation of Sixth Pay Commission‟s 
Report in respect of Regular employees of the Department. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated 20.03.2010 
 
(Recommendation Para.4) 
     The gross expenditure under the Revenue Section has been increasing 
year after year.  As per the updated data provided by the Department, the rev enue 

expenditure during the year 2008 -09 is Rs. 9,455.41 crore against the actual 
expenditure amounting to Rs. 7,006.34 crore during the previous year.  Thus the 
working expenses of the Department during one year have increased by Rs. 
2,449.07 crore i.e. around 25 per cent.  Further the projected revenue expenditure 
of the Department during the year 2009-10 is              Rs. 11,768.20 crore. While 
appreciating the fact that the huge increase in the revenue expenditure is due to 
implementation of Sixth Pay  Commission‟s recommendations, the Committee feel 
that there are huge challenges before the Department to effectively use the man 
power of the Department which may result in the equal enhancement of the 
revenue of the Department.   The data provided by the  Department with regard to 
revenue as compared to staff strength indicates that although there has been an 
increase in revenue per person, yet the enhancement is very slow.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Department should find out mechanism to ensure 
increase in revenue per person by honing the professional skills of the officers and 
employees and also through technological interventions.  The concrete action taken 
on the suggested lines should be taken and communicated to the Committee. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
        In order to increase  in Revenue per person, the Department has decided to 
computerize and network  all its Post Offices  including the Rural  Post Offices , 
establish  a Data Centre and provide for integrated Modular Softw are  for all 
services  and operations in the Department.  
 The BD and M directorate of the Department of Posts has been taking a number 
of steps to optimize the revenue generation by: 
 
a. Bringing improvement in Speed Net Software to improve the quality of 
service. 
b. Arranging training of officers/employees working on Speed Net and  
c. Technology upgradation of National Speed Centres  to improve their 
productivity. 
Mail Operations: 
 As part of the 11th Five Year Plan, the Department has formulated  a scheme 
for “Se tting up of Automatic Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) in Delhi, 
Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad and replacement of existing 
AMPCs  at Mumbai and Chennai. These automated systems would be used for 
sorting of Mail which would help the Department  i n increasing the 
productivity  at mail offices in these cities. Automation in mail processing 
would also help the Department in consolidation  of sorting activities  in 
these cities. 
 
 
(Tech) 

         Inductions of IT based systems have improved efficiency , cost, 
effectiveness and customer satisfaction levels and both the pace and scales of IT 
induction are being hastened under the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para.5) 
 As per the updated data furnished by the Department, the revenue receipts 
during the year 2008-09 are Rs 5,862.33 crore against the actuals of Rs. 5,494.90 
crore during the previous year.  Hike is merely 6 per cent against the hike in 
revenue expenditure of around 25 per cent.  Various sources of revenue generation 
of the Department are revenue from Postal Operations, SB/CC remuneration and 
recoveries.   54 per cent of the revenue of the Department comes from Postal 
Operations.  There is an urgent need to m ake the postal services cost effective and 
viable. With the entry of a strong private sector in the core functions of India Post, 
the challenges before the Department have increased many -fold.  As such, the 
Department has to work in a mission mode so as to  provide competitive services to 
the customers which may result in enhanced revenue from Postal Services.  The 
detailed strategy of the Department in this regard need to be chalked out.  The 
Committee may be kept apprised about the proposed action plan in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
            A Joint outward international Express service called “World Net Express” in 
association with M/s Deutsche Post has been introduced. M/s Deutsche Post is the 
official Postal Operator  of Germany. The World net Express is a Premium Express 
Service  offering dedicated Website and tracking of articles via internet, telephone 
and SMS. 
          An agreement has been reached  with Emirates Posts for International 
Money Remittance Services from Dubai to Indi a. The “ MO Videsh” service has 
recently been launched by the Department of Posts  under the agreement with M/s 
Euro Giro for inward and outward International Remittances from India Post to 
more than 50 member countries  worldwide. 
           Discussions a nd negotiations are also going on with several major Postal 
Operators such as TNT Post, Netherlands, USPS and other leading operators for 
enhancing the parcel traffic between these countries  and India. 
 
(BD): 
            Speed Post – which is the Express P ostal Service of the Department of 
Posts. In order to meet the challenges posed by the competitors in this market  and 
to sustain and increase the rate of growth, the  Department has formulated a 
strategy  of consolidation and up gradation of Speed Post Ne twork in the country 
with the features and quality of service which meets the requirement of today‟s 
customer. The additional features are - on line tracking of Speed Post articles, SMS 
tracking of Speed Post articles, One India One Rate for articles  upto 50 grammes  
across the country, pick up facility and  special discount to large customers etc. 
              

The Department of Posts is also looking forward to increase revenue receipts 
through its Premium Product Services like- Express Parcel Post, E-Payment  (e-bill) 
and Retail Post etc. 
 
Financial services: 
            The Department has also launched the Financial services  like -Instant 
Money Order Service (iMO), setting up of Postal Financial Marts (PFMs) and 
International Money Transfer Service(IMTS) to increase its revenue.  
iMO:- It is an online domestic money transmission service. This enables the 
customer to receive money in minutes from any Post Office providing iMO service.  
An amount of Rs.1000/- to 50,000/- can be sent in one transaction. The s ervice is 
available from more than 2100 locations across the country as at present. It is 
proposed to extend the facility to more than 10700 Post offices during the 11th Plan. 
Financial Marts:- The Postal Financial Marts provide the facilities of different Small 
Savings Schemes run by the Post Office as well as other financial services like –
Postal Life and Non-life Insurance, Mutual Funds& Bonds , Government Securities, , 
Pension Schemes, International Money Transfer, Money Order, and Instant Money 
Order e tc under one roof as „One Stop Shop for Financial Services‟ in a fully 
computerised office supported  by technology and in a customer friendly 
ergonomically improved environment at par with the reputed banking institutions.  
         The number of Marts se tup during the 10 th Plan were 313 and the target for 
the 11th Plan is set up  500 Postal Finance Marts. 
IMTS : This service provides the customers the facility of receiving remittances 
from 205 countries on a real time basis. The service is currently avail able in more 
than 8500 Post offices. The Department has been operating the service in 
association with a multinational company - Western Union Financial services Inc. 
sine April,2001. The agreement for International Money Remittance Service with 
Western Union has again been renewed in January,2009. 
 
Core Banking Solutions for Post Office Small savings Schemes: 
       Core Banking Solutions(CBS) with the objective of any -where, any-time and 
any-branch banking, is included in the 11 th Five Year Plan with a Financial outlay of 
Rs.106 crore for development of CBS Software, Customer Relations Management , 
Training, Project Management Unit, and Centralised Back Office etc. The Scheme 
envisages setting up of 4000 CBS branches  during the Plan Period.  
 
Mail Operations:  
         With a view to improve the quality of Mail Operations, the Department  has 
formulated  a Plan Scheme for setting up Mail Business  Centres  during the current 
Plan period. As part of the Scheme , the Department has also decided to undertake 
restructuring of existing mail network and optimize the same from both quality and 
cost perspectives. The services of M/s McKinsey & Company, a renowned  
Consultant, will be utilized for this project. 
 
It is expected that operational restructuring would res ult  in a better quality  of 
mail related services. 

 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
  
(Recommendation Para.7) 
    The Department of Posts are paid agency charges for the services rendered 
by them on behalf of other Departments/ organizations like Postal Life Insurance 
Pension Payments/Western Union Money transfer etc.   The Committee note with 
concern that there are outstanding recoveries against the various Departments, the 
details of which are CPF Rs. 1.59 cr ore, CMPF Rs. 5.62 crore and DoT Rs. 7.74 
crore.  The Committee strongly recommend that action should be expedited to 
recover the outstanding amount from the aforesaid Departments.   
Action Taken by the Government 
            The payment of Pension  on beha lf of these organizations by the 
Department of Posts and Recovery thereof  is a continuous process. The arrear of 
Commission/Pension can not be wiped  out as a whole  at any point of time . 
However all out efforts are being made in this regard. This  Directo rate  is 
monitoring the Position periodically and issuing suitable instructions in this regard 
to all concerned from time to time.The outstanding recoveries at the close of the 
quarter ending 30.09.2009 is as under : 
EPF             Rs.20.38 crore 
CMPF          Rs. 7.72   crore 
DOT            Rs. 8.24 crore 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para. 8) 
  
The difference between revenue expenditure and revenue receipts is the 
deficit of the Department .  The Revenue deficit is increasing year after year.  
During the year 2007-08, the deficit was Rs. 1,511.44 crore which increased to Rs. 
3,593.08 crore as per the updated status provided by the Department.  The 
projections for 2009 -10 are for Rs. 5,632.46  crore.  The Committee note with 
concern that during the year 2008 -09, RE in this regard is more than BE and the 
actuals are more than BE.  Not only that, the deficit during the year 2008 -09 is 
more than three times of the projected BE.  During the course of the deliberations, 
the Committee have been informed by the Secretary that the mandate given to the 
Department during the previous Plan was that the Department should become 
deficit free.  The Committee express serious concern that even then the deficit has 
increased to the extent of over 300 per cent during the year 2008 -09 as compared 
to the previous year.  Even in the next financial year, chances of decreasing the 
deficit are remote as the projections indicate that the deficit may be of Rs. 2,039.38 
crore more as compared to the previous year.  The Department has to chalk out the 
action plan to increase the revenue by multi pronged strategy which includes, 
expanding the business by capturing the rural market, making the human resource 

competent and providing efficient and quality services to the customers depending 
on the local needs and by induction of technology.  Concrete action on the 
suggested lines should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       The De partment has taken a number of steps to increase the  revenue by 
expanding  its  business as also its customer base. The instances are: 
Speed Post Business-  by providing efficient and quality service to the customers 
depending upon their needs  and by induction of technology. This strategy has been 
able to gain the confidence of the Indian Customers which reflected in the growing 
business of Speed over the years:- 
Year              Speed Post articles  traffic ( in Lakh) 
2006-07                   1286 
2007-08                   1773 
2008-09                   2114 
Premium Services:-   The Department is also looking forward to increase Revenue 
Yield through its Premium Products  like Express Parcel Post, Retail Post, Media Post 
and  e-bill Post. 
Financial services-  - 
(i) Introduction of Instant Money Order (iMO) service. 
(ii) Operation of International Money Transfer Service ( Western Union  
Financial Services Inc. USA) 
(iii) Retailing of Mutual Fund and Pension Fund. 
(iv) Oriental Accidental Death Insurance Cover to Post Office Savings bank 
(POSB) account holders. 
(v) Field Postal Orders. 
(vi)  Setting up of Postal Financial Marts (PFMs) 
(vii) Electronic Clearance Service. 
Department of Posts is considering to introduce Anytime, Anywhere, Any 
branch Banking through Core banking Solutions (CBS)  for Post Office Small 
Savings  Scheme during the 11 th Five Year Plan ( 2007 -12). The system so setup 
would enable providing  new services such as National Electronic Fund Transfer 
(NEFT), Electronic Clearing services ) (ECS) and  Real Time Gross Settlemen t 
(RTGS) etc. The proposed CBS would support Post Office Savings Bank and Savings 
Certificates  work with improved operational efficiency  while paving the way for  
multiple delivery channels  like ATM, Internet , Phone and Mobile Banking  Services 
for Small Savings Schemes. 
 

Department is expanding iMO  service to greater number of Post Offices  which 
would enable technology induction in money remittance reducing operational costs 
and earning greater revenue for the Department. 
           In order to incre ase Revenue yield, the Department has taken up new 
initiatives as part of the 11th Plan to improve the quality of mail operations, which 
are mainly: 
*A proposal to set up automated mail processing Centres  at Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad with a view to increasing automate 
mail sorting.  
*Setting up of Mail Business Centres  through a fundamental redesign of the 
existing mail network of the Department. 
*Popularization of  the Pin Codes with a view to expedite mail sorting , 
transmission and delivery. 
*Creation of a National Database Management System. 
* Introduction of  Radio Frequency  Identification  Device (RFID) technology in 
mail offices for tracking of mail bags/articles.  
These initiatives  are expected to result in better q uality of service, which in 
turn, would help the Department in increasing mail traffic and revenue. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para.9) 
 The Committee in the 56 th Report on Demands for Gr ants of the previous 
year had expressed serious concern over gross under utilization of Capital Outlay 
during Tenth Plan as well as during the year 2007-08.  In spite of that, the trend of 
under utilization persists during the year 2008 -09.  During the yea r 2007-08, the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 90.62 crore against the Revised Estimates of  Rs. 
202.22 crore.  During the year 2008-09, BE was Rs. 453.51 crore which was scaled 
down to Rs. 278.27 crore at RE stage.  The actual expenditure upto March 2009 
was Rs. 244.75 crore. The BE for the year  2009-10 is Rs. 370.50 crore which is Rs. 
83.01 crore lesser than the BE of the previous year. Thus during the previous year, 
the Department could not utilize the outlay provided at BE stage which was reduced 
considerably at RE stage.  The Committee conclude from the aforesaid observation 
that the Department itself is responsible for getting the reduced allocation during 
the year 2009-10.  While expressing the serious concern over the alarming trend of 
under-spending par ticularly under the Capital Section, the Committee strongly 
recommend to take the corrective measures so that the allocations made during the 
year 2009-10 are optimally utilized and result into effective implementation of the 
various schemes. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       During the year 2007 -08, funds to the extent of Rs.87.94 crore out of  Rs. 
164.63 crore were utilized ( 53.41% utilization) under capital segment. The main 
reason for under utilization was that the year 2007 -08 being the first yea r  of the 
Plan period,  some of the schemes got approved during the last quarter of the 

financial year and resultantly the time available for implementation of the schemes 
as well as utilization of funds was very limited. 
          
 However, during the yea r 2008-09, Rs 238.86 crore out of Rs.241.33 crore 
of (FG) the funds were utilized under capital segment. Thus the funds have almost 
been utilized during the year. 
          
In the year 2009 -10, Capital outlay of Rs.370.10 crore approved for the 
Department at BE stage has been reduced to Rs.214.77 crore at RE stage. The 
funds to the extent of Rs.105.51 crore have already been utilized and the remaining 
amount is already committed and the activities are under implementation stage.  
The Department, thereby assures full utilization of the Grant. 
           It can, therefore, be assessed  that there is improvement in the spending 
trend of the Department. All efforts are being made to utilize the allocated funds 
fully in spite of constraints faced. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para.14) 
The Committee are surprised to note that even when serious problems in 
implementation of the various schemes are duly reflected in the physical and 
financial achievem ents as explained in the previous part of the report, the 
Department do not feel any need to evaluate the schemes continued from the 
Tenth Plan by some independent agency.  The Department neither has ever 
evaluated any scheme by the independent agency nor propose to evaluate the 
schemes in the near future. The Committee express unhappiness over the stand of 
the Department in this regard.  The Committee urge that the schemes continuing 
from the Tenth Plan should be evaluated by some independent agency so as to get 
the feedback about the implementation of the schemes.  The concrete action in this 
regard should be taken and Committee informed accordingly. 
Action Taken by the Government 
     In respect of  schemes carried over from Xth Plan such as-  IT Induction, though   
the nomenclature of the schemes have been retained from 9th  Plan, the 
components of the schemes are vastly changed  in scope and content to cater to 
the requirement of the emerging  Socio -economic structure of the country and 
strictly speaking cannot be said to have been carried over  from 10th Plan.  
 
However, the directions of the Committee have been noted  and action will 
be taken to evaluate those schemes which have been carried in content and scope 
from  the 10th Plan. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para.21) 

   The Committee are unhappy to note that out of the seven sub -components 
of one of the important schemes, whose objective is to increase the access to the 
postal network, only one component could be approved even when the third year of 
the Eleventh Plan is in its half way.  The delay in the clearance of the scheme has 
affected the working of the Department in one or the other way.  As acknowledged 
by the Department, the in itial proposal of creation of 3000 GDS posts, had to be 
scaled down since the precious plan period was lost in getting the approvals.  All 
this clearly indicates that there are serious loopholes in  the process of getting 
clearances for the various Plan sc hemes.  There is an urgent need to simplify the 
process of  getting approvals. Without wasting further time the Department should 
act fast and ensure that the approval of the various components of the scheme is 
obtained immediately so that the projects can  be implemented at least in the 
remaining period of the Eleventh Plan. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
          Expansion of Postal Network depends mainly on creation of p osts and 
provision of manpower to new Post Offices. There being ban on creation of n ew 
posts, the Department has to seek approvals from competent Ministries. 
Accordingly, the competent authority  has cleared the 11 th Plan Proposals  except 
for creation of new posts of Gramin Dak Sewaks required for opening of new Branch 
Post Offices for w hich a revised proposal for creation of 400 new  GDS posts is 
being taken  up with the Ministry of Finance.  Physical Targets and Financial 
Allocations for opening of Sub Post Offices by redeployment/relocation and Branch 
Post offices by relocation have already been allotted to the Circles.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para. 24) 
The Committee observe that even when the Franchisee outlets are 
functioning well and have done more than Rs. 4 cr ore business only under stamps, 
stationery etc, the scheme remain still in the process of getting clearance during 
the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee fail to understand how the Department would 
achieve the target of opening 8000 such outlets with the slow p rocess of approval.  
At least now the Department has to act fast and take the concerted action so that 
the scheme is formally approved and the desired objectives are achieved. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
      For opening of Franchise Outlets, targets are allotted to the Circles and 
canvassing is done by them. However, these can be opened only on receipt of 
request from public. So far, these Outlets have been opened without incurring Plan 
expenditure. During the current year 2009 -10, allocation of funds  was reduced  at 
RE stage. Therefore, a target for opening of 300 Franchise  Outlets  has been given 
to the Circles  without any budgetary support. On availability of Plan support during 
the remaining two years  of 11th Plan , it is proposed to achieve the physical targets 
of opening of  Franchise outlets. 
 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 

 
(Recommendation Para.26) 
Post Office Small Saving Schemes and Saving Certificates have been one of 
the favourable option fo r investing money particularly among the middle income 
group in the country.  These schemes have lost their status which is evident from 
the data furnished by the Department according to which under various schemes 
viz MIS, SCSS, 1, TD, 2, TD, 3, TD, CTD, NSS-87 and 6NSC VIII, the withdrawals 
are more than the deposits.  When the Commercial Banks and other private Banks 
are providing quality services with the use of  the latest technology, in the case of 
Post Bank, things are still at the conceptualization stage.  „Any time Anywhere Any 
Branch‟ Banking is still   a distant dream.  Even the pilot project is likely to start in  
the next financial year.  The Government funding is being provided under the 
aforesaid Plan scheme whose objective is to fully realize  the potential of the vast 
customer base.  During the year 2007 -08 out of the allocation of Rs. 20.50 crore, 
the utilization was just Rs. 1.05 crore.  Similarly during the year 2008 -09, the 
allocation was reduced to Rs. 15 crore which also remained undersp ent.  Only Rs. 
5.49 crore could be utilized.  It is evident that the Department is unable to avail of 
the opportunity which is clear from the status of utilization of funds.  With the 
status of the schemes as indicated above, the Committee express its doub ts about 
the improvement in public perception of these saving schemes of the Department.  
The Department has to work on war footing to realize the credibility of India Post in 
the area of banking and money operations.  The various proposed projects need to  
be hastened to achieve the set objective.  The detailed action plan in this regard 
should be chalked out and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Plan of action are as under; 
(i) Centralised Banking for POSB: 
(1) Technology & Banking Consultants have been engaged. 
(2) Migration to Double entry Accounting System. 
(3) Data Cleansing and Autjentication of POSB data. 
(4) Floating of RFP for Core Banking Software with the help of Technology 
and Banking Consultant. 
(5) Customization of Software, User acceptance Testing. 
(6) 4000 POs have been identified for this scheme. 
(7) Once Software is chosen, detailed training for operative staff will be 
undertaken. 
(8) Pilot in 104 Post Offices. Implementation will be in three stages. 
(9)  Implementation will be in three stages,viz: 
 
Stage-I.          500 Offices  

Stage-II.       1900 Offices 
Stage-III.      1600 Offices 
(II) Setting up Post Bank of India: 
          The proposal to setup Post Bank Of India (PBI)) is at a conceptual stage. The 
aim of establishing PBI is to provide full banking privilege to the rural poor who still 
do not have modern banking facilities  and still have to depend on informal sector 
for their credit requirements. The scheme named as “ Studies and Miscellaneous 
Expenditure  relating to setting up of Po st Bank of India”  is the Plan activity  
included in 11 th Five year Plan  with an outlay of Rs.5 crore. The Appraisal Memo 
has been approved  in March, 2009 which covers  action  plan  such as 
feasibility/detailed  studies and study visits within and outsi de India  to understand 
the various aspects  of a Bank in order to prepare a detailed roadmap for 
establishing Post Bank of India. The Request for Proposal (RFP) to select an 
institute to study and design a Roadmap for establishing Post Bank of India has 
been issued on 1120.03.2010 
 
(III) Instant Money Order (iMO)Service: 
          Instant Money Order (iMO) is an online money transmission  service 
intended  for a market  clientele  requiring instant money remittance. This service 
enables the customer to rec eive money in minutes  from any of the Post Offices  
providing iMO service. The service was introduced  on 20 th January,2006 during the 
10th Five Year Plan. Under this Service , a person can send  amount from Rs.1000/ - 
to 50,000/- in one transaction.  The fee charged is in the range of Rs.150/- and Rs. 
330/-. At present, iMO service is available from more than 2100 locations across 
the country. 
         Department is expanding iMO service which would enable technology 
induction in money remittance, reducing  operational costs  &  earning greater for 
the Department. In the 11th Plan, it is proposed to expend this facility  to more than 
10,700 Post offices.  
(IV) Setting up of Postal Finance mart: 
            The Postal Finance Marts provide  Post Office Saving s Bank  service like 
Savings Bank, Recurring Deposit, Monthly  Income Scheme, Time Deposit, Senior 
Citizen Savings Scheme, National Savings Certificates, Kisan Vikas Patra as well as 
other financial services  like Postal  Life and Non - Life Insurance , Mutual Funds, & 
Bonds, Government Securities,, Pension Schemes, International Money Transfer,  
Money Order and Instant Money Order etc  under one roof as „One Stop shop for 
Financial Services‟ in a fully computerized office  supported by technology  and in a 
customer friendly  ergonomically improved environment at par  with the reputed  
banking institutions. The facilities like Internet Connectivity, availability of forms  & 
stationery  and comfortable sitting arrangement  for the customers are already 
provided in Postal Finance Marts. 
                In the 10th Five Year Plan, a total of 313 Postal Finance Marts have been 
setup across the country. A target of setting up of 500 Postal Finance Marts has 
been fixed for the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 

 
(Recommendation Para. 29) 
The Committee note that various added benefits are being provided to the 
investor of  Post Office Saving Schemes which includes bonus @ 5  percent on the 
deposits made under Post Office monthly income account and the benefit of 
accidental insurance through Oriental Insurance Company for Rs. I lakh to the Post 
Office Savings account holder with nominal premium of Rs. 15.  The examination in 
this regard has revealed that the Department has no mechanism to know about the 
similar benefits being provided by the other Banks.  The Committee feel that in this 
world of competition, India Post has to be more vigilant while making its various 
instruments customer friendly.  More so it is necessary to  make the public aware 
about the various benefits.  The rural India, where Post Bank has the maximum 
reach need to be made aware about the saving schemes of the Department.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
     The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance has informed that the 
benefit of either Bonus  on Maturity or Accidental Insurance to account holders  are 
not available with the Banks. Public awareness campaign are organized  from time 
to time at the grass root level to educate the rural masses about the facilities 
available under the Post Office Savings Bank  Schemes 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 (Recommendation Para. 38) 
The Committee again note the under-utilization of outlay during the aforesaid 
scheme during the years 2007 -08  and 2008 -09.  The specific reasons for under 
utilization under the scheme should be communicated to the Committee.  The 
Committee further note that there is confusion with regard to the sub-component of 
the scheme insurance operations viz training of circle office personnel and 
marketing personnel.  Initially, the Department informed that no allocation was 
made for the scheme.  When the Committee enquired whether the sub scheme has 
been dispensed with, the Committee have been informed that Rs. 2.51 crore was 
allocated during 2009 -10.  The Committee cannot understand the idea of 
dispensing with the scheme related to training and marketing particularly when the 
autonomy to the Department has been provided which may provide the opportunity 
to expand the insurance business.  The Committee would like that more stress 
should be given to the training of the officers.  The detailed strategy in this regard 
should be chalked out and the Committee informed accordingly. 
Action Taken by the Government 
The reasons for underutilization of Plan Outlays  during 2007 -08 and 2008-09  
are as follows: 
(i) Being initial year of XI Plan, approval of plan schemes was required  
before the amount could be spent. 
(ii) Online Operations upto Division and HO level could be made possible 
because of WAN through dedicated  leased line  as part of spill over of 
10th Plan project relating to computerization and networking of Post 

Offices. However the Software development was taken up in the  11th 
Plan which is still continuing  
(iii) Regarding computerization of PLI/RPLI, the Circles placed  the   orders 
to vendors to purchase Hardware through DGS&D in the year 2008-09. 
Due to delayed supply of Hardware by vendors, their bills could not be 
cleared w ithin the Financial Year 2008 -09  though the supply of 
hardware  were made. 
(iv) Because of in house training imparted by the Departmental 
officials/training Centres,  expenditure was on lower side. 
 
As regard the allocation and utilization of funds under the s ub scheme 
Training of marketing personnel and Circle office staff  during 2007 -08  and 2008 -
09 , it is informed that the total allocation for the plan period  under this sub 
scheme was Rs.5.00crore. During 2007-08  being the initial of the plan period , th e 
scheme was approved during  January, 2008. Initial allocation was Rs. 2.5 crore  
for the year 2009-10 which was reduced  to Rs.0.57 crore out of total of Rs.2.25 cr. 
in the Revised Estimates. Detailed strategy  for training of officers  and marketing 
personnel  has been worked out. Marketing Personnel   including Direct Agents, 
Departmental staff, and Gramin Dak Sewaks  are being provided in house and 
licentiate training through Insurance Institute of India, Mumbai and other 
accredited institutes. Trainin g to  officers  is being imparted through National 
Insurance Academy, Pune, Indian Institute of Management, Shillong and other 
institutions.   
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 (Recommendation Para.39) 
The Committee note that the Department has ambitious plans with regard to 
technology upgradation and modernization during Eleventh Plan.  The Department 
propose to complete ongoing projects for technology upgradation and initiate action 
for computerization of remai ning Post Offices.  Besides it is proposed to upgrade 
Automatic Mail Processing Centers (AMPCs) and provide for a multi model transport 
system. The setting up of regional data centre is another proposal of the 
Department.  In addition, modernization of Speed Post concentration Centre, Speed 
Post Centre, Postal Stores Depots, Circle Stamps Depots and Customer Care 
Centres are also proposed during the Eleventh Plan.  Besides as acknowledged by 
the Department, the enlargement of business of Posts is dependent upon 
networking of Post Offices.  The insurance companies, banks as stated by the 
Department are approaching Post Offices for collecting their premiums but the work 
cannot be taken due to the constraints of networking.  The Committee note that 
when the who le plans of the Department are dependent upon the modernization 
and computerization, out of total schemes of   Rs. 2011.50 crore under IT Induction 
during the Eleventh Plan, the schemes amounting to Rs. 628.66 crore could only be 
approved.  The Committee fail to understand how the Department would implement 
the modernization plans with the status of approval of the schemes when the half of 
plan period has already gone.  The Committee emphasize that it is high time the 
Department should wake up and do whatever is needed to expedite the approval of 
the plans and work on a mission mode to achieve the objectives of modernization 
and computerization.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 

        All Plan Schemes  relating to Mail Operations had already been approved by 
the competent authority except the Plan Scheme relating to „Setting up of 
Automatic Processing Centres‟. The said Scheme has now been approved  by 
Hon‟ble Minister of Finance  on 19.01.2010 with the total outlay of Rs.145.38 crore. 
(PMU) For comprehensive induction of Technology in Post Offices, computerization 
and  Networking of all Post Offices  including those in Rural areas , development of 
integrated Modular Software for all the applications, establishment of Data Centre 
and business continuity Plan   and having an appropriate  governance structure for 
the IT Project , the Department has engaged a IT Consultant  and the Project 
Report  and the Draft EFC has been circulated to the nodal Ministries. On the 
approval of EFC, all the Post Offices including  the  Rural Post Offices will be 
computerized  and networked  by the end of XIth Plan period..The IT Project will 
improve  the Service level  to the customers, increase productivity of the 
employees and inter -alia will have beneficent impact  on the Revenu e of the 
Department.  
(BD):    The Plan Schemes of Business E xpansion of Speed Post and Marketing  
Research  and Product Development have been approved by the competent 
authority and are currently under implementation. The Business product Division  of 
BD and Marketing  is having following Plan Projects  for modernisation: 
i. Development of Infrastructure for logistic Post. 
ii. Development of Infrastructure for Express Parcel Post. 
iii. India Post Business Innovation Centre. 
iv. India Post Consultancy Group and 
v. Establishment to Print to Post Facility.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para. 42) 
The Committee further find that in addition to the already available staff 
quarters there is an additional demand for ab out 1400 staff quarters to be 
constructed during the Eleventh Plan. With the status of implementation of the 
projects, as explained above, the Committee express doubts about the achievement 
of targets during the Eleventh Plan. All the hurdles being faced in implementation of 
the project should be identified and corrective action taken so that the targeted 
staff quarters are constructed during the Eleventh Plan which may increase the 
satisfaction level of the employees.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As intimated earlier also, during the 11 th Five Year Plan the Department has 
proposed to construct 30 staff quarter   projects involving 100 staff quarters. 
During the current Plan period i.e. April, 2007 to December, 2009, work of 13 staff 
quarter projects involving 45 staff quarters was completed. In order to achieve the 
physical target fully, monitoring is being done at various levels by holding review 

meeting. Besides, all the Heads of Circles have already been addressed to monitor 
all the ongoing /approved building  projects at personal level for the purpose. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 44) 
The Committee note that the revenue from premium services has grown 
from Rs. 425.74 crore in 20 03-04 to Rs. 2,141.48 crore in 2008 -09.  While 
appreciating the aforesaid development, the Committee take note of the fact that 
some of the premium products like express post, retail post media post,     e-bill 
post and „others‟, there is decrease in reven ue earned during the year 2008 -09 
against the previous year.  The Committee would like to emphasize that all 
initiatives should be taken to reverse this trend. The particular reasons for the said 
decrease should also be communicated to the Committee.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
During the year 2007 -08, the revenue generated from the  Express Parcel 
Post was Rs.53.53 crore which has come down  to Rs. 49.29 crore during the year 
2008-09. In order to generate more revenue, Express Parcel Post „Retail ser vice‟ 
has been introduced w.e.f. 1 st May,2009 to make the service customer friendly by 
offering the Service to Retail customers without signing  any agreement. The 
customers who have not signed the Business Parcel Agreement, shall book the 
Express Parcel p ost under „ Express Parcel Post Retail    (EPP)‟ service. Steps 
have been taken through Plan Schemes to further increase the Revenue under EPP. 
 
E-Payment (e-Bill Post): Revenue generated under e-payment during the year  
2007-08 was Rs. 4.71 Crore  which has reached to Rs.10.20 crore during the year 
2008-09.In order generate more Revenue by optimally utilizing the Postal Network, 
service has been extended 8457 Post offices  and the network is still growing. 
 
Retail Posts: The Revenue generated from the Retail Post  during the year 2007 -
08 was Rs.103.56 crore which has come down to Rs.95.94 crore  during 2008 -09. 
Tie up with other organizations are being made and more retail locations are being 
added to offer the services viz. sale of Gold Coins, Passenger Reser vation 
System(PRS) sale/Purchase of Foreign Exchange by expanding the retail network. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para. 45) 
The Committee further note that the market share of the Departme nt in the 
courier business is just 13 per cent.  The Committee emphasize that there is an 
urgent need to improve the quality of courier services of the Department.  As 
acknowledged by the Department, the staff of the Department is not as alert as 
that of t he private courier.  Since this is a world of competition, there is no other 

way than to improve the quality of services by providing adequate training to the 
employees and taking all other desired initiatives to bring in the attitudinal changes 
for the cu stomer needs and requirements for quick and speedy delivery.  The 
detailed action plan should be chalked out in this regard and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       The Department has taken a number of new initiatives  in the realm of  mail 
operations as part of the 11 th Plan with a view to bring in greater automation in 
mail processing, reliability in mail transmission and restructuring of the existing 
network and operational framework. These initiatives are aimed at n ot only 
arresting the decline in mail volumes  but also to meet the challenges in an 
extremely competitive mail market in the country. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para. 46) 
The Committee in this regard would also like to suggest that the customer 
particularly in the rural areas needs an assurance that the daks sent through 
courier reaches them in time.  In this regard, there is an urgent need to have Post 
Office building in every village.  The Government should examine the aforesaid 
proposal and take the desired action. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Department has prescribed norms on the basis of which decision is taken 
regarding providing  of Post Office facilities. As regards buildi ng for Post Office in 
every village presently we consider  building proposals only where  departmental 
staff are providing  fulltime Post Office services and as such the provision of 
building in each village post office may perhaps not be feasible.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 48) 
 
The Committee have persistently been recommending to take the desired 
action to fill the vacant posts in the Department.  The Committee are pleased to 
note that at last the Department has got clearance to fill up vacancies for the 
current year.  The Committee strongly recommend that the action should be taken 
urgently to fill up the vacancies so that the work is not affected particularly in the 
single handed Post Offices  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As a follow up action 276 vacancies of IPOs (Inspector of Post Offices) Group 
„B‟ have been reported to Staff Selection Commission for filling up on the basis of 

Combined Graduate Level Examination. They ha ve already declared the result of 
the Written Examination and were in process of conducting the Interviews. The 
Staff Selection Commission is expected to declare the result soon after the 
conclusion of the interviews. On receipt of the nominations of the s elected 
candidates, action will be initiated to complete the pre-appointment formalities viz.- 
Medical Examination, Character and Antecedents verifications etc. before issuing 
the offer of appointments. 
Various Postal Circles have completed the selection p rocess to fill up 4618 
vacancies of Postal assistants/Sorting Assistants. As soon as the pre -appointment 
formalities are completed , the candidates will be issued the offer of appointments. 
Similar action is being taken by the Circles to fill up 2244 vacan cies of 
Postmen by Direct Recruitment.  Action is also under way to fill up 143 posts of 
Junior Accountants. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 50) 
The Committee note that human resource i s the biggest asset for any 
institution.  The quality of the human resource is the main factor in the 
success/failure of any institution.  In this regard, training is the input which hones 
the skills of the individuals and ensure best of their performance.  In the case of the 
Department of Posts, there is an urgent need to give more emphasis on training 
particularly when the Department propose to set up the Post Bank.  Further the 
postal facilities of the Department are also being expanded and there are pla ns to 
expand the insurance activities.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
details of the number of employees who have been imparted training so far along 
with the plans of the Department to give training to the remaining employees. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Training is imparted to the employees on regular basis to improve the 
quality of the human force  and to develop the special skills. It is an ongoing 
process. To train the workforce of the Department, a comprehensive scheme has 
been prepared as the plan Project  for the XIth plan. The same has been approved 
for Rs. 124.92 crore  The Scheme includes imparting of institutional in service 
training, technology training ,business oriented programmes  capacity building of 
training centres  and trainers and development of infrastructure. 
The Group „A‟ & „B‟ officers are trained at Postal staff College of India (PSCI) 
Ghaziabad, which the apex institute of the Department and there are  six Postal 
Training Centres (PTCs) which   impart  in duction training to the Inspector of Post 
Offices , Postal Assistants and Sorting Assistants. The PTCs also organize in service 
training programmes for Post Masters and Assistant Superintendents of Post Offices 
on Departmental matters and technology. 
The Plan Scheme for Human Resource Management during XI Plan includes 
following training programmes to cover all the cadrers of employees. 
 
(a) Induction Training Programmes  are imparted for new entrants. The 
induction training programmes for Major cadres like Inspector of Post Offices, Postal 

Assistants and Sorting Assistants have been reviewed and revised. The focus is on 
gaining operational efficiency and improving staff skills for handling customers. The 
new entrants are being sensitised to the future developmen ts and initiatives of the 
Department. IT training is an essential component of all induction trainings. 
(b) Development Programmes are conducted  to develop officers after specific 
spells of service. The existing development programmes for middle level and juni or 
level officers  have been enhanced. These include one week exposure to a foreign  
postal administration which have successfully transformed themselves. Three new 
development Programmes have been introduced in this plan, namely the Advanced 
Development P rogramme for senior level officer and programmes for Assistant  
Superintendent of Post Offices and Account Group „B‟cadre. 
(c) In –Service Training Programmes have been introduced for Post Masters and 
supervisors on Software along with technology knowledge  pr ogrammes. Presently, 
the Post Masters and Supervisors in Project Arrow Phase I,II and III Post Offices, 
have been trained . The Postal training Centres also  impart the „Train the  Trainers‟ 
training to the Workplace Computer Training Centre trainers. As p art of 
improvement of  quality  of service, training  has  been  imparted  t o the  Sorting 
Assistants with a view to improve their sorting skills  particularly improving town 
delivery sorting. Training Programmes have also been initiated for the accounts 
personnel through Zonal training Centres and Divisional Training Centres  in the 
office of Director of Accounts ( Postal)  
(d) Technology training  is being given to Group „A‟  and „B‟ officers for 
technology implementation, training to Assistant Superintendent  of Post Offices  
and Inspector of Post offices to enable them to inspect computerized offices  and 
training to Postal Assistants, Post Masters , Sub Post Masters and Supervisors  to 
operate the Departmental Software. System Administrators are also being 
developed  for trouble shooting  assisting in technology  implementation at the Post 
Office Level. Similarly,the focus has been on  expansion of facilities for imparting 
training from the year 2007. 
(e) Business oriented Programmes  are being organized for the work force 
dealing with the customers directly.  This include customers‟ relationship 
Management Programmes for the Marketting  Executives  and Rural marketing 
Programmes  for the Assistant Superintendents of Post Offices  who are in -charge 
of the Sub Division Programmes for the Postmen and Gramin Dak Sewaks  are also 
being organized. Programmes are also being organised for frontline staff  which 
includes Postmen, and the counter staff.. Training is being imparted to the Drivers 
and the Technical staff. 
(f) There is need for capacity building for imparting training keeping in view the 
increasing need for updating  the skills of the work force. Initiatives in this direction 
include train and trainers , development of mentors, standardization  of training 
packages as well as building infrastructure  and development of training facilities. 
In addition to this Training on Direct Trainers „ Skill is also being imparted to the 
trainers. 
5. Further to keep pace with the Technology implementation, local         
Training f acilities  are being developed to supplement the training  provided by 
Postal Training Centres. Accordingly two types of training facilities are being setup 
called –Workplace Computer Training Centres (WCTCs) and Divisional level  
Training Centres  (DTCs).  The WCTCs, mainly setup in Region will impart training 
for Departmental Software  to the Supervisors and Postal Assistants  whereas the 
DTCs impart basic computer  training to the employees. 
6. Training facilities have been setup for accounts Personnel in  the Circle. Five 
Zonal Training Centres at Chennai, Delhi, Lucknow, Nagpur  and Kolkata and fifteen 

Divisional Level Training Centres have been setup at the remaining offices of Postal 
Accounts Offices. The ZTCs impart training  on accounting as well as a ccounting 
software. The Divisional Level Centres provide training on accounting software. The 
Computer Training capacity of the PTCs has also been increased to cope with the 
need f induction training for the newly recruited Postal Assistants. 
7. The Standa rd Training Packages (STPs) have been developed  for imparting 
computer training. The PTCs develop the STPs which contain the programme 
objectives , breakdown of module, trainee material and notes for instructor for 
conducting the training. 
            The details of the number of the employees who have been given training  
so far during the first three years of the XI Plan are shown in the Annexure „VI‟ 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 (Recommendation Para. 51) 
The aforesaid observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
made after detailed examination of the various Budget documents and the 
deliberations held in the context of examination of Demands for Grants 2009 -10.  
The Committee hope and trust th at the Department would take note of the 
suggestions made by the Committee and implement the same which would 
definitely improve the working of India Post particularly the implementation of 
various Plan schemes. 
 
Action Taken by the Government  
             The Observations/Recommendations and Suggestions of the Committee 
are noted with due regards for necessary action/compliance. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 

 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para. 13) 
Another disturbing fact noticed during the course of examination of Demands 
for Grants was the discrepancy in the data furnished to the Committee in  various 
Budget documents.  For the Tenth Plan which concluded on 31 st March, 2007, the 
utilization status as informed during the course of examination of Demands for 
Grants of the previous year was Rs. 874.67 crore.  In the note furnished to the 
Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the current year, the status 
was indicated as Rs. 661.57 crore.  When the attention of the Department was 
drawn to the data given in the previous year, the Department changed its stand 
and stated that the actual expenditure was Rs. 874.67 crore.  Similar is the position 
with regard to actual expenditure under the Plan schemes during the year 2007-08.  
While examining the DFG of the previous year, the Committee were informed that 
Rs. 75 crore was the utilization sta tus.  As per the Outcome Budget, the actual 
expenditure was Rs. 136.81 crore.  When the comments of the Department were 
sought, the Committee have been informed that the actual expenditure during the 
year 2007 -08 was Rs. 136.81 crore as indicated in the Ou tcome Budget.  The 
Department has further stated that Rs. 75 crore appears to have inadvertently been 
reflected.  The Committee note that the data furnished by the Committee in their 
reports is based on the information provided by the Department in various  Budget 
documents and the data before finalizing the report is verified by the Department. 
The discrepancy of the data has further been noticed in respect of some more 
heads, the details of which have been given in the earlier parts of the Report. The 
discrepancy of the data furnished by the Department in the various documents is a 
serious issue.  The Department should take utmost care before furnishing the 
information before the Standing Committee and Parliament. 
Action Taken by the Government 
           The mistake in furnishing the actual expenditure of the tenth Plan occurred 
inadvertently for which the Department regrets.  
           Some times, the figures/data are also changed due to updating the 
information. The observation of the Committee is noted to avoid such instance. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para.33) 
Besides the remuneration received from the Ministry of Finance for NREGA, 
the Department also gets funds from the Planning Comm ission under the Plan 
Scheme for additional work which includes arrangement for cash conveyance, 
incentive to staff and training etc.  The Plan Scheme was introduced during the year 
2008-09.  As regards, the status of approval of the scheme, the Committee have 
been informed that EFC is under submission.  Even when the EFC is under 
submission, an amount of Rs.22.18 crore was spent during the year 2008-09 out of 

the total allocation of Rs. 80 crore.  During the current year 2009-10, Rs. 100 crore 
is the BE.  The Committee would like to be clarified how the scheme was being 
implemented and the amount spent without its formal approval.  The Committee 
also emphasize that the formal approval of the Plan Scheme should be obtained 
expeditiously so that the infrastru cture is created for the disbursal of wages under 
NREGA. 
Action Taken by the Government 
        Besides the remuneration received from Ministry of Finance  for NREGA, the 
Department also gets funds from Planning Commission under the Plan scheme for 
additional work which include arrangement for cash conveyance, incentive to staff 
and training etc. The Plan scheme was introduced during the year 2008 -09 . An 
amount of Rs.22.18 crore was spent during the year 2008 -09 out of the total 
allocation of Rs. 80 crore . During the current year  2009-10, EFC has been approve 
for for Rs 100 crore. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para. 34) 
The Committee further observe that even when the amount is being allocated 
by the Planning Commission for creating the infrastructure for disbursement of 
wages under NREGA, the Department has shown its reluctance on a suggestion that 
emerged during the deliberations according to which the Department should 
introduce mobile services for the disbursement of wages to the workers at the work 
site.  The Committee feel that all out efforts should be made to ensure that the 
workers get their wages timely without wasting their time to come to the Post 
Office to get the wages.  Though the Department subsequently agreed to consider 
the said suggestion, the reluctance indicates the insensitivity of the Department 
towards the poorest of the poor.  The Committee hope that their suggestion would 
be implemented expeditiously and the workers w ould get their wages at the work 
place. 
Action Taken by the Government 
       As part of NREGS IT modernization effort, the Department of Posts will begin 
deploying a mobile technology solution to over 1,30,00 rural branch post offices  
which will enable mobile banking  and a host of other services. One key feature of 
this solution will be the ability to disburse NREGS fund to its beneficiaries . It is the 
intention of India Posts to  enable each rural Branch Post Office to open NREGS 
accounts and disburse funds using secure biometric enrolment and identity 
validation  procedures. The Department also plans to increase our presence by 
authorizing Branch Post Masters (BPMs) to make payment directly  at job sites 
wherever feasible. The Department hopes to begin  the first stage of this project 
beginning in October,2010. The Department is also planning  for the use of optional 
smart cards to serve the  illiterate  customers in a better manner. When a smart 
card is used and coupled with a biometric validation of id entity, customers will not 
be required to complete any forms - similar to an ATM transactions. Further, 
illiterate customers will be able to  hear a summary of their transactions in their 
local vernacular to reach assurance that they have received the requested amount.   
 

Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
(Recommendation Para.39) 
The Committee note that the Department has ambitious plans with regard to 
technology upgradation and modernization during Eleventh Plan.   The Department 
propose to complete ongoing projects for technology upgradation and initiate action 
for computerization of remaining Post Offices.  Besides it is proposed to upgrade 
Automatic Mail Processing Centers (AMPCs) and provide for a multi model transport 
system. The setting up of regional data centre is another proposal of the 
Department.  In addition, modernization of Speed Post concentration Centre, Speed 
Post Centre, Postal Stores Depots, Circle Stamps Depots and Customer Care 
Centres are also proposed during the Eleventh Plan.  Besides as acknowledged by 
the Department, the enlargement of business of Posts is dependent upon 
networking of Post Offices.  The insurance companies, banks as stated by the 
Department are approaching Post Offices for collecting their premiums but the work 
cannot be taken due to the constraints of networking.  The Committee note that 
when the whole plans of the Department are dependent upon the modernization 
and computerization, out of total schemes of Rs. 2011.50 crore under IT Induction 
during the Eleventh Plan, the schemes amounting to Rs. 628.66 crore could only be 
approved.  The Committee fail to understand  how the Department would 
implement the modernization plans with the status of approval of the schemes 
when the half of plan period has already gone.  The Committee emphasize that it is 
high time the Department should wake up and do whatever is needed to expedite 
the approval of the plans and work on a mission mode to achieve the objectives of 
modernization and computerization.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
        All Plan Schemes relating to Mail Operations had already been approved by 
the competent authority except the Plan Scheme relating to „Setting up of 
Automatic Processing Centres‟. The said Scheme has n ow been approved  by 
Hon‟ble Minister of Finance  on 19.01.2010 with the total outlay of Rs.145.38 crore. 
(PMU):   For comprehensive induction of Technology in Post Offices, 
computerization and Networking of all Post Offices  including those in Rural areas  , 
development of integrated Modular Software for all the applications, establishment 
of Data Centre and business continuity Plan  and having an appropriate  
governance structure for the IT Project , the Department has engaged a IT 
Consultant  and the Proj ect Report  and the Draft EFC has been circulated to the 
nodal Ministries. On the approval of EFC, all the Post Offices including the Rural 
Post Offices will be computerized and networked by the end of XIth Plan period..The 
IT Project will improve the Serv ice level to the customers, increase productivity of 
the employees and inter -alia will have beneficent impact  on the Revenue of the 
Department.  
 
(BD):    The Plan Schemes of Business E xpansion of Speed Post and Marketing  
Research  and Product Development  have been approved by the competent 
authority and are currently under implementation. The Business product Division  of 
BD and Marketing  is having following Plan Projects  for modernisation: 
vi. Development of Infrastructure for logistic Post. 

vii. Development of Infrastructure for Express Parcel Post. 
viii. India Post Business Innovation Centre. 
ix. India Post Consultancy Group and 
x. Establishment to Print to Post Facility.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 

 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Para. 6) 
The Department receives remuneration for the services performed on behalf 
of the Ministry of Finan ce in Saving Bank and Saving Certificate functions and 41 
per cent of the revenue come from SB/CC remuneration.  From the data provided 
by the Department, the Department has explained that as per the recommendation 
of the Expert Committee set up in 1993 -94 by the Ministry of Finance, the rate of 
remuneration was enhanced @ 10 per cent per year upto 2000 -01.  However, the 
rates were reduced substantially in the subsequent years.  During the year 2007 -
08, the rates decreased to as low as 3 per cent.  In this regard, the Committee 
have persistently been raising the issue of hike in the rate of remuneration being 
received by the Department.  The aforesaid Expert Committee had recommended 
that the Department of Posts were entitled to a hike of 10 per cent per ann um in 
the rate of aforesaid remuneration.  With the pursuance of the issue, the 
remuneration was increased by 4.6 per cent during the year 2008 -09.  During the 
year 2009-10, the rate has increased further to 5 per cent.  With regard to the 
latest position in this regard, the Department has informed that the Ministry of 
Finance has agreed to constitute again an Expert Committee to review the rate of 
remuneration in the light of pay revision due to recommendations of Sixth Pay 
Commission.  The Committee recom mend that the issue should be pursued further 
with the Ministry of Finance so that the Department gets its due share of 
remuneration. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
        Ministry of Finance has decided to set up an Expert Group headed by chief 
Advisor (Cost), Department of Expenditure to review the rate of remuneration paid 
to the Department of Posts for operating Small Savings Schemes in which 
representation has been given to the Department of Posts. Formal orders 
constituting the expert group is yet t o be issued by Ministry of Finance. The issue 
will be presented before the said group by the Department. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 41 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 10) 
 The Committee are seriously concerned to note the persistent problem of 
under-spending of Plan outlay of the Department.  During Tenth Plan (2002 -07) 
Budget Estimates were Rs. 1,273 crore i.e. almost 1/3 rd of the proposed allocat ion 
of Rs. 3619.83 crore.  Even then the allocated outlay could not be spent fully 
resulting into under -spending of Rs. 398.33 crore which is around 26 per cent of 

the allocation.  Even when the issue was raised in 56 th Report, there is no 
improvement in t his regard.  Out of the total allocation of Rs. 4,180 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan, the expenditure as on date is just Rs. 1,075.64 crore which is 26 per 
cent of the total outlay even when half of the Plan period has already passed.  The 
trends of the allocations and the expenditure indicates that the proposed allocations 
are scaled down while providing allocation at BE stage and whatever is allocated at 
BE stage is further reduced at RE stage and the reduced allocation at RE stage 
further remain unspent.   During the year 2008-09, BE was Rs. 600 crore that was 
less than half of the proposed allocation of Rs. 1,492.57 crore.  The BE was further 
reduced by Rs. 200 crore at RE stage.  Even this reduced allocation could not be 
spent fully and there was shortfall  of Rs. 81.17 crore.  Worst is the position during 
the year 2009-10.  BE during this year is Rs. 620 crore which is even less than 1/3rd 
of the proposed allocation i.e. Rs. 2,100 crore.  Expenditure position upto July, 
2009 as intimated in the written note  was only Rs. 22 crore i.e. 3.5 per cent of the 
allocation.  Another disturbing fact noticed is that with the continuous status of 
under utilization of Plan outlay, the Department however, is quite optimistic and 
has projected 100 per cent utilization duri ng the current year.  The Committee fail 
to understand how the targets set under different projects would be achieved with 
the status of under utilization of the Plan outlay.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion that there are serious problems in 
planning and implementation of the various Plan schemes.  There is an urgent need 
to review the situation scheme -wise and project-wise. The corrective action in this 
regard should be taken immediately and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
         The amount of utilization of Rs.388 crore mentioned during the deliberations  
was not related to the current year, but it relates to the year 2008 -09 where the 
actual amount utilized  was Rs. 318.83 crore  as against the  RE outlay of  R s.400 
crore. 
        Further, as per the observations of the committee, the Department would like 
to inform that the Physical targets for the activities are fixed keeping in view the 
funds made available for the activity. The main reason for variation betw een the 
targets  and fund utilization is due to the facts that once the activity is implemented 
the physical targets are achieved but reflection of funds utilized in the books of the 
Department takes place only after the bills are adjusted by the DGS&D , Cheques 
are presented by the vendors, submission of bills by Civil Wings etc. which  is 
actually not completed  within the Financial year thereby causing reflection of under 
utilization of funds. However, all efforts are being made  to ensure complete 
booking of expenditure by seeking timely submission and adjustment of the bills 
within the close of the financial year.   
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of the Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 11) 

The Committee in its 56 th Report had raised serious concern over the whole 
planning process whereby the substantial part of the Plan period is wasted in 
obtaining clearances for the different schemes/projects.  Even then a s many as 14 
schemes still remain to be approved even when two and a half year of the Plan 
period has already gone. Three major schemes viz  Computerization and 
networking of Post Offices, Setting up of Automatic Mail Processing Centres and 
Support for pay ment of wages under NREGS for which substantial allocation has 
been provided are yet to be approved by the competent authority.  The Committee 
take serious note of the statement made by the Secretary during the course of 
deliberations that the projections are little complicated and come back from the 
Ministry of Finance.  It appears that sufficient homework has not been done by the 
Department before start of the Plan period resulting into moving of files from the 
Department of Posts to the Finance Ministry and vice versa.  The Committee 
disapprove the way the projects are being planned by the Department.  There is an 
urgent need to analyze the position critically and streamline the whole Plan process. 
The Secretary herself has acknowledged that procedures ar e the problem area 
which are not considered as a focus area. The Committee strongly recommend that 
the process of evaluation/restructuring of the schemes and obtaining various 
clearances etc. should be over before 1 st April of the first year of Five Year P lan so 
that the targets set under the different schemes are realistically achieved.  The 
Committee urge that atleast now the Department should properly coordinate with 
the Ministry of Finance so that the clearances for these 14 schemes are obtained 
immediately.  The concerns of the Committee in this regard should also be duly 
communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
Action Taken by the Government 
           The Plan Scheme namely „Support for Payment of NREGS beneficiaries 
through Post Office s‟ was introduced during the year 2008 -09. An amount of 
Rs.22.18 crore was spent during the year 2008 -09  out of the total approved  
allocation of Rs.80 crore. During the current year 2009 -10, EFC has been approved 
for Rs.100 crore. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 12) 
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the previous year 
had expressed concerns over the mis -match bet ween the physical and financial 
achievement during Tenth Plan period. At that time, the Committee had been 
informed that the last estimates with regard to electronic equipments were not 
correct.  During the examination of the Demands for Grants of the current year, the 
Department has changed its stand and has stated that the reason for mis -match 
between physical and financial achievement during Tenth Plan period was due to 
the fact that DGS&D bills are not adjusted well within the stipulated time. The 
Committee observe that the Tenth Plan period was over by 31st March, 2007 and as 
such there is no point in change of reasons as given in the month of 
February/March, 2009.  The Committee are being misled by giving different 
versions for the under -spending of the outlay without analyzing the actual reasons 

concerning the implementation of different schemes.  This is a serious matter which 
the Department need to explain to the Committee.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       As far as estates management is conc erned it is stated that there is no direct 
correlation between the physical targets and the financial outlay as the cost 
involved is calculated  on a project -to-project basis, which in turn, depends upon 
the tentative  schedule of accommodation  and CPWD s chedule of rates, drawings 
and preliminary estimates. Also, physical achievements have exceeded the financial 
allocations in cases where construction was commenced in Tenth Plan but 
completed in the first year of Eleventh Plan 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of the Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Para. 15) 
The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their recommendation in 
56th Report an exclusive Rural Bus iness Division has started functioning at the 
Directorate w.e.f. 29th May, 2008. The Committee find that with the devolution of 
funds, functions and functionaries in respect of the items as indicated in the 
Eleventh Schedule in pursuance of 243G of the Con stitution to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions more and more funds are being directly released to PRIs under different 
Central/State sector schemes.  India Post has to play an important role in providing 
financial services to the local bodies in rural areas.  Be sides with the launching of 
some of the flagship schemes like NREGA, a lot of opportunities are being created 
for the Department to expand the area of activities in rural areas.  The Committee 
hope that with the setting up of an exclusive Rural Division, t he action would be 
taken to capture the rural market.  The details of the initiatives taken by the said 
Department should be communicated to the Committee periodically. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       Besides, NREGS, Rural Business Division deal wit h the collection of rural price 
data and tie - up  with State Bank of India. The Department of Posts has entered 
into a tie -up with the  State Bank of India to sell its asset and liabilities products 
through identified Post Offices. The Scheme is operationa l in 19 Postal Circles 
throughout  the country. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of the Chapter I) 

 
(Recommendation Para. 16) 
As per the norms 10 per cent of t he Plan allocation has to be provided to the 
North East.  During the Tenth Plan period, Rs. 874.67 crore were provided under 
the Plan schemes out of which the actual spending for North East was only Rs. 
40.59 crore which is just 4.5 per cent. During the ye ars 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, 
under the Revenue Section Rs. 15.52 crore  and    Rs. 27.40 crore respectively 
remained unspent and were transferred to the non -lapsable pool of resources.  
Under the Capital Section during the year 2007 -08, the expenditure was jus t Rs. 
5.40 crore against RE of Rs. 17.82 crore.  Worst is the position during the year 
2008-09.  The expenditure is just Rs. 0.76 crore against the BE of Rs. 33.10 crore.  
The Committee find that even when 10 per cent allocation of the outlay is 
exclusively being earmarked for the North East, it is not giving the desired results 
as most of the outlay in a year remain unspent and is being transferred to non -
lapsable pool of resources.  The Committee feel that more than allocating outlay, 
the need is to ensur e that outlay is effectively utilized and physical targets 
achieved.  The whole scenario of implementation of the schemes in the North East 
need a review.  There is an urgent need to find out the difficulties being faced in 
these areas in the implementatio n of the schemes and take the desired action to 
address the problems. The Department should take the concrete action on the 
suggested lines and inform the Committee accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       During 2007-08, funds to the extent of Rs.32.54 crore was allocated under 
Revenue (Plan) segment  and Rs. 17.82 crore under Capital (Plan) segment out of 
which Rs.29.44 crore and Rs.5.40 crore amounting total to Rs.34.84 crore were 
utilized. Funds to the tune of Rs. 15.52 crore  was transferred  to Non Lapsable 
funds. 
       During the year 2008 -09, Rs.60 crore was earmarked  for North East which 
consists of Rs.26.90 crore  Revenue (Plan) and Rs.33.10 crore Capital (Plan). The 
allocation at RE stage was reduced to Rs.41.06 crore with the breakup of Rs.29.60 
crore under Revenue and Rs.11.46 crore under capital. Out of this, Rs. 16.38 crore 
under Revenue and Rs. 2.50 crore under capital  making total to Rs. 18.88 crore 
were utilized.   
         All efforts are being made by the Department  for earma rking 10% of the 
Budget allocation for North East and also for maximum utilization of funds. In some 
cases the scope of implementing some  of the schemes  in North East is not feasible 
due to environmental and developmental condition of the Region. However , the 
Department is taking all necessary steps for maximum utilization of funds 
earmarked for the North East. Funds allocation for the year 2009 -10 in respect of 
North East Region are shown in Annexure I 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of the Chapter I) 
 

 
(Recommendation Para. 19) 
The Committee find that as on January, 2008, 634 proposals for opening of 
new Post Offices were received out of which 207 requests w ere found justified. 
Besides during the year 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, 707 requests were received for 
opening of new Post Offices/upgradation of Post Offices, out of which, 142 requests 
were found justified. The Department has further stated that new Post Offices could 
not be opened as SFC had not been approved. The Committee observe that since 
the SFC has now been approved, the Post Offices which are justified should be set 
up expeditiously and the Committee informed accordingly. The Committee would 
also like t o be apprised about the State/UT wise position of the requests and the 
status of setting up of Post Offices in this regard. The details in this regard may be 
furnished separately for opening of new Post Offices and the cases of upgradation 
of Post Offices. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
          Circle wise breakup  of proposals as on 1 st January, 2008 and the proposals 
received during the years 2008 -09 and 2009-10 are enclosed in Annexure II & III 
respectively. 
          Opening of Post Offices depends not only requests received and requirement 
evaluated but also on target allotted under plan Scheme and availability of 
manpower. While a large number of requests for opening of Post Offices were 
received  during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, only about one  third of the 
requests were found to fulfill the norms prescribed by the Department. 
Notwithstanding the aforesaid,  no action could be taken to open these Post Offices 
in view of the fact  that new creation of posts of BPMs is  not permitted despite Plan 
targets having been allotted to the Department. 
         Targets for opening of 105 Sub Post  Offices by relocation / redeployment ( 
50 new  Sub Post Offices by redeployment  and 55  by relocation) and 50 Branch 
Post Offices  by relocation have been allott ed to the Circles  in December,2009. 
Besides, target for opening of 300 Franchise outlets has been issued to the Circles 
for providing basic postal facilities  in urban areas and upcoming urban areas. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of the Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 22) 
The Committee understand that new Post Offices and sub -Post Offices are 
first being opened and then relocated due to being unviable.  F rom the information 
provided by the Department, it appears that the discretionary power provided to 
Chief Postmasters General to relax the norms for opening of Branch Post Offices 
was not being judiciously used.  Their decision to open the new Post Office made 
neighbouring Post Office unjustified and there was the need to relocate the Post 
Office.  Even when the Department has clarified that relocation is done in very rare 
and unavoidable circumstances, the specific allocation of outlay for relocation under 
the Plan Schemes indicates otherwise. The Committee would like to be apprised 

about the no. of cases of relocation of POs and SPOs during Tenth Plan and in the 
Eleventh Plan so far to understand the matter and comment further in this regard.  
Action Taken by the Government 
          10th Plan Policy Imperatives had directed the Department that all units which 
do not fulfill the norms  and where the resources are underutilized need to be 
closed down. Instead of restoring to closing down the Post Offices, th e Department 
has taken the alternative route  of rationalization/relocation of some of the Post 
Offices  for optimum utilization of the resources . So, during the 10 th Plan period   
210 Post offices not fulfilling the  distance norm were relocated to other  needy 
areas. During 11th Plan, physical target  for relocation of 55 SOs and 50 BOs  have 
been issued to the Circles. Financial allocation for the purpose is Rs. 2.75 lakh and 
0.5 lakh respectively. This is one time expenditure. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 23) 
 The Committee feel that solution to the problem of relocation lies in opening 
of mobile Post Offices.  In this regard the Committee in its 56 th report had 
suggested opening of mobile  Post Offices. Instead of giving heed to the suggestion 
of the Committee, the Department could not accept the recommendation.  When 
the issue was reiterated during the course of e xamination of DFG 2009 -10, the 
Department explained that mobile Post Offices used to function in remote and hilly 
areas and their reintroduction can be considered.  This explains the insensitivity of 
the Department to the issues raised and the suggestions made in various reports.  
The Committee emphasize that Mobile Post Offices equipped with all the possible 
postal services and equipments can be of great help to the people residing in the 
far-flung tribal, hilly and other difficult areas particularly in th e unfavourable 
weather conditions which make it impossible for these peoples to go outdoor.  More 
so the financial institutions and banks may also not be interested to open Branches 
in these areas due to the commercial considerations.  Another solution is the 
weekly bazaars of postal services at prominent places in rural areas like Panchayat 
Headquarters.  Close coordination with the local bodies can solve the problem of 
space for these weekly bazaars.  Besides providing the postal facilities at the 
doorstep of the customers, said mechanisms can also address the problem of 
relocation of Post Offices and the save the money spent in this exercise.  The 
Committee hope that now when the Secretary has agreed to consider this 
suggestion of the Committee, concrete action would follow which need to be 
communicated accordingly.     
Action Taken by the Government 
       Out of 1,55,015 Post offices ( as on 31.3.2009), 1,39,144 Post Offices are 
located in rural areas. Thus 89% of the Post offices are functioning in rura l areas. 
Average area and population served per Post Office are 21.21 sq.km and 7175 
respectively. This compares favourably with other countries including advanced 
ones. 

       Postal facilities in terms of  regular delivery of mail at the door step of eve ry 
customer, collection of letters from letterboxes and selling of stamps /stationery are 
provided by the Department in every village irrespective of  terrain through delivery 
agents  while on their regular visit to respective beats. 
   The Department is c onstantly in process of providing postal facilities  through 
various means like opening of new BOs, alternative means of providing basic postal 
facilities  through PSSKs, relocation of Post Offices  to needy areas etc. Licensed 
Stamp Vendors and licensed postal agents  are also functioning at many places. 
When Department of Posts is able to network all the Rural Post Offices , the 
Branch Post Masters will be provided with the handsets and will be able to transact 
his business  anywhere in his jurisdiction.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of the Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Para. 28) 
The Committee further find that the Post Offices are not providing the 
competitive rate of interest on the various small saving schemes.  The information 
provided by the Department indicates that there is a huge difference between the 
rate of interest of Posts and SBI under the five year recurring deposit scheme.  
Posts provides rate of interest @ 7.50 percent whereas SBI is giving 9 percent rate 
of interest.  The choice of the customer is obvious. Further disappointing is the fact 
that with such apparent difference, the Ministry of Finance is not ready to move 
from its stand of not rev iewing the rate of interest even when the representations 
in this regard as received by the Prime Minister Office are being forwarded to them.  
In the competitive market, it is utmost necessary to keep track of the frequent 
changes in the rate of interest and act fast.  With Posts having no such autonomy 
and with the stand of the Ministry of Finance not to review the position is quite 
dismal. The Committee strongly recommend that the issue of revision of rate of 
interest under POSB scheme should again be taken with the Ministry of Finance and 
the concerns of the Committee duly communicated to the Cabinet Secretary and 
the Ministry of Finance.   
Action Taken by the Government 
      The issue has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance at number of times 
but Ministry of Finance  has not agreed to raise interest rate of Small Savings 
Schemes. Views expressed by the Committee are being communicated to the 
Cabinet Secretary and Ministry of Finance. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 41 of the Chapter I) 
 
 

(Recommendation Para. 30) 
The Committee feel that the people particularly in rural India recognize Post 
as related to the postal operations.  The Committee would like to  suggest to 
consider adding the word `Bank‟ with the India Post in its nomenclature.  This 
would make the public aware that Post Offices also provide Banking facilities.  
Besides publicity about the various activities of the Post in rural areas can be done  
through various mechanisms like displaying the information at various prominent 
places like  Panchayat  Headquarters, dispensaries, schools etc.  Besides Gram 
Sabha meetings can be the best platforms in this regard.  The Committee 
recommend to use the sug gested mechanisms for advertisement of the various 
schemes of the Department in order to enlarge its customer base in rural areas. 
Action Taken by the Government 
       Department of Posts is carrying out banking activity  on behalf of Ministry of 
Finance  as an operative agent of the Small Savings Schemes. Ministry of Finance 
make the rule pertaining to  all Small savings Schemes  under the powers vested 
with it through the Government Savings Bank Act 1873, Government Savings 
Certificates Act 1959 and Publi c Provident Fund Act 1968. Under these Acts , 
Department‟s mandate is limited to the collection and disbursement of the money 
deposited there in and maintenance of records. Hence, it may not be appropriate to 
add the word “Bank” with India Post as the Bank s are governed by separate set of 
Acts /Rules which is/are all together  different from the Acts/Rules followed by the 
Department  to carryout banking activity.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 31) 
The Department of Posts is involved in the disbursement of wages to 
labourers under one of the flagship programme of the Government i.e. NREGA.  The 
share of the Posts in the  disbursement of wages all over the country is 46.14 
percent.  However the State-wise data in this regard indicates that in Andaman and 
Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,  Uttar Pradesh and  Uttarakhand, 
the percentage share is even less than 20 percent.  Further in Chandigarh, Daman 
and Diu, Lakshadweep, Nagaland and Puducherry the percentage share is nil.  The 
Committee would like to know the State specific reasons for th e low percentage of 
involvement of Posts in the disbursement of wages under NREGA in the said States.  
The Committee would  also like the Department to work hard and take all the 
initiatives to increase its share in all the States/UTs. 
Action Taken by the Government 
             The Department of Posts is involved  in the disbursement of wages to 
labourers under  one of the flagship programme  of the Government i.e. NREGA. 
The share of the Posts in the disbursement of wages  all over the country  for the 
Financial Year 2009-10  upto the month of February, 2010 is 41.3 %. However, the 

State-wise data in this regard indicates that inAndaman and Nicobar , Arunachal 
Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh , 
Meghalaya, Punjab a nd Uttar Pradesh  the percentage share is even less than 20 
percentage. Further in Chandigarh, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Nagaland, 
Pondicherry  and Tamilnadu the percentage share is nil. In Lakshadweep. 
Chandigarh and Daman & Diu no  NREGS wages were dis bursed either through 
banks or through post offices. Further, in the state where disbursement of wages 
through post offices is low, disbursement is done through nationalized banks, local 
co-operative banks  or by other means or in cash. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 37) 
The Committee have persistently been recommending in their reports to give 
autonomy to the Department particularly with regard to taking initiatives to extend 
their clientele and introduce new products on their own.  In this regard, at last the 
Cabinet has finally given approval on 13 December, 2007 for appointment of two 
public sector Fund Managers, For mation of Investment Division and sanction and 
creation of Ex cadre posts for the Investment Division.  T he likely date of 
implementation of above decision as informed by the Department was 1 October, 
2009. The Committee would like to be informed whether the aforesaid proposal has 
finally been implemented.  The Committee hope that the autonomy provided to the 
Department would provide similar level playing field to PLI/RPLI and the revenue by 
way of interest and returns through investments of the Department would increase.  
Action Taken by the Government 
As per the Cabinet decision, UTI asset Management  Company and SBI Funds 
Management Private Limited have been appointed as  Funds Managers. Agreement 
was signed with the two Funds Managers on October,6, 2009.  The CIO of the 
Investment Division taken on loan basis  from RBI, has joined on October, 9 th, 
2009. Accordingly, investments of net accretions to POLIF and RPOLIF finally 
started w.e.f. November,2009 as per IRDA Regulation. As regards providing 
autonomy to DOP to expand  clientele and introduce new products , the matter is 
still under correspondence with the Ministry of  Finance regarding removal of 
restrictions imposed on DOP for extension of scope so as  to cover other clientele, 
introduction of new products/schemes etc.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 41 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 40)  
Project Arrow was launched with the objective of making a ta ngible 
difference in the Post Office operations that matter to the common man.  Initially 
the project was proposed to be extended to 4500 Post Offices after the pilot phase.  

Even when the success of the scheme is a different experience to customers both in 
terms of ambience of the Post Offices as well as in terms of providing improved and 
reliable services as acknowledged by the Department,  the proposal to extend the 
facility to 4500 Post Offices was stalled. The reason for this has been stated to be 
as f und constraint.  The Committee further note that no separate funds were 
earmarked for the Project Arrow under Eleventh Plan outlay and the expenditure 
was being met from the outlay provided for computerization and networking.  The 
Committee cannot appreciate the reasons of fund constraints particularly when the 
proposed outlay for the computerization and modernization have remained unspent 
during the first two years of Eleventh Plan.  Out of total allocation of Rs. 2011.50 
crore only Rs. 281.87 crore could be utilized.  The funds remaining unspent could 
have been utilized for the Project Arrow which have been a success experience.  
The Committee would like to recommend that the initial plans of extending the 
facility to 4500 Post Offices should be maintained  and the detailed strategy in this 
regard should be chalked out.  The Committee would also like to be apprised 
whether the approval of the Ministry of Finance was obtained for using the outlay 
earmarked for computerization and networking in the Project Arrow. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
       „Project Arrow‟  plan activity was introduced only after the 11 th Plan Outlays 
were approved  and hence no fund could be marked to the activity. When the 
activity was launched as  a pilot project  funds to the exte nt of Rs. 12 crore was 
utilized from various other activities. During  Phase -I of the project funds to the 
extent of Rs.74 crore were utilized from the outlay available under „Computerisation 
& Networking of Post Offices‟ to cover 500 offices. The funds we re diverted  as the 
activity „Computerisation & Networking of Post Offices‟ was not approved till then. 
Further, when the Department proposed to cover 4500 offices  under Project arrow 
funds to the extent of Rs.887 crore  was requested  out which Rs.512 cr ore was 
sought as additional outlay from Planning Commission over and above the 11 th Plan 
Outlays. 
         Since the funds could not be provided by the Planning Commission, as 
requested, the scheme was restricted to cover only 500 Post Offices with an out lay 
of Rs. 65 crore which was again met from the outlays available under the activity  
„Computerisation & Networking of Post Offices‟. No further diversion of fund  is 
possible at this stage as all plan activities have been approved  including 
„Computerisation & Networking of Post Offices. With no additional funds being 
provided for meeting the demand, the Department is not in a position to extend the 
facility of „Project Arrow‟ to 4500 Post offices even though the activities under 
Project arrow have been widely appreciated both by customers and Postal staff. 
           However, despite all the constraints  the Department will extend Project 
Arrow to 500 more Post Offices  in 2010 -11. Thus 1500 Post Offices  would be 
covered under Project Arrow.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 35 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Para. 47) 
The Committee find that the Department has appointed a consultant who 
would study the inter national experience with regard to functioning of regulatory 

mechanism there and would recommend accordingly.  The Committee feel that with 
the increased activities of the Department, entry of strong private sector in the core 
functioning of the Department , likely increase in Banking and insurance activities 
with the Post Bank becoming reality and the autonomy provided to insurance 
sector, there is an urgent need to take expeditious decision on the issue of 
regulatory mechanism.  The Department should accordingly take the desired action 
so that the regulatory mechanism is set up expeditiously. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
        The Department has appointed a consultant to aid it in the preparation of a 
draft legislation to replace the existing Indian Po st Office Act,1898. In this context, 
the consultant is required to carefully identify and evaluate  various options  for 
administering and regulating the Postal Services  and make recommendations. One 
of the aspects to be considered  in this regard  along with other proposals  is the 
creation of a regulatory authority . While legislating , the need or otherwise of a 
regulatory mechanism will also be examined. 
            Banking and insurance activities of the Department of Posts are agency 
functions. Since  sectoral regulations  are already in place, incorporating these 
activities of the Department into the ambit of regulation may lead to regulatory 
overlap.  
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 41 of the Chapter I) 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE 
OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Para. 17) 
 In all the documents furnished to the Committee, the expenditure position in 
respect of  the Outlay provided to North East has been indicated as nil. The 
Committee have subsequently been informed that the expenditure was reported  
from the North East and the nil expenditure shown was due to the fact that Circles 
are booking expenditure under the Common Head 3201 and 5204 for Revenue and 
Capital Outlay, which is not bifurcated at the final compilation stage. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the aforesaid clarification. The Committee feel that 
the outlay and expenditure position for North Ea st need to be monitored 
periodically. As such it is not justified to show the expenditure under the Common 
Head by the Circles. The Department should issue suitable instructions to Circles to 
maintain outlay and expenditure position separately which may be  monitored and 
reflected in the Budget documents. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 

        Action has been initiated to show the expenditure against the Heads of 
Account 2552 (Revenue) and 4552 (Capital). Guidelines have also been sough t  
from the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 20) 
 As per the data made available to the Committee, out of total 1,29,484 
EDBOs/EDSOs mostly operating from rural areas, 73,000 are runnin g on loss. The 
number of sub-Post Offices operating mostly in urban areas is 24,722, out of which 
9,668 are running on loss. While appreciating the fact that the Department has the 
mandate to reach to the last person of the society, the Committee feel that  such a 
high number of Post Offices running on loss is a matter of grave concern. The 
Committee in its 56 th Report had emphasized on the involvement of local bodies 
particularly Panchayati Raj Institutions while taking the decision for setting up a 
new Post Office. While reiterating the earlier suggestion, the Committee would like 
to add that the proposals for setting up of new Post Offices, need to be deliberated 
in the meetings of Gram Sabhas. Besides helping  the Department in examining the 
viability of the new Post Offices, this mechanism would also address various other 
problems confronting the Department like availability of land for setting up the new 
Post Offices etc. Another suggestion in this regard that the Committee would like to 
make is the invo lvement of local MPs and MLAs. The Department should frame 
suitable guidelines in this regard and circulate to various Circles for implementation. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Rural Postal Network is subsidized to the extent of  66.66% of the cost in 
normal rural areas and up to 85% of the cost in hilly, tribal and inaccessible  areas. 
Therefore, the loss is inherent in the Policy of providing Postal Facilities within reach 
of People.  However, efforts are being made to reduce the loss by rationalizatio n of 
staff  and providing new services  at Branch Post Offices. Most requests  are 
received through representatives of the people or sponsored by the Gram Sabhas. 
These requests are given immediate attention. Incidentally, necessary instructions  
for involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions and local MPs and MLAs in setting up 
of Post Offices have been reiterated to Circles  for implementation of the 
Recommendations of the Committee. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 25) 
The Committee have been informed that a monitoring mechanism has been 
set up to regularly monitor physical and financial performance during the course of 
the year.  With the said mechanism in operation, the Department was  unable to 
furnish the data of performance of these outlets Circle -wise, State -wise.  The 
Committee fail to understand the utility of such mechanism in such a scenario.  The 
Committee emphasize that more than setting various monitoring mechanisms, it is 

utmost necessary that these mechanisms function effectively.  The State -wise and 
Circle-wise data in this regard should be maintained and made available to the 
Committee. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
         90 Franchise Outlets were opened  during the 10th Plan (2006-07). During the 
first two years  of 11th Plan, 760 Franchise Outlets have been opened and target for 
opening of 300 Franchise Outlets have been allotted to the Circles during the year 
2009-10. Financial allocation has not been given for open ing of these outlets. 
However, Financial Plan support is proposed to be given during the remaining two 
years of the Plan. Quantum of business transacted by these Franchise outlets 
during April –June 2009 is enclosed. (Annexure-IV) 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 27) 
Today‟s customer has the vast option and is always looking for a bank which 
fulfils all his requirements at one place.  There are limited services available under 
Post Office Saving Bank Scheme, if we compare with that of the services provided 
by Commercial Banks and private Banks.  Loan facility which is the major 
requirement of the customer is not available in the Post Offices.  The solution is the 
Post Bank which is still a t the conceptualization stage.  Pending setting up of Post 
Bank, the Department has entered into an MOU with SBI to act as business 
correspondents in 5,000 Post Offices across the country.  But that too is not 
working well as acknowledged by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence. 
In this background the Committee feel that there is no other option available with 
the Post Office.  The Post Offices have to think and act professionally.  There is an 
urgent need to address to all the constraints being  faced in the setting up of the 
Post Bank.  This is all the most required for the survival of the Post Offices.  The 
Post Bank should be the reality within the stipulated time frame and the action plan 
should be chalked out and implemented to achieve the objective. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
           The proposal to set up Post Bank Of India (PBI) is at a conceptual stage. 
The aim of establishing PBI is to provide full banking  services primarily to the rural 
poor who still do not have the privilege of modern banking facilities and still have to 
depend on the informal sector for their credit requirements. The scheme of “Studies 
and miscellaneous expenditure  relating to setting up of Post Bank of India” is the 
Plan activity  included in the 11 th Five Year Plan with an outlay  of Rs.5.00 crore . 
The Appraisal Memo has been approved  in  March,2009, which covers action plan 
such as  feasibility /detailed studies and study visits within  and outside India to 
understand the various  aspects of a Bank in or der to prepare a detailed roadmap 
for establishing Post Bank of India. 
       Request for Proposal from various institutions have been issued  for 
preparation of a roadmap for establishing Post Bank of India. 

 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 32) 
The Committee have been informed that the workers‟ wage account under 
NREGA is a type of POSB Account and Ministry of Finance gives remuneration for 
these accounts at the same rate that is applica ble for POSB accounts.  In this 
context, during the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, Rs. 117.89 and 123.33 crore 
respectively were provided by the Ministry of Finance.  The projections during the 
year 2009-10 are for Rs. 129.49 crore.  The Committee feel that there is hardly any 
difference between the amount received during the year 2008 -09 and projections 
for 2009-10, which indicates that the Department do not intend to increase its base 
in this regard.  The Department should clarify the position so as to enable  the 
Committee about the expansion plans of the Department under NREGA. 
Action Taken by the Government 
        The committee have been informed that the worker s‟ wages account under 
NREGA is a type of POSB Account and the Ministry of Finance  gives remuner ation 
for these accounts at the same rate that is applicable for POSB Accounts. In this 
context, during the year 2007 -08  and 2008 -09 Rs.117.89 and Rs.123.33 crore 
respectively were provided  by the Ministry of Finance. The projections during the 
year 2009-10  are for Rs.129.49 crore. The case of remuneration to workers wages 
account under NREGS is under consideration between the Department of Posts and 
Ministry of Finance. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 35) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that pursuant to their recommendation 
made in the 56th report, the Economic Survey, 2008-09 and the Hon‟ble President‟s 
address to Parliament on 4 th June, 2009 have emphasized on revamping of Post 
Offices to become outreach units for financial inclusion.  The Committee feel that 
great opportunities are being provided through various Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes particularly through NREGA.  The Department has to think professionally 
and act fast to use t he opportunity to capture the rural market particularly when it 
has the added advantage of its reach to the last person of the society through its 
vast network and also the fact that it has the backing of the Government in all 
respects including the funding through the Plan schemes.   
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
     As suggested by the Committee, the Department of Posts is moving  
professionally and acting  fast to use the opportunity to capture the rural market.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
    

(Recommendation Para. 36) 
The Committee further observe that Hon‟ble President in her aforesaid 
address has also referred to providing scholarships and social security schemes 
through accounts in Post Offices and phased transition to smart cards.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the detailed strategy of the Department to 
achieve the set goal. 
Action Taken by the Government 
(RB) 
           The Department is willing to operate social security schemes a nd providing  
Scholarship through accounts in Post Offices. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para. 41) 
The Committee note that during Eleventh Plan no new projects were taken 
and the whole allocation is being used for completion of spill over of projects.  Even 
then a lot of spill over projects still remain to be completed.  Such spill over 
projects include 25 projects under construction of Post Office buildings, 5 projects 
under construction of administration office building and another 5 projects for under 
construction of staff quarters. The Committee disapprove the way the Plan scheme 
is being implemented. Equally disappointing is the fact that the Department has not 
bothered to know the im pact of spilling over of the projects on the cost of the 
projects. The Committee strongly recommend that the detailed report of spill over 
of projects should be obtained from different circles and the Committee apprised 
about the same. Besides it should be  ensured that all the spilled over projects are 
completed within the stipulated time frame.  
Action Taken by the Government 
           A building project depends upon many  factors such as preparation of 
Drawings, approval from municipal authorities, finali zation of pre -contractual 
formalities and award of tenders etc. However, many new building projects have 
already been started and the fund for these new projects stands released during 
the current financial year. 
             As on 1 st April 2009, there we re 35 spillover projects of 10 th Plan ( i.e 25 
Post Office Projects, 5 Administrative Office Projects and 5 Staff Quarters Projects). 
Out of these 35 spillover Projects, the work of 11 Post Offices Projects, 2 
Administrative Office Projects and 5 Staff Qua rters Projects involving 27 staff 
quarters was already completed during the period April,2009 to December, 2009. 
In order to complete the remaining 17 spillover projects of 10 th Plan (14 Post Office 
Projects and 3 Administrative Office projects), monitorin g is done at various levels 
by holding Review Meetings etc. Further all the Heads of Circle sand Engineering 
Wing  were instructed  to monitor /review these on-going projects  at personal level 
for their  early completion. 

           As regards impact of spillover of the projects  on their cost, it  is submitted 
that the nature of building projects is such that all the projects can not be 
completed within a particular time as the completion period varies depending on 
their size, location etc. besides subject to availability of funds. 
          At the start of 11 th Plan, there were 110 spillover projects of the 10 th Plan 
(84 Post Office Projects, 13 Administrative Office Projects  and 13 Staff Quarter 
Projects). Amongst them,  75 spillover Projects ( 59 PO,8 AO & 8 SQ Projects 
involving 18 staff quarters) were completed during the first and second year of 11 th 
Plan. 
           Detailed report in respect of 70 projects (out of 75 completed spillover 
projects of 10th Plan) have revealed that the total expenditure on the project ( from 
starting to completion) were within the AA&ES amount of the project. Hence there 
was no impact of spillover of the projects on their cost. The detailed report of 70 
spillover projects have been annexed. (Annexure „V‟) Information in  respect of 
remaining 5 spillover projects is being obtained. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
(Recommendation Para. 43) 
The Committee are pleased to note that at last the Committee of Secretaries has 
cleared the proposal regarding the commercial utilization of land.  The Department has been 
asked to put up a Cabinet note on the kind of model that they propose to utilize.  The 
Committee would like to emphasize that the Cabinet note should be put up expeditiousl y 
and all actions initiated to get the approval of the Government.  The Committee hope that 
with the aforesaid approval, the Department would be able to utilize its land optimally.  
While recommending for optimum utilization of land of Post Offices, the Co mmittee would 
like to emphasize that it should be ensured that the identity of India Post is maintained.   
Action Taken by the Government 
        A draft Note for Cabinet on a proposal for public – private partnership for development 
and management of post al estates  has been prepared and circulated to the subject matter 
Ministries  for their views. Once the views of all concerned  subject matter Ministries are 
received further necessary action for placing the proposal before the cabinet would be 
taken.  
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
(Recommendation Para. 49) 
The Committee note that ED employees form substantial part of the total employees 
of the Postal Department.  Such a great number of employees should al so get all the 
pensionery benefits being provided to the regular employees.  The decision in this regard 
should be taken at the earliest and the Committee informed accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
It is stated that Gramin Dak Sewaks are not reg ular employees and they are not 
covered by  FR/SR, CCS (Pension) Rules 1972. They work for a part time ranging for  3 to 5 
hours per day .Their Service conditions are regulated by separate set of Conduct and 
Employment Rules. The Apex court held that, they  are holders of civil posts and outside the 
regular civil service. The Recommendations of Talwar Committee for provision of Pension to 
this category of workers  was examined by a Group of Ministers  in 1998 and it was not 
agreed  and an element  of payment severance allowance  is introduced. 

Recent One- man Committee also examined this issue  and did not recommend  the 
Pension to GDSs as the Pension Scheme is withdrawn  for regular employees also from 
01.01.2004. In order to provide social security, the Com mittee recommended annuity 
scheme on contribution basis. The Department accepted the  recommendation and approval 
of Cabinet is also obtained for examining this in consultation with Nodal Ministries.  
    Action has already been initiated and Pension Regula tory Authority  has been requested 
for formulating proposal and for evolving detailed guidelines.  The scheme is being  taken 
up with the Ministry of Finance for formal approval. 
 
Department of Posts  letter. No.20-2/2009-BGT (1st Report) Dated  20.03.2010.  
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE 
 
ANALYSIS OF  ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/  
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No.5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Paragraph Nos: - 1,2,3, 4, 5,7,8,9 ,14,21, 24, 26,29,38, 
39, 42, 44, 45, 46, 48, 50 & 51 
 
 Total 22 
 Percentage 43.14 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Paragraph No:- 13, 33, 34 & 39  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 7.84 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Paragraph Nos:- 6, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 19, 22, 23, 28, 30, 
31, 37, 40, 46 & 47 
 
 Total 15 
 Percentage 29.41 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim nature:- 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  17, 20, 25, 27, 32, 35, 36, 41, 43 & 49  
 Total 10 
 Percentage 19.61 

 
Confidential  
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-10) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4th May, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1615 hours in Committee Room „62‟, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi.  
P R E S E N T 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Shri Charles Dias 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
8. Shri Abdul Rahman 
9. Shri Prem Das Rai 
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
11. Dr. Bhola Singh 
12. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya  
15. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
16. Shri P. Rajeeve 
17. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
S E C R E T A R I A T 
  
  18. Shri T. K. Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
  19. Smt. Sudesh Luthra, Director 
 
 
 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sittin g of 
the Committee.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration and adopted the same without any modifications:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in thei r First Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Second  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting. 
 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in their Third  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Information Technology). 
 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Fourth  Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to  the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above  
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. The Commi ttee also decided to undertake on -the-spot study tour 
during the month of June, 2010. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 