1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  
Demands for Grants (2010-11)] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
 
20 

2 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
  Demands for Grants (2010-11)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08/03/2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08/03/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page No. 
 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
Chapter  I    Report 
 
 1 
Chapter  II    Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
17  
Chapter  III    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of replies of the  Government 
 
43  
Chapter  IV    Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 
44  
Chapter  V    Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim in nature 
 
51  
APPENDICES 
 
*I Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Information Technology (2010-11) held on 17 th 
February, 2011. 
58 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee. 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (2010-2011) 
 
           
          Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Prem Das Rai 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
17. Dr. Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
20. Shri C. Sivasami 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
*25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri T.K. Mukherjee          -   Joint Secretary 
2.     Smt. Sudesh Luthra          -   Director  
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar   -   Under Secretary 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relati ng to Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. T he Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology furnished their Action Taken Notes on  21 July, 2010. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 17 February, 2011. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report. 
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi              Chairman 
24 February, 2011                                           Standing Committee on 
05 Phalguna,1932 (Saka)                                        Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  
 
 
  
 
(iii) 

6 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relating to Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the 
Department of Telecommunications. 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010 and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. It contained 37 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Report have been received and categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 4, 5, 6, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19, 23, 24, 25, 29 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36 
& 37 
 
 Total 20 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 3, 9, 10, 17, 21, & 27  
 Total 07 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the reply is of interim 
nature 
 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 8, 11, 14, 16, 20, 22, 26, 28 & 33  
 Total 10 
 Chapter V 

7 
 
4. The Committee trust  that utmost importance would be give to implementation of 
the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not 
possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter s hould be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to 
the Recommendations contained in Chapt er-V of this Report should be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
A. Shortfall in the utilization of Outlays 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee note that there has been a persistent trend of allocating reduced 
Outlay as compared to the projections in all the first three years of the Eleventh 
Plan. Further, there has also been considerable reduction of Out lay at the RE 
stage. Not only that there are considerable shortfalls in the utilization of even the 
reduced allocation both under IEBR and GBS components. The aforesaid trend 
has been continuing from the Tenth Plan. The Committee in their earlier Reports 
have repeatedly been expressing serious concern over the under utilisation of 
scarce resources. Inspite of this, there has been no improvement in this regard. 
The data furnished by the Department substantiates the aforesaid observation of 
the Committee. The total allocation during 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 both under 
IEBR and GBS components was Rs. 63212.59 crore at BE stage which was 
reduced to Rs. 51817.54 crore at RE stage. Thus, there was reduction of Rs. 
11395.05 crore at RE stage. Even the reduced allo cation was not effectively 
utilized. During the aforesaid three years, there was under spending to the tune of 
Rs. 21585.56 crore i.e. 41.66 per cent of allocation provided at RE stage. All this 
clearly indicates that there are serious problems in implemen tation of various 
schemes/projects. The detailed analysis project/scheme -wise has been done in the 
later part of the Report. While expressing their serious concern over the sorry 
state of affairs with regard to implementation of various projects/schemes, t he 
Committee strongly emphasize that the Department should take concrete action 
with respect to each of the project/scheme which is under performing to ensure 
optimal utilisation of the Outlay. 
 
 
 

8 
 
7. The Department of Telecommunications has stated as under:- 
 
“Both BSNL and MTNL are making sincere efforts for effective utilization of 
outlays by ensuring effective and timely planning and estimation of requirements 
and through rigorous monitoring and review of each ongoing project. The 
progress of fund utiliz ation is also being carefully monitored through regular 
reviews at the highest levels of the Department for optimal utilization of outlays.” 
 
8. There is persistent trend of allocations lesser than projections, reduction of outlay at 
RE stage and considera ble shortfall in the utilization of allocation both under IEBR and 
GBS components of the Department of Telecommunications.  Even when the Committee 
have consistently been exhorting the Department to take concrete initiatives and the 
concerns were reiterated in the recommendation of the Committee made in Eighth Report, 
the Department has simply stated that the progress of fund utilization is being carefully 
monitored through regular reviews at the highest level of the Department for optimal 
utilization of ou tlay.  The details of the monitoring done as well as the outcome of the 
monitoring has not been indicated in the reply. Not only that, the Department has not 
bothered to present before the Committee the status of utilization of outlay earmarked 
during the year 2010 -11 which could have indicated the results of the monitoring and 
regular reviews as stated in the action taken note.  While expressing strong concerns over 
the under utilization of outlay under IEBR and GBS components, the Committee again 
emphasize to take all the desired initiatives so that the allocations made are meaningfully 
utilized.    
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
B. Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that budgetary suppo rt is provided for executing the 
Universal Service Support Policy (USSP) through the Universal Service 
Obligation Fund (USOF) for bringing rural telecom connectivity. The resources 
for meeting the same are generated through a Universal Service Levy (USL) 
which is 5 per cent of the Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) earned by all the 
telecom operators except pure value added service providers like internet service 
provider, voice mail etc. From the data furnished by the Department, the 

9 
 
Committee note that total am ount collected as USL upto 2008 -09 is Rs. 25331.36 
crore whereas the total allocation made to the Department of Telecommunication 
is Rs. 10371.44 crore i.e. just 40.94 per cent. With regard to the status of 
utilisation of Outlay, the Committee find that wh ereas there are shortfalls in 
utilisation of Outlay provided under IEBR and GBS component, the financial 
performance of USO Fund is quite satisfactory. The position of not allocating 
resources commensurate with the collections even when the allocation are being 
fully utilized is a matter of concern particularly when there is a definite source of 
funding for USO Fund and there are big challenges of providing connectivity in 
rural and backward areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
quantum of allocation for USO activities should be increased further so as to 
improve the rural telecom connectivity. Besides, the Committee would also like to 
be informed about the use of the remaining Outlay collected through Universal 
Service Levy.” 
 
10. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 “As per provision of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, collections under 
Universal Service Levy (USL) are credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and 
allotment of funds for USOF is made through parliamentary approvals. During the 
Financial years 2002 -03 to 2009 -10, final allotment of funds received through 
Parliamentary approval was transferred to USO fund in the concerned years and 
the entire allocation so made and transf erred to USO fund was optimally utilized 
in the respective years. In BE/RE 2009 -10, the Department had taken up the case 
for allotment of Rs. 3000 crore, for USO Fund, with Ministry of Finance. 
However, an allotment of funds of Rs. 2400 crore was received from Ministry of 
Finance against this demand both in BE and RE 2009 -10. In BE 2010 -11, Rs. 
3000 crore was sought for allocation to USOF. However, an allotment of Rs. 2400 
crore only has been received from Ministry of Finance. The concern of the 
Standing Committee in this regard to the recommendations for allocation of funds 
for USO activities commensurate with the collections made under USL was also 
communicated to Ministry of Finance by the Department. In reply, the Ministry of 
Finance has inter -alia intim ated that while considering the proposal of DoT for 
constitution of USOF initially, Cabinet had decided the Department of 
Telecommunications to consult Ministry of Finance at the time of finalizing the 
amount to be transferred to USOF and thus, Ministry ha s the authority to decide 
the quantum of funds to be transferred to USOF. Ministry of Finance have further 
stated in their letter ibid that the amount towards transfer to USOF is provided on 
the basis of claims pending with the DoT for releases from USOF. However, the 
concerns of Standing Committee have been noted by Ministry of Finance for 
necessary action during RE 2010 -11.  The Ministry of Finance has further stated 
that the Licence fee from telecom service providers is an important component of 
Non-Tax Revenue of the Union Government.  It also stated that as the 
Government is committed to finance various flagship programmes of the 
Government, the resources cannot be locked by simply lodging them in the Public 
Account of India.”  
 
11. As per the data furn ished by the Department of Telecommunications during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants 2009 -10, the rural teledensity as on January, 

10 
 
2010 was just 22.18 per cent as compared to 113.78 per cent urban teledensity.  The 
aforesaid data indicates that a lot needs to be done to improve rural telecom connectivity.  
Even when Budgetary support is provided through the Universal Obligation Fund and it 
has definite source of funding, the amount generated through universal service levy to 
generate this fu nd is not being fully allocated to the Department of Telecommunications. 
The examination has revealed that up to 2008 -09 just 40.94 per cent of the funds generated 
under USO fund were allocated to the Department of Telecommunications.  Now when the 
Committee raised this issue in their recommendation, and matter was taken up by the 
Department of Telecommunications with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance 
has tried to assert their authority over the quantum of funds to be released to Department 
of Telecommunications out of USO fund.   
As per the action taken note, while considering the proposal of Department of 
Telecommunications for constitution of USO fund initially, the Cabinet had decided the 
Department of Telecommunications to consult the Min istry of Finance at the time of 
finalizing the amount to be transferred to USO fund. While appreciating the aforesaid 
decision of Cabinet, the Committee observe that this does not mean that the Ministry of 
Finance has discretion to allocate the money for r ural telecom connectivity.  The 
Committee again emphasize that USO fund has been created for the particular purpose i.e. 
to provide rural telecom connectivity and it has definite source of funding as such the 
outlay as requested by Department of Telecommunications should be provided particularly 
when the entire allocations are being utilized.  Further there should not be any cut at the 
RE stage.  The Committee therefore reiterate their concern that the Ministry of Finance 
would transfer the amount from USO fund as demanded by the Department of 
Telecommunications during the year 2011-12. 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 

11 
 
C. Telephone Advisory Committees 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Telephone Advisory Committees (TACs) at the district and zonal l evel is an 
important  mechanism to keep an oversight over the implementation of various 
telecom projects funded by the Government. In this connection, the Committee 
observe that the meetings of TACs are not being regularly held. These 
Committees are an imp ortant link between users i.e. public at large and the 
implementing agencies and can play pivotal role by getting the feedback from the 
users and communicating to the implementing agencies for taking the desired 
action accordingly. As such the Committee emphasize that the Department should 
closely monitor the outcome of the sittings by these Committees. The necessary 
action in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
13. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“During the calendar year 2010, till date a total of 8 meetings have been held in 
various Telecom district of MTNL, Delhi and 3 meetings are held in MTNL, 
Mumbai. A total number of 136 meetings of TAC have been held by BSNL since 
October, 2009. Circle-wise list is as below:- 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of BSNL Circle 
(No. of SSAs) 
No. of 
TAC 
Meetings 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name of BSNL 
Circle (No. of SSAs) 
No. of 
TAC 
Meetings 
1. Andaman & Nicobar 
(1) 
0  15. North-East – I (3) 1 
2. Andhra Pradesh(22) 21  16. North-East – II (3) 2 
3. Assam (7) 0  17. Orissa (13) 1 
4. Bihar (19) 5  18. Punjab (11) 6 
5. Chattisgarh (6) 0  19. Rajasthan (24) 4 
6. Gujarat (18) 9  20. Tamilnadu (17) 0 
7. Haryana (9) 3  21. Uttaranchal (7) 2 
8. Himachal Pradesh (6) 2  22. UP (East) (31) 16 
9. Jammu & Kashmir (5) 0  23. UP (West) (18) 9 
10. Jharkhand (6) 2  24. West Bengal (14) 2 
11. Karnataka (19) 2  25. Chennai TD (4) 0 
12. Kerala (12) 9  26. Calcutta TD (4) 0 
13. Madhya Pradesh (34) 26   Total (343) 136 
14. Maharashtra (30) 14  
 
14. The Committee find from the data made available by the Department of 
Telecommunications that during the calendar year 2010 till date 8 meetings of Telephone 
Advisory Committee (TAC) have been held in various telecom districts of MTNL, Delhi 
and 3 meetings are  held in Mumbai. With regard to the meetings of TAC by BSNL, the 
Committee have been informed that 136 meetings were held in various Circles since 

12 
 
October, 2009. The examination of the Circle wise details indicates that in many of the 
circles viz. Andaman and Nicobar, Assam, Chattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Tamil Nadu, 
Chennai TD, Calcutta TD, no meeting of TAC was held during the said period. In other 
States also the number of TACs meetings as compared to the number of Circles under 
BSNL is very poor excepting Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, UP East 
and UP West. The Committee would like to be apprised about the specific reasons for 
having no meetings or very less meetings in the various Circles.  
The Committee in their earlier recommendation had also desired to be apprised of 
the outcome of the sittings of TACs.  The Department has not responded in this regard. 
The Committee again emphasize that TACs is an important mechanism to keep an 
oversight over the implementation of various telecom projects and are an important link 
between users i.e. public at large and the implementing agencies and as such there is an 
urgent need to monitor the outcome of these meetings. The Committee as such while 
reiterating their earlier concern would like the Department to closely monitor the outcome 
of the meetings and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
D. Chairman of Zonal and District Telephone Advisory Committees 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee further note that as per the existing position local sitting Member 
of Parliament is the co-Chairman of TACs. In this regard, the Committee may like 
to draw the attention of the Department to the district level Vigil ance Committees 
constituted by the Union Ministry of Rural Development where the local sitting 
Member of Parliament is the Chairman. The Committee recommend that the local 
Member of Parliament should be the Chairman of district and zonal TACs on the 
line of the Vigilance Committees of the Ministry of Rural Development”.. 
 
16. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 

13 
 
“Presently, the concerned GMTD, BSNL is made the Chairman in the TAC and 
the Hon‟ble M.P.s are given the st atus of Co -Chairman, due to the following 
reasons (i) the area of jurisdiction of a TAC may exceed the constituency area of 
the Hon‟ble M.P. and (ii) there may be more than one M.P. in a TAC.” 
 
17. On the recommendation of the Committee to appoint the loca l Member of 
Parliament as the Chairman of District and Zonal TACs on the line of Vigilance 
Committees of the Ministry of Rural Development, the Department has expressed certain 
difficulties which include representation of more than one MP in TAC and the ar ea of 
jurisdiction of TAC exceeding the Constituency area of the Hon’ble MP. The Committee 
find that similar problems may have been encountered while constituting Vigilance 
Committees at Zonal and District level by the Ministry of Rural Development. The 
Department instead of finding solutions has tried to justify the existing position whereby 
the concerned GMTD, BSNL is made the Chairman of TAC. While expressing displeasure 
over the way the recommendation has been addressed by the Department, the Committee 
emphasize to reconsider the recommendation and the way out to resolve the difficulties 
may be found in consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development.  
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
 
E. Expansion of Broadband 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Broadband Policy, 2004 envisages a target of 20 million broadband subscribers 
by the end of 2010. As per the information provided by the Department, there are 
8.03 million broadband subscribers as on January, 2010. Compared to the status 
of telephone conn ections to the level of 582.04 million, the Committee feel that 
there are big challenges before the Department regarding the broadband 
expansion in the country. In this connection, the Committee may like to highlight 
the finding of a survey by the World Ba nk as given in the documents of the 
Department according to which every 10 per cent increase in access to broadband 
connectivity leads to 1.38 per cent increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
The finding is very much relevant in the context of our countr y particularly at the 
period of slowdown of International economy which has an impact on Indian 
economy too. The reasons attributed for slow broadband penetration are (i) lack 

14 
 
of interest in private operators for broadband network expansion in rural areas 
being non-remunerative, (ii) non -availability of spectrum for mobile broadband, 
(iii) difficulty in laying of OFC network due to issues related to right of way 
clearances and high cost of right of way charges, (iv) high backhaul cost, (v) low 
PC penetration, (vi) high cost of Customer Premises Equipment (CPEs), (vii) low 
literacy levels, (viii) lack of local content and (ix) poor power supply. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the position State/UT -wise in this 
regard should be analyzed by t he Department and all the desired action taken to 
increase the broadband connectivity in the country.” 
 
19. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
There are total 9.21 million broadband subscribers in the country as on  
31.05.2010. State wise broadband connections (as on 31 May, 2010) are given 
below:- 
 Sl. 
No. 
State/Telecom Circle Broadband 
subscribers 
(As on 31.05.2010) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 4220 
2 Andhra Pradesh 815016 
3 Assam 55979 
4 Bihar (including Jharkhand) 124689 
5 Delhi* 902714 
6 Gujarat 563973 
7 Haryana 194571 
8 Himachal Pradesh 47712 
9 Jammu and Kashmir 39389 
10 Karnataka 1003813 
11 Kerala 570454 
12 Maharashtra (including Mumbai, Goa) 1632942 
13 Madhya Pradesh (including Chattisgarh) 320383 
14 North East ** 30534 
15 Orissa  146184 
16 Punjab 438763 
17 Rajasthan 286402 
18 Tamil Nadu (including Chennai) 1106884 
19 Uttar Pradesh (including Uttaranchal) 487030 
20 West Bengal (including Kolkata) 443948 
21 All India *** 1167 
 Total 9216767 
* Includes Noida, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad and Faridabad 
** Includes Meghalaya, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Nagaland & Tripura 
*** Some of the companies have not provided the state -wise break-up of 
their subscribers 
 
Initiatives taken to increase the broadband connectivity in the country is as under:- 
 
o Auction of spectrum for 3G and BWA services to the private operators 
through e -auction has already been completed. This will facilitate 

15 
 
proliferation of broadband through mobile handset and wireless 
technology. 
 
o Outdoor and indoor usage of low power Wi -Fi and Wireless Broadband 
systems in 2.4  GHz – 2.4835 GHz band has been delicensed. 
 
o The use of low power indoor systems in 5.15 -5.35 GHz and 5.725 -5.875 
GHz has also been delicensed. 
 
o Based on directions of the Cabinet Secretariat, an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee was set up to prepare Concept Paper on “Broadband for All – 
An Integrated Approach for Rural Areas”. The recommendations of the 
IMC re under consideration. GIS mapping to ascertain incremental OFC 
length is going on. Detailed Project Report (DPR) will be submitted 
accordingly. 
 
o BSNL plans to launch following more attractive post paid plans to its 
customers to make broadband affordable:- 
 
(i) Launch IPTV services in 25 more cities. (50 already connected); 
(ii) Launch more value added services like VVoBB, Desktop security 
in 2010-11; 
(iii) Make prepaid broadband service more attractive; 
(iv) Implement motive application in all the circles by June, 2010; 
(v) Training its call center and field unit‟s executives to have an up to  
date knowledge of its plans, packages and special offer; 
(vi) Sensitization of the overall BSNL fronts end executives for 
extending helping hand to the customers. 
(vii) Implementation of a utility software to help customer to finalize 
his/her broadband plan as per his/her requirements; 
(viii) Regular up gradation of broadband plans/tariffs; and 
(ix) Instant redressal of customer complaints. 
 
20. The Committee have been apprised that as per the Broadband Policy 2004 the 
target has been set for 20 million subscribers by the end of 2010. The Committee would like 
to be apprised as to how far the target has been achieved. The Department in the Action 
Taken Note has further enumerated various initiatives taken to increase the broadband 
connectivity in the country. The aforesaid initiat ives include setting up an inter -Ministerial 
Committee to prepare Concept Paper on “Broadband for All – An Integrated Approach 
for Rural Areas”. It has been stated that the recommendation of IMC are under 
consideration. The Department has also stated that GIS Mapping to ascertain incremental 
OFC length is going on and the Detailed Project Report (DPR) would be submitted. The 

16 
 
Committee would like to emphasize that the recommendations of inter Ministerial 
Committee should be implemented expeditiously. Besides  there is an urgent need to follow 
the implementation of various initiatives taken/being taken by the Department.  
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
F. Broadband connectivity to Gram Panchayats, Government High Secondary Schools 
and Public Health Centres  
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“As per the Broadband Policy, 2004, the Department has targeted to provide 
broadband connectivity to all Gram Panchayats, Government High Secondary 
Schools and Public Health Centres by 2012. The existing status wi th regard to 
Gram Panchayats is that out of 242279 Village Panchayats only 79924 Gram 
Panchayats i.e. only 32 per cent could be broadband enabled as on February, 
2010. The State/UT wise information provided by the Department indicates that 
the coverage of broadband to Gram Panchayats is very low in almost all the 
States/UTs excepting Kerala, Goa and Puducherry where almost 100 per cent 
Gram Panchayats have been covered. Besides, the performance in Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands and Nagaland is also very good. The Committee are surprised to 
note that in Daman and Diu, Dadar and Nagar Haveli and particularly Chandigarh 
which is one of the best planned cities in the country, none of the Village 
Panchayats, in these areas have been broadband enabled. The Committee  may 
like to know the reasons for non coverage of all the Village Panchayats under 
broadband expansion programme particularly in the case of Chandigarh which has 
17 Village Panchayats. Besides, the Committee emphasize that performance with 
regard to provid ing connectivity to rural Panchayats should be evaluated 
State/UT- wise and the necessary corrective action taken so that all the Village 
Panchayats are covered by the stipulated time frame i.e. by 2012. With regard to 
the target of broadband enabling of t he Higher Secondary School and Public 
Health Centres the existing status has not been indicated in any of the documents 
furnished by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
existing position and the steps initiated by the Departme nt to provide broadband 
connectivity to all these schools and Public Health Centres by the stipulated 
deadline of 2012.”.”  
 
22. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“Gram Panchayat coverage: There are a total of 2,42,069 village panchayat across 
the country. Out of these, 91,365 Village Panchayats are covered through ADSL 
& Wi-Max broadband. In Chandigarh Secondary Switching Area (SSA), there are 
23 village Panchayats out of which 16 have already been covered. Effort s are 
being made to cover remaining village Panchayats of Chandigarh. Further, BSNL 
has planned to cover all gram Panchayats by March, 2012. The major barrier in 
growth of broadband in rural areas is non -availability of connectivity upto village 
level. It has been targeted that all 2.5 lakh Gram Panchayats would be extended 
broadband connectivity by 2012, from where broadband connection can be given 
to higher Secondary Schools and Public Health Centres. For the said purpose, in 

17 
 
order to lay OFC Cable, GIS m apping of existing network is going on. After GIS 
mapping, DPR will be prepared and approval will be taken from competent 
authority.” 
 
23. The Committee note that the Government has set the target of covering 2.5 lakh 
Gram Panchayats by 2012. To achieve th e purpose, GIS Mapping of existing network is 
going on. After GIS Mapping, DPR would be prepared and approval would be taken from 
the competent authority. Thereafter, OFC cables would be laid. The Committee further 
find that for enabling Higher Secondary S chools and Public Health Centers, broadband 
connectivity would be dependent upon the connectivity provided to Gram Panchayats. As 
such, the Committee strongly recommend that expeditious action should be taken to 
complete the GIS Mapping followed by approva l of the competent authority so that OFC 
cables are laid and the village Panchayats, Higher Secondary Schools and Public Health 
Centres are provided broadband connectivity.  
The Committee in their earlier recommendation have also requested to indicate the 
status of broadband connectivity of Higher Secondary Schools and Public Health Centres 
which had nowhere been indicated in the documents furnished by the Department. Even 
when the specific information was desired by the Committee as per the recommendation,  
the Department has not furnished the information. While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised about the status of broadband 
connectivity in this regard. 
(Recommendation Para No. 21) 
 
G. e-Auction of 3G Spectrum 
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that date of 3G auctions has been shifted several times and 
at last now the auction is scheduled to begin from 9th April,  2010. As informed 
by the Department, the rules of auction have been  announced on 25th February, 
2010 and they are on the DoT‟s website. As regards eligibility, as mentioned in 
the rules, all existing Universal Access Service License holders or existing 
telecom operators are eligible to bid in this auction. In addition, fo reign entities 
that have experience of running 3G services are also eligible to bid. With regard 

18 
 
to security aspects in the e -Auction, the Committee have been informed that the 
best practices followed by various auctions done by the Office of Communication  
in the UK, and the Federal Communications Commission in the USA have been 
taken  into consideration. Besides, the auctioneers who are working for DoT have 
long experience of conducting auctions in various European and American 
markets. The Department have  also informed the Committee that suitable steps 
have been taken by the Department to ensure free, fair and transparent e -Auction 
for the 3G spectrum. The Committee hope that the Department auction the 3G 
spectrum in a successful manner. In this regard, th e Committee would like to 
recommend that by undergoing the process of e -Auction, the Department should 
ensure that the Indian auctioneers also get the experience and expertise so that the 
country need not depend on the foreign countries for conducting such  auctions in 
future.” 
 
 
 
 
25. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
 “The e-Auction was carried out using software which has been developed by the 
Auctioneer. This is professional software which is proprietary in nature devised 
for the purpose of auction of radio spectrum exclusively. The Ministry has 
requirements of certa in safeguards to be built in the e -Auction system to ensure 
the security of the entire process for a fail -safe operation. Further the auctioneer 
was expected to have the experience of conducting at least 5 e-Auctions in the last 
3 years. An Evaluation Comm ittee had gone through the process of technical and 
financial evaluation with reference to a Request of Proposal (RFP) and finally 
selected the Auctioneer. 
 
Any company including Indian Company could be considered to act as an e -
Auctioneer in the future if  it would meet the terms and conditions required to 
conduct e-Auction prevailing at that time.” 
 
26. The Committee find from the Action Taken Note that for the purpose of e -Auction 
of 3G spectrum, the auctioneer was expected to have the experience of condu cting 5             
e-Auction in the last three years. As per the reply of the Department, any company 
including Indian company could be considered to act as an e -Auctioneer in the future if it 
would meet the terms and conditions required to conduct e-Auction prevailing at that time. 
The Committee observe that e -Auction for 3G spectrum was the first e -Auction in the 
country. The Committee fail to understand as to how the criteria for conducting atleast  5   
e-Auctions in the last three years could be met unle ss the Indian Auctioneer get the 
opportunity to be involved in the process. If this is the position with the e -Auction 

19 
 
conducted by the Indian Government, it cannot be expected that Indian Company with no 
experience would get the opportunity to act as an a uctioneer in some other country. There 
is an urgent need to find ways and means to train the Indian Auctioneer and give them first 
opportunity to handle the task. With this view, the Committee had recommended to involve 
Indian Auctioneer in the process of e-Auction so that they get some sort of experience and 
can be involved in the future e-Auctions. While reiterating the earlier recommendation, the 
Committee exhort the Department to find out ways and means to train the auctioneers in 
India in the e-Auction process.  
(Recommendation Para No. 27) 
 
H. Radiation from Towers 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Department have inserted a Clause in the Access Service Licence  
Agreement which stipulates that Licensee shall conduct audit and provide self 
certificates annually as per procedure prescribed by Telecommunication 
Engineering Centre (TEC) / or any other agency authorized by Licensor from time 
to time for conforming to limits / levels for antennae (Base Station Emissions) for 
general public exposure should conform to the Guidelines prescribed by 
International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) from 
time to time. The Committee observe that besides th e aforesaid provision, there is 
an urgent need on the part of the Department to ensure that the licence actually 
conduct audit annually and the limits/levels for antennae (Base Station Emissions) 
for general public exposure are within the limits prescribed by ICNIRP.” 
 
28. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
 “For implementation of the guidelines, regarding emission by Base Transceiver 
Station (BTSs), issued by the International Commission on Non Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), instructions have been issued by the Department, 
in the month of April, 2010, to all CMTS/UASL Licensees.” 
 
29. The Committee are disheartened to note from the information furnished in the 
Action Taken Note that the Department has not addressed the issue to the extent it requires 
especially taking into account the seriousness of the issue of which has wider ramifications 
affecting the lives of many people. The Department seems to have been just contented by 
issuing the guidelines, regard ing emission by Base Transceivers Stations (BTSs) issued by 

20 
 
International Commission of Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection to all CMTS/UASL 
Licensees. The Committee also note that reply of the Department is completely silent on the 
issue of conducting Annua l Audit and the limits/levels for antennae (Base Station 
Emissions) are within the limits prescribed by International Commission on Non Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and once again strongly emphasize that earnest steps are taken to conduct 
the Annual Audit to check that the radiation are within the prescribed limits/levels and the 
findings be informed to the Committee accordingly.  
 
***** 

21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 From the data made available by the Department, the Committee find  that the problem of 
under utilization of resources under IEBR and GBS component is continuing during the years 
2008-09 and 2009-10.  With regard to the performance of the Department during the year 2008 -
09, the percentage of utilization of Outlay under IE BR component is 61.26 per cent and with 
regard to GBS, it is 94.76 per cent.  During the year 2009 -10, the utilization status with regard to 
IEBR, is 58.69 per cent as on January, 2010.  The situation is alarming in case of GBS 
component.  During the examination of Demands for Grants (2010-11), the Department informed 
that out of Rs. 431 crore allocated at BE/RE stage during 2009 -10, the utilization status was Rs. 
85.59 crore i.e. 19.86 per cent upto January, 2010.  Even during the course of oral evidence h eld 
on 26 th March, 2010, the Department informed that the expenditure status was Rs. 85.80 crore 
i.e. 19.91 per cent upto February, 2010.  To the surprise of the Committee, the Department 
informed in response to one of the post evidence question received f ive days after the evidence 
that the expenditure is now 81.88 per cent.  The Committee express serious concern over the 
status of utilization of Outlay reported to the Committee.  The Department need to clarify how 
the spending under GBS component which was just 19.91 per cent during the course of evidence 
could magically grow to 81.88 per cent after mere five days after evidence.  The substantial 
shortfall in utilization of resources is a matter of concern particularly when the important projects 
of Govern ment of India are starving for funds.  Again the Committee emphasize that the 
Department need to analyse the performance of various schemes programmes to find out the 
shortcomings and take the desired action to address the various problems. The concrete ac tion 
taken in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed according. 
Action Taken by the Government 
The utilization of plan outlay for 2009-10 is given as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
  RE *Expenditure % age Utilization 
IEBR 15397.00 11320.48 73.52% 
GBS 431.00 387.38 89.88% 
Total 15828.00 11707.86 73.97% 
 *The accounts are yet to be finalised. 
 The expenditure under GBS was Rs. 85.80 crore i.e. 19.91% up to February, 2010 which 
increased to Rs. 387.38 crore i.e. 89.88% in March, 2010.  This increase was due to the reason 

22 
 
that payment was made by DoT to BSNL and MTNL.  This reimbursement to BSNL a nd MTNL 
was made for the OFC based network for Defence Services/AFNET project executed by these 
PSUs till March, 2010. 
  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 Indian telecom market is one of the fastest growing markets in the world.  The network 
expansion of the Department envisages a total of 600 million connections by 2012.  As on 
January, 2010, India has 582.04 million telephone s ubscribers (both wireline and wireless).  
India is proud to have the status of second largest network in the world after China.  The data 
provided by the Department indicates that the targets with regard to telephone connections and 
teledensity in urban areas are being over achieved.  However, a lot needs to be done with regard 
to telephone connectivity in rural and backward areas.  The urban teledensity as on January, 
2010 is 113.78 per cent whereas the rural teledensity is just 22.18 per cent.  With regar d to the 
reasons for slower growth of rural teledensity as compared to that of urban teledensity, the 
Committee have been informed that it is primarily due to poor electric power supply, lack of 
adequate infrastructure, approach roads and demand for teleph one connections in the far -flung 
and scattered areas.  In this regard, the Committee are of the view that use of non -conventional 
sources of energy, particularly the solar energy is the answer to the problem with regard to the 
shortage of electric power su pply.  Therefore, there is an urgent need to coordinate with the 
Department of non -Conventional Energy Resources and find out ways to address the problem.  
With regard to providing telephone connections in far flung and scattered areas, the Committee 
have been apprised that telecom network is not technically and commercially viable.  The 
Committee emphasize that these areas are in immediate need of telephone connectivity.  
Providing better communication networks would certainly help the population living in  far flung 
and scattered areas to connect with the main stream and the rest of the country.  As such these 
areas needs special attention by the Public Sector Undertakings particularly when a lot of 
Government funding out of USO Fund and GBS component are b eing provided to address the 
problem of connectivity in rural areas.  Therefore, the Department should find ways and means 
to address the various problems of rural areas so as to ensure that the teledensity in these areas is 
at par with the urban areas.  
Action Taken by the Government 
As per Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, the objective of USO Fund is to 
provide access of telegraph services  to people in the rural and remote areas at affordable and 
reasonable prices. The schemes of USO Fund have accordingly been formulated to fulfill this 
objective as stipulated under the Act. The provision of Village Public Telephone under different 
schemes has provided the access to telegraph services. 

23 
 
 In order to bridge the rural-urban divide, USO Fund in past had taken up various schemes 
under Stream-II and Stream-III of Indian Telegraph Amendment Rules 2004 and 2006, where the 
focus was on provision of individual telephone lines and creation of Shared Mobile 
Infrastructure for provision of mobile services in the rural and remote areas of the country.  
 Under Stream II of USO Fund a scheme was launched for installation of Rural Household 
Direct Exchange Lines (RDELs) in 1685 Short Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs) out of 2647 
total SDCAs in the country, where cos t of providing telephone was more than the revenue 
earned. As on 31.03.2010, about 79.3 Lakh RDELs have been provided under this scheme with 
subsidy support from USO Fund.  
 Under Stream III , Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme (Phase -I) was launched to 
provide subsidy support for setting up and managing 7387 (revised from 7871) number of 
infrastructure sites (towers) in 500 districts spread over 27 states for provision of mobile services 
in the specified rural and remote areas, where there was no existing fixed wireless or mobile 
coverage. Villages or cluster of villages having population of 2000 or more and not having 
mobile coverage were taken into consideration for installation of the towers under this scheme.  
The infrastructure so created is being share d by three service providers for provision of mobile 
services. As on 30.04.2010, 7146  towers i.e. about 96.74 % have been set up  under this scheme. 
Utilizing the infrastructure so created,  mobile services are being provided in a phased manner 
from these towers. A capacity of about 20 Million lines will be created, once the scheme 
becomes fully operational.  
 In addition, under proposed Phase II of the Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme, abo ut 
10,000 towers are planned to be set up in the rural and remote areas of the country.  Villages or 
cluster of villages having population of 500 or more and not having mobile coverage are being 
taken into consideration for installation of the towers under this scheme. This scheme shall be 
launched in the year 2010-11.  
Isolated and remote uncovered villages/ cluster of villages having scattered population 
are also proposed to be covered with mobile services using „Micro Telecom Systems‟.  About 
5,000 additional towers are proposed to be set up under this scheme. 
All the above schemes help in the creation of infrastructure in the rural and remote areas 
of the country, which in turn shall enable increase in the rural teledensity. 
As regards the suggestion of t he Committee to use Non- Conventional Energy Resources 
to circumvent the power problem in rural and remote areas USOF would like to apprise the 
Committee that  USO Fund in consultation with MNRE had invited bids for 28 Renewable 
Energy sites on a pilot basis one in each state.  Agreements with successful bidders in this regard 
are being signed. Based on the outcome of pilot projects, use of renewable energy resources in 
rural areas will be encouraged in future USO Fund schemes. 
 Further an Agreement has also  been signed for providing solar mobile charging stations 
in villages through TERI‟s project of Lighting a Billion Lives (LaBL)     
 

24 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
 dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that the Public Sector share in the network 
expansion has declined over the years both for the wireline  and wireless, whereas, the Private 
Sector has improved their share in both the sectors.  This is substantiated by the data furnished 
by the Department which indicates that the share of Public Sector in the wireline segment has 
declined from 97.56 per cent  in 2006 to 85.06 per cent in January, 2010 whereas in the case of 
Private Sector, their share has grown from 2.44 per cent to 14.94 per cent during the same 
period.  In the wireless sector too, there is marginal decrease in the share of the Public Sector.   It 
was 21.44 per cent in 2006 which declined to 12.85 per cent in January, 2010.  The Private 
Sector has grown from 78.56 per cent to 87.15 per cent during the said period.  The Committee 
conclude that there are serious problems affecting the functioning  of the two PSUs i.e. MTNL 
and BSNL whereas the Private Sector with their efficiency and marketing strategies have grown 
over the years.  The Public Sector is losing its share even in the wireline segment which was 
previously their domain.  The aforesaid s cenario of under -performance by PSUs is an area of 
concern and since the BSNL and MTNL are under the administrative control of Department of 
Telecommunications, the Department too have great responsibility.  The various shortcoming 
affecting the functionin g of the PSUs need to be assessed and corrective action taken 
expeditiously.  The Department should take action on the suggested lines and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Department has been assessing the functioning of the PSUs and regular monitoring is 
being done at the highest level in the Department.  
 
 The decline in the share of Public Sector is basically due to   
 
(i) Entry of new service providers in the existing license area with aggressive tariff plans. 
 
(ii) Aggressive marketing of services by the operators at different points of time. 
 
 However, measures are being taken to arrest the decline. Some of the measures being 
taken are as below:  
 
(i) Improving mobile coverage by expansion of existing network and covering the new areas. 
 
(ii) Matching and innovative tariff plans and other subscriber friendly schemes are being 
launched by BSNL. 
 
(iii) Launching of new services and bundling schemes in the network for retention of the 
subscribers.  
 

25 
 
 During the Financial Year 2009 -10, in spite of mobile customers churn out, BSNL had 
been able to add 16.64 million net GSM connections. 
 
 The fall in market share and in profit with regard to wire line is mainly due to rapid 
expansion of mobile services and manifold increase in mobile connections, which provide greater 
convenience and cheaper calls and consequent shifting of traffic to more convenient mobile 
phones. Both the PSUs, BSNL and MTNL, are making all out efforts to retain wire line 
customers and by increasing their utility by providing several Value Added Services including 
broadband services, IPTV services, Video phones and Video C onferencing services etc to 
increase utility of landline even though the overall market of wire line is stagnating and there are 
many competitors now. Efforts are being made for modernization of wire line network like 
induction of new IP Based NGN (Next Ge neration Network) switches, inductions of IT enabled 
customer care and  commercial billing system like CDR billing, ERP etc, provisioning of new 
services at affordable prices, availability of latest CLI phones, introduction of various attractive 
tariff pla ns and improved marketing strategies, rigorous monitoring of Quality of Service 
parameters as defined by TRAI and integrated focus on enterprise business. A separate business 
vertical has been erected for increasing the business with large corporate, gover nment 
departments and enterprises.                      
   
 Project Udaan  has been specifically launched by BSNL for improvement in sale of 
products and services in respect of landline and broadband which will enhance the market share 
of BSNL by way of pro active selling, better customer interface and automated processes. 
External plants are being upgraded and extending connectivity in new upcoming colonies 
through new technologies like OF cable to meet demand for landline in all areas. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that the physical achievement of the scheme as on January, 2010 is 
61633 VPTs out of the stipulated target of 62302 VPTs.  However, the stipulated target date to 
complete the scheme by the extended deadline of November, 2009 has not been  met. 669 VPTs 
could not be installed even within the extended deadline of November, 2009.  The reasons 
attributed for the same are the location of these uncovered villages in more difficult and 
inaccessible terrain in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Megh alaya, Chattisgarh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Uttranchal and Manipur.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to provide 
VPTs expeditiously to these areas keeping in view their strategic locations.  As such all the 
desired initiatives should be taken to provide connectivity to these areas.  Further, the option of 
using alternate technologies need to be explored in these areas to ensure that the remaining VPTs 
are provided within the shortest possible time.  The desired action should be taken in this regar d 
and the Committee be kept apprised.  Another noticeable development with regard to the 
extension of deadline is the fact that BSNL has extended the deadline to September, 2010 
without the formal extension given by the Department. 
Action Taken by the Government 

26 
 
 As on 30.04.2010, 61678 VPTs, out of 62302 VPTs to be provided, have been installed. 
Review meeting has been carried out at the level of Administrator USO Fund with CMD, BSNL. 
BSNL has been apprised about the displeasure of the Committee and has once again  been asked 
to provide the remaining 624 VPTs without any further delay.  For provision of remaining VPTs, 
extension of roll out period up to September, 2010 is being issued.   As regards the VPTs under 
Bharat Nirman provided after the expiry of extended r oll out period, the settlement of subsidy 
claims for the same shall be done after imposition of the LD charges as per the terms and 
conditions of the Agreement. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)   
 The Committee note that the scheme is progressing satisfactorily as on February, 2010 
about 7.5* lakh line have been provided.  During 2009 -10 out of the stipulated target  of  1.2** 
lakh RDELs, about 1.18** lakh RDELs have been provided.  Nevertheless, the Committee feel 
that BSNL need to do a lot on the aspect of their sustainability and take suitable steps in this 
regard. 
*The figure should be 75 lakh. 
**The figure should be 12 lakh. 
***The figure should be 11.8 lakh. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 USOF would like to apprise the Committee that the RDEL scheme has come to an end on 
31.03.2010. Under this scheme about 79.3 lakh RDELs were provided in 1685 SDCAs in the 
country where the cost of providing RDELs was more than the revenue earned. Out of these, 
about 16.1 lakh RDELs were provided in the year 2009-10 against a target of 12 lakhs. 
  As per the Agreements signed with Service Providers, subsidy support is being provided  
for the provision as well as operation & maintenance of RDELs for a period of five years i.e. up 
to 31.03.2010, the validity period of the Agreement. After expiry of the validity period of five 
years, the responsibility of operation & maintenance of RDELs  lies with the Service Provider as 
spelt out in the Agreement. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
 dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that in terms of percentage the scheme has achieved 95.22 per cent 
of the physical targets as on February, 2010.  However, the target date for its completion has 
been extended to March, 2010 from September, 2009.  The reasons for the same as explained to 

27 
 
the Committee are lack of infrastructure, inconsistencies in the revenue record in many villages 
and non-availability and irregularity of power supply in the villages.  Taking into consideration, 
the importance of rural connectivity, the Committee feel tha t the Department should ensure that 
BSNL crease out all aforementioned problems and ensure that the scheme is completed in time.  
The Committee are also of the opinion that to address the problem of power supply in the 
villages, the option of using renewab le source of energy particularly solar energy as 
recommended in the earlier part of the Report should be explored at the earliest.  The Committee 
further desire that the urgent steps be initiated to make larger use of the renewable source of 
energy like solar energy in all the areas.   
Action Taken by the Government 
As the scheme progresses, left out areas which are located in more difficult and 
inaccessible terrain and are as such hard to reach, would also be covered. As the basic objective 
of USO Fund is to provide accessibility of telecom services to people in the rural and remote 
areas at affordable and reasonable prices, the roll out period was extended for service providers 
keeping in view their difficulties. Thus the extension in roll out has been giv en after due 
consideration of the ground realities and difficulties / problems being faced by the Service 
Providers in achieving the targets.  
Keeping in view the criticality of power supply position in rural areas, USO Fund had 
invited bids for 28 Renewab le Energy sites on a pilot basis at the rate of one in each state.  
Agreements with successful bidders in this regard are being signed. Based on the outcome of 
pilot projects use of renewable energy resources in rural areas will be encouraged in future USO  
Fund schemes. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 Broadband Policy, 2004 envisages a target of 20 million broadband subscribers by the 
end of 2010.  As per the information provided by the Department, there are 8.03 million 
broadband subscribers as on January, 2010.  Compared to the status of telephone con nections to 
the level of 582.04 million, the Committee feel that there are big challenges before the 
Department regarding the broadband expansion in the country.  In this connection, the 
Committee may like to highlight the finding of a survey by the World Bank as given in the 
documents of the Department according to which every 10 per cent increase in access to 
broadband connectivity leads to 1.38 per cent increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  The 
finding is very much relevant in the context of our country particularly at the period of slowdown 
of International economy which has an impact on Indian economy too.  The reasons attributed 
for slow broadband penetration are (i) lack of interest in private operators for broadband network 
expansion in rural ar eas being non -remunerative, (ii) non -availability of spectrum for mobile 
broadband, (iii) difficulty in laying of OFC network due to issues related to right of way 
clearances and high cost of right of way charges, (iv) high backhaul cost, (v) low PC penetr ation, 
(vi) high cost of Customer Premises Equipment (CPEs), (vii) low literacy levels, (viii) lack of 

28 
 
local content and (ix) poor power supply.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the position State/UT -wise in this regard should be analysed  by the Department and all the 
desired action taken to increase the broadband connectivity in the country. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 There are total 9.21 million broadband subscribers in the country as on 31 -05-2010. State 
wise broadband connections (as on 31st May 2010) are given below:-  
 
Sl. No. State/ Telecom Circle Broadband subscribers 
(As on 31.05.10) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar  4220 
2 Andhra Pradesh  815016 
3 Assam  55979 
4 Bihar (including Jharkhand) 124689 
5 Delhi* 902714 
6 Gujarat  563973 
7 Haryana  194571 
8 Himachal Pradesh  47712 
9 Jammu & Kashmir  39389 
10 Karnataka 1003813 
11 Kerala  570454 
12 Maharashtra (including Mumbai Goa) 1632942 
13 Madhya Pradesh (including Chattisgarh) 320383 
14 North East ** 30534 
15 Orissa  146184 
16 Punjab  438763 
17 Rajasthan  286402 
18 Tamilnadu (including Chennai) 1106884 
19 Uttar Pradesh (including Uttaranchal) 487030 
20 West Bengal (including Kolkata) 443948 

29 
 
21 ALL INDIA *** 1167 
 TOTAL 9216767 
 
*      includes Noida, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad and Faridabad  
**  includes Meghalaya, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland & Tipura  
*** some of the companies have not provided the statewise break-up of their subscribers      
 
 Initiatives taken to increase the broadband connectivity in the country is as under:- 
 Auction of spectrum for 3G and BWA services to the private operators through e -
auction has already been completed. This will facilitate proliferation of broadband 
through mobile handset and wireless technology. 
 
 Outdoor and indoor usage of low power Wi -Fi and Wireless Broadband systems 
in 2.4 GHz-2.4835 GHz band has been delicensed.  
 The use of low power indoor systems in 5.15 -5.35 GHz & 5.725 -5.875 GHz has 
also been delicensed.   
 Based on directions of the Cabinet Secretariat, an Inter -Ministerial Committee 
was set up to prepare Concept Paper on “Broadband for All – An Integrated 
Approach for Rural Areas”.  The recommendations of the IMC are under 
consideration. GIS mapping to ascertain incremental OFC length is goin g on. 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) will be submitted accordingly. 
 
 BSNL plans to launch following more attractive post paid plans to its customers 
to make broadband affordable:- 
 
i. Launch IPTV services in 25 more cities.(50 already connected) 
ii. Launch more value added services like VVoBB, Desktop security in 2010 - 
11. 
iii. Make prepaid broadband service more attractive.  
iv. Implement motive application in all the circles by Jun‟2010.    
v. Training its call center and field unit‟s executives to have an up t o date 
knowledge of its plans, packages and special offers. 
vi. Sensitization of the overall BSNL front end executives for extending 
helping hand to the customers.  
vii. Implementation of a utility soft ware to help customer to finalize his/her 
broadband plan as per his/her requirements.  
viii. Regular upgradation of Broadband plans /tariffs. 
ix. Instant redressal of customer complaints. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 

30 
 
 The Committee note that the Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC), with participation from 
Department of Telecommunications, Planning Commission, Department of Higher Education, 
Department of Elementary Education, Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Economic 
Affairs, M inistry of Panchayati Raj and Department of Information Technology, held various 
meetings and finalized a draft Concept Paper.  The salient recommendations of IMC are (i) OFC 
connectivity should be provided to all the 2.5 lakh village panchayats to ensure availability of 
high speed broadband (2 mbps) to all of them, (ii) broad strategy should be providing optical 
connectivity upto Gram panchayat level and the last -mile broadband connectivity could be made 
available through wireless based on 3G/broadband wir eless technology, (iii) dovetailing of 
financial resources from NREGS for labour component of laying OFC, while desirable, appears 
difficult on account of provisions of NREGS, (iv) an estimated amount of Rs. 18,000 crore will 
have to be provided from USO F und for laying of 5 lakh kms of OFC over a period of three 
years, (v) carve out an infrastructure company from BSNL which can work with support of other 
PSUs like PGCIL & RAILTEL.  The existing OFC network of BSNL could also be transferred 
to this Company.  The network would be compulsorily shared among all service providers on 
same terms and conditions, to ensure level playing field, (vi) mapping of entire network by 
USOF of various operators including PSUs on a GIS platform along with Gram panchayats to 
arrive at better estimates of incremental OFC length, (vii) adoption of various methodologies in 
speeding up and simplifying right way of permissions and (viii) for undertaking the actions 
indicated in the recommendation preparation of a detailed project rep ort has been suggested.  
Further, the Committee have also been informed that IMC has proposed that the Full Telecom 
Commission should take a decision on its recommendations and if necessary, Cabinet/Cabinet 
Committee/GoM may be constituted for taking a fin al decision on the recommendations.  The 
Committee would like to be informed about the status of implementation of the 
recommendations of IMC. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Based on the recommendations of the aforesaid Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC), in 
order to ascertain incremental OFC length required, GIS mapping of OFC Networks of BSNL, 
RAILTEL, PGCIL etc. has already been started by National Informatics Centre (NIC). On 
completion of the same, Detailed Project Report (DPR) shall be prepared for ap proval of 
competent authority. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
 dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that the scheme has not progressed satisfactorily.  
This is substantiated by the fact that during 2009 -10, out of the total Outlay of Rs. 35 crore only 
Rs. 23.73 crore could be spent as on February, 2010 with a physical achievement of  only 4 
kiosks out of the stipulated target of 100 kiosks.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
earnest steps be taken to utilize the Outlay provided for 2010 -11 as it has been increased from a 

31 
 
mere Rs. 35 crore to Rs. 125 crore and also the stipulate d target of kiosks have also increased 
from 100 kiosks to 1500 kiosks. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 During 2009 -10, as on 31.3.2010, a total of 1,21,542 wireline broadband connections 
have been installed with the cumulative figure of 1,37,321 under the scheme. The subsidy of Rs. 
42.57 crore has been disbursed under this scheme as on 31.3.2010. 
 Recommendation of the Committee, with reference to the targets for 2010 -11, are noted 
and all out effort would be made to achieve the targets set for 2010 -11 by g reater coordination 
and monitoring of this scheme.  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee note  that an Outlay of Rs. 5 crore has been provided for the aforesaid 
scheme for the year 2010-11.  The report in connection with the scheme which was submitted by 
C-DoT has been approved by the Competent Authority.  The Committee would like to have a 
status report on the launching of this scheme and how far this scheme will be able to make rural 
and remote areas broadband enabled in the country. 
Action Taken by the Government 
The scheme is in an advanced stage of formulation.  It is envisaged that the scheme 
would be rolled out during the current five year plan (2007-2012). 
The Satellite Broadband Connectivity is proposed for those rural & remote villages where 
terrestrial connectivity, i.e. wireline / wireless network , is not feasible. Initially, about 1200 such 
villages are envisaged to be provided broadband on this media.  
  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 The Committee note that for the scheme for augmentation, creation and Management of 
OFC network in Assam, an agreement was signed on 12 th February, 2010.  However, the said 
network is yet to be rolled out.  Regarding OFC network in North East States and West Bengal 
Service Areas USOF is in the process of signing MoU with TCIL and is likely to be signed in the 
month of March, 2010.  The Comm ittee hope that these schemes would be rolled out at the 
earliest so as to have better broadband connectivity in Assam, North -East and West Bengal and 
the initiatives like setting up of BPO in the North-East States sees the light of the day. 

32 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
In Assam, BSNL is working on the implementation of the USOF‟s scheme for 
Augmentation, Creation and Management of OFC Network and the work is in progress. It may 
be mentioned that as per the outcome of the tender for implementation of this  scheme in Assam, 
BSNL has been declared the successful at their subsidy quote of Rs. 98.89 Crore, and 
subsequently, an Agreement has been signed with them on 12.02.2010 in this regard. This 
Scheme is envisaged to be rolled out during the current Five Year Plan (2007-2012).  
As regards West Bengal Service Area and North East Service Area, MoUs have been 
signed with TCIL on 22 March 2010 for providing technical and financial consultancy for 
assisting in the implementation of the scheme and accordingly, TCIL has already started working 
on these projects.  
These Schemes are envisaged to be rolled during the current Five Year Plan (2007-2012). 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
 dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 One of the important area identified by TEC for 2010 -11 is the setting up of Specific 
Absorption Rate (SAR) Laboratory for testing mobile terminals to ensure that the radiation from 
the mobile equipment handled by the users are within safe limit.  The Comm ittee find that the 
proposed plan of setting up of SAR lab is a step in the right direction.  The aforesaid lab should 
be set up expeditiously as it would go a long way in addressing the general concern towards the 
probable harmful effects of the electroma gnetic radiation emitted by the mobile terminals on 
human beings. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted.  It is intimated that the Project 
Estimate for setting up of SAR Laboratory in TEC has already been submitted  for the approval 
of the competent authority.   After approval of P/E, tender will be invited for supply of 
equipment/instruments etc. for SAR lab.  The SAR Lab is targeted for setting up during the 
current financial year. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 

33 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the deadline for Mobile Number Portability 
(MNP) is continuously being shifted.  The present deadline of 31st March, 2010 is also not likely 
to be met as stated by the Department.  Now the probable date for its implementation is stated to 
be as June, 2010.  The Committee further note that Security Agencies have expressed concern 
that in case a Mobile Number is under Lawful Interception and Monitoring by Security and Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), the intercept messages should not get affected due to the Mobile 
Number being ported from one operator's network to other.  The Security and  LEAs should get 
seamless information/messages even in case of Mobile Number Portability.  In this regard, the 
matter has been discussed and deliberated with Nodal Security Agency i.e. Intelligence Bureau 
and their comments have been received.  However, th e comments of Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) are awaited.  The Committee find that the concerns expressed by the security agencies 
are very much valid and the Department suo -moto should have sought the views of security 
agencies and Ministry of Home Affair s instead of waiting for these agencies to express their 
concern in this regard thereby delaying the implementation of MNP further.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that all the security concerns expressed by these security agencies should be 
considered carefully and the Mobile Number Portability be implemented expeditiously. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 With reference to the observation of the Hon'ble Committee it is to submit that DoT had 
suo-moto started consulting the Nodal Security Agency (Intelligence Bureau with reference to 
Security Concern in MNP implementation at the time of tendering itself.  Va rious rounds of 
discussions were held and views of the Security Agencies/MHA were sought on the final 
procedure before issuing the instructions.  The views of the MHA/Nodal Security Agency have 
been received and necessary Secret instructions have been issu ed to the Service Providers 
addressing the security concerns in the porting process.  It is submitted that there is no delay in 
implementation of MNP due to finalization of the above instructions addressing the Security 
Concern.  The Department is making all efforts for implementation of MNP expeditiously.  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee note that some of the programmes to be taken up by C -DoT for the year 
2010-11 includes (i) Gigabit Passive Optical Network (GPON) for providing broadband delivery 
over an Optical Fibre Cable (OFC), (ii) MAX -NG (MAX -Next Generation) for migrat ing 
existing C -DoT fixed line switching systems to the next generation packet technology as well 
VoIP technology trial in the north east region, (iii) Shared GSM Radio Access Network (SG -
RAN) for sharing active infrastructure among multiple service provide rs, (iv) Wi -Fi based 
broadband wireless system and (v) Setting -up R&D lab -build for data centre for piloting 
technology of Centralized Monitoring System (CSM).  The Committee recommend that the 
Department should ensure that adequate Outlay is provided to C -DoT so that all these important 
projects are implemented in time to reap their benefits at the earliest by the masses. 

34 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The technology development programs for GPON, MAX -NG, SG-RAN and Wi-Fi based 
broadband wireless system [Sl. No. (i) to (iv)] have been successful and these technologies are 
either in the evaluation or in the field trial phase. Adequate funding in the form of Government 
Budgetary Support (GBS) has been provided in the BE stage for the field trials of these p rojects 
and further support for piloting these technologies can be considered at the RE stage.  
 Adequate GBS is provided in the BE for setting R&D lab -build for data center for 
piloting the technology of Centralized Monitoring System [Sl. No. (v)] and the  R&D work 
associated with the CMS program is progressing well. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 Another important scheme which is intended by C -DoT for the year 2009 -10 and 2010 -
11 is ATM -based system customization for multiple Defence applications.  In this regard, the 
Department have informed that C -DOT has gained a significant expertise in success fully 
carrying out customization and trials in association with M/s BEL and Navy for its ATM  
technology and it is now planned to be proliferated in other naval programmes.  The Committee 
have also been informed that when all the Naval ships being equipped  by the ATM technology, 
Navy will be capable of providing very high speed, high quality onboard communication.  The 
technology coming from a National R&D center, onboard networks will be free from any 
security weakness.  Also, due to the ATM customization program, Navy is assured of networks 
optimized for their specific needs and is assured of long -term support for patches, upgrades, and 
most importantly, support against obsolescence with assured supply of spares.  The Committee 
while appreciating the steps taken by C-DoT recommend that they should take suitable measures 
to ensure that the scheme is implemented expeditiously particularly when the initiation of the 
scheme is a very important step towards self-reliance in the area of strategic sector. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Committee‟s recommendation is well taken.  C -DOT is pursuing continuously to 
improve its system practices and processes, which include planning, monitoring, and quality to 
ensure that the implementation of the R&D schemes, adher e to the schedules.  Thus, various 
ATM customization programs are progressing as per schedule; both M/s BEL and Navy are 
closely involved in the implementation and monitoring of the projects. Therefore, the scheme is 
expected to be completed on schedule. I t is also apt to mention here that the first indigenously 
built Stealth frigate INS Shivalik of AISDN -17 project of the Navy was commissioned on April, 
29, 2010. The complete onboard communication network on this frigate is based on C -DOT 
ATM technology. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 

35 
 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 The Committee note  that the project costing Rs. 522.06 crore has been approved by 
Telecom Commission and a note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has been 
circulated to concerned Ministries for inter -Ministerial consultations.  The Committee have also 
been apprised that the major areas identified for the project during the year 2010 -11 are Project 
Management Plan, Quality Assurance Specification Submission, Product Design Acceptance 
(Cable, repeaters, branching units, Submarine Line Terminating Equipment), Fin al Route Survey 
Approval etc.  Even when the scheme was at the finalization stage, Rs. 52 crore was allocated at 
RE stage during 2009-10 which remained unutilized.  During the year 2010 -11, the allocation of 
Rs. 161.84 crore has been made at the BE stage.  The committee find that the project of 
Undersea Cabling between Mainland and Andaman & Nicobar is an important project.  After the 
execution of the project it would provide and alternate an more importantly reliable 
communication link to avoid communicati on blackout in a disaster.  As such the Committee 
emphasize that the project should be approved expeditiously so that the Outlay provided are 
effectively utilized.  
Action Taken by the Government 
(i) The laying and execution of the branching submarine cable to A&N Islands is linked with 
the execution of main submarine cable which M/s Millennium Telecom Limited (MTL) has 
proposed to lay from Digha in West Bengal to Singapore. 
(ii) M/s MTL has decided to re-assess the financial viability of the main cable project at the 
stage of evaluation of financial bid. Accordingly, MTL Board appointed a Committee for 
rechecking the financial viability of the project. 
 
 The committee in its report has stated that the project is not financially viable.  The 
committee report was discussed by MTL Board and the board has decided the following:   
 "Keeping in view the high cost of the project, it may not be possible to invest such a huge 
amount by the BSNL and MTNL alone.  Hence the possibility of forming a consortium with the 
telecom operators of other countries where MTL is proposing to have its landing stations may be 
explored.  The Board authorized the Steering Committee to have dialogue with prospective 
consortium partners". 
(iii) Therefore, the execution of main submarine cable project from West Bengal to Singapore 
is presently uncertain as it will depend on the possibility of formation of a consortium for which 
no specific time frame has been decided by the MTL Board. 
 
(iv)    In view of the above, the matter shall be taken-up afresh after the formation of consortium 
as some parameters of the scheme including cost considerations may undergo substantial 
changes.   
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  

36 
 
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
 The Committee are really upset to note the worsening status of one of the important 
Public Sector Undertaking i.e. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited  ( BSNL) whose mandate is to 
provide telecom services across the length and breadth of the country excluding Delhi and 
Mumbai.  The data in respect of various parameters of performance of the PSU as made 
available to the Committee substantiates the aforesaid observation of the Committee.  There is 
persistent problem of under-utilization of scarce resources provided under IEBR and USO Fund.  
The utilization status of IEBR in the first three years of Eleventh Plan is just 57.87 per cent.  Not 
only that, the prof it making PSU has turned to be a loss making PSU as per the information 
provided to the Committee.  During the year 2007 -08, the profit was Rs. 3009 crore which 
decreased to Rs. 575 crore during 2008-09.  During the year 2009-10, the estimated loss is to t he 
tune of Rs. 3641 crore.  There are huge outstanding arrears both for GSM mobile and wireline.  
As on January, 2010, the outstanding arrears are Rs. 4086.52 crore.  Surrender of telephone 
connections is another matter of  concern.  During 2009 -10 the tot al number of surrender 
wireline was 28,61,592, WLL (F&M) and for GSM Mobile it was 34,84,24.  The under -
performance of one of the important PSUs of the Department is a matter of great concern.  The 
reasons for shortfalls in various parameters such as non -finalization of tender, non-timely supply 
of equipments, reducing tariffs in highly competitive market, sharp reduction in Land Line 
revenue, stoppage of Licence Fee reimbursement, lower returns on investments etc. are not 
acceptable to the Committee partic ularly when the Private Service Providers are functioning in 
all these conditions and even then making great profits.  More so, BSNL being the Government 
of India undertaking has always the support of the Government by way of Government funding 
as well as various policies of the Government.  Another noticeable point is that even when the 
Private Service Providers are waiting endlessly for getting 3G spectrum, BSNL has been 
provided 3G spectrum much ahead.  During this period BSNL had the great opportunity t o take 
advantage of the facility of 3G services and could have easily overtaken the Private Service 
Providers.  But the Committee are unhappy to note that this has not happened.  The Committee 
are of the firm view that there is an urgent need to fix the re sponsibility for this under -
performance by the PSU.  The functioning of the BSNL should be reviewed and all the 
corrective action taken expeditiously.  The Committee should also be kept informed about the 
action taken by the Department/BSNL in this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Total utilization of IEBR in the first three years of Eleventh Plan is to the tune of Rs. 
28,479 Crore which works out to 61.95 per cent of allocation provided at RE stage.  However, no 
support from Government funds has bee n provided to BSNL during the first three years of 
Eleventh Plan. 
 The major factors responsible for surrender of wire line connections are: 
 
(i) Rapid expansion of mobile services and manifold increase in mobile connections, which 
provide greater convenience at highly competitive rates; 
 

37 
 
(ii) Surrender of extra wire line telephone where multiple telephones existed in same house/ 
office premises and their substitution by personal mobile phones; 
 
(iii) Occasional service interruption due to heavy damages done to underground cables owing 
to different developmental activities undertaken by public utility service agencies and 
other private agencies. 
 
BSNL is making all out efforts to retain wire line customers and increase their utility. Following 
steps have been taken in this direction: 
[[ 
 Several Value Added Services including broadband services, IPTV services, Video phones 
and Video Conferencing services etc are being provided. 
 
 All out efforts are being made for modernization of landline network like induction of new 
IP Based NGN (Next Generation Network) switches, induction of converged customer care 
and billing platform, provisioning of new services at affordable prices, making available of 
latest CLIP phones. 
 
 
 Various attractive tariff plans & improved marketing strategies are being introduced. 
 
 Rigorous monitoring of Quality of Service parameters is being done as defined by TRAI etc. 
 
 
 Steps are being taken for up -gradation of the external plants and extending connectivity 
through OFC and copper cables to new upcoming colonies to provide landline telephones on 
demand in all upcoming areas. 
 
 Effective utilization of outlays is primarily linked to timely completion of tendering 
process for procurement and execution in case of turnkey projects. BSNL has made all out 
efforts for effective utilization of outlays by ensuring effective and timely planning and 
estimation of requirements and formulation/floating of tenders and thereafter the completion of 
tendering process, rigorous monitoring of project execution by regular, p eriodic  review meeting 
at all levels at BSNL corporate office as well as field units. However, the shortfall in effective 
utilization of outlays is most of the time due to unforeseen and unavoidable situations whereby 
the tendering process gets delayed/stalled and so the subsequent execution of project also. BSNL 
has drawn out stringent plans for timely and effective planning, assessment of requirements and 
completion of the tendering process and there after the timely execution of projects by rigorous 
monitoring at all levels and by regular periodic review meeting at BSNL Head Quarter as well as 
field units involving the concerned field units, officers of BSNL corporate office and respective 
vendors.              
  Out of the total outstanding arrears Rs. 4086.52 Crores on January 2010 (31.01.2010) 
mentioned in the report, Rs. 648.25 Crores is pertaining to GSM services. Rest of the amount i.e. 
Rs.3438.27 Crores relates to Basic Services. The said outstanding amount in respect of GSM 
Service as on 31.01.201 0 has been brought to Rs. 577.29 Crores at the end of March 2010 
through various actions as listed below. 
Apart from regular measures for reduction of outstanding of Cellular services, the following 
additional initiative has been taken. 
 
             Incentive scheme for employees of BSNL for recovery of old outstanding dues: 
 
a) Monitoring of Circle -wise high value outstanding and fixing a target for Circles 
that there shall be no outstanding cases of more than 3 months old with an amount 
of Rs. 1 lakh and above. 

38 
 
b) Filing of legal cases wherever the outstanding is more than Rs.25000 and 
whereabouts of the defaulter is known. 
c) Pursuing through State Police authorities wherever the defaulters are not traceable. 
d) Special drive for realization of old  outstanding by conducting special camps in 
SSAs/Circles. 
e) Introduced the Project KUBER for recovery of outstanding dues through agencies. 
 
  Out of the total outstanding arrears Rs. 4086.52 Crores on January 2010 (31.01.2010) 
mentioned in the report, Rs. 3438.27 Crores is pertaining to Basic Services. Rest of the amount 
i.e. Rs. 648.25 crores relates to GSM service. The said outstanding amount in respect of Basic 
Service as on 31.01.2010 has been brought down to Rs. 2906.79 Crores at the end of March 2010 
through various actions as listed below. 
 The following steps have been taken / are being taken by BSNL to recover its outstanding 
dues:- 
a) Payment reminders through IVRS and SMS are being issued to persuade the 
customers to make payment before disconnection of their telephones. 
 
b) Phones are disconnected as per the schedule in case of non payment of dues by 
customers. 
 
c) Connections remaining disconnected for non -payment even after expiry of 3 months 
period are permanently closed and accounts regularized by adju sting Security deposit 
if any available. 
 
d) If no payment is received despite disconnection, a registered notice followed by a 
legal notice if necessary, is sent. 
 
e) Heads of Circles have been authorized to Appoint Private Recovery agents on 
commission basis t o assist BSNL in recovery of outstanding revenue.  Circles have 
also been asked to utilize the services of State Government Departments in recovery 
of outstanding dues. 
 
f)  Graded discount scheme regarding grant of discount to defaulting customers, for 
clearance of old outstanding dues has been introduced. 
g) Incentive scheme to employees of BSNL for recovery of outstanding arrears from 
defaulters was also implemented. 
 
h) Legal proceedings wherever required are initiated against the defaulters for recovery 
of dues. 
 
i) The State Governments have been requested to amend their respective land revenue 
acts so that the defaulted Telephone dues of BSNL can be recovered as land revenue 
arrears. 
 
j) Every year targets for liquidation of outstanding dues for different billing periods for 
each Circle/ Metro District are fixed and performance thereof is reviewed regularly. 
 
k) Circle wise targets were also fixed under 100 days programme for reduction  of 
outstanding dues. 
 
l) The progress in regard to liquidation of outstanding dues is closely monitored and 
units are addressed periodically. 
 

39 
 
m) Procedure for settlement of defaulter cases through Lok Adalat has been introduced 
for recovery of outstanding tele phone dues in respect of permanently closed 
connections. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
 dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
 The Committee note that the performance of BSNL in North -East Regions during 2009 -
10 was poor as the achievements vis -à-vis the targets set were discouraging.  Regarding the Net 
Switching Capacity for Wired, WLL and CMTS the target set was 6,16,254 whereas the 
achievement made was on ly 2,83,040.  The number of wireline and mobile connections to be 
connected during the same period was stated to be 1,71,000 and 4,55,000 respectively, whereas, 
the achievement made was only ( -) 23,265 and 2,98,314 respectively.  Further, the VPTs to be 
covered as per the Census, 2001 was 4,877, whereas, the achievement made was only 1,339.  
Regarding Broadband Capacity (Ports) and Broadband Connections the target set was 41,105 
and 32,255 respectively, however, the achievement made was 16,628 and 15,563 re spectively.  
The total teledensity in the entire North -East Region is 8.01 per cent.  Out of this, the urban 
teledensity is stated to be 18.79 per cent and that of the rural teledensity, is 3.92 per cent which 
are far below when compared with the National Statistics.  Therefore, the Committee expect that 
BSNL would perform better during 2010-11 by taking suitable measures to imp;rove the network 
connectivity in this region. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 During the Financial Year 2009 -10 the performance of BSNL in North East Region is as 
under: 
 
Net GSM Connections 283479 
Net work expansion (GSM Radio Capacity) 234634 
  
 It is submitted that NE region provided Net GSM Connections more than the Annual 
Target assigned during 2009-10. 
 
 Regarding 19.2 lakh line project following equipment are under rollout in NEs: 
 
Circle       MSC     BSC            BTS 
Assam                    2                              3                             96 
NE-I                         2                              3                              41 
NE-II                        1                              1                            133 
 The above equipment shall improve the WLL network connections in the areas. 
 Based on the requirement of NE Region, following developmental support actions are taken: 
 
(i) New Technology Switch:  8KL NT switch equipment for NE -I & Assam and 10.5KL to 
West Bengal (which includes Sikkim) was supplied/commissioned upto March, 2010.  
 

40 
 
(ii) 20KC TAX equipment was supplied/ installed in Assam during 2009-10. Commissioning 
of 104KC TAX equipment in NE region is planned during the next year 2010-11. 
 
(iii) 0.69LCKM PIJF cable has been tentatively allocated for NE Region (including WB for 
Sikkim) in the procurement planned for this year 2010-11. 
 
(iv) 28,600 CLI phones are tentatively allocated for NE Region (including WB for Sikkim) in 
the procurement planned for this year 2010-11. 
Broadband capacity/ connections of NE region are as under. 
Connections 
Circle As on 
31.3.2008 
As on 
31.3.2009 
Achievement 
2008-09 
As on 
31.3.2010 
Achievement 
2009-10 
Assam 20423 38018 17595 50405 12387 
NE-I 4783 11672 6889 16921 5249 
NE-II 2463 6437 3974 10876 4439 
Capacity 
Circle As on 
31.3.2008 
As on 
31.3.2009 
Achievement 
2008-09 
As on 
31.3.2010 
Achievement 
2009-10 
Assam 47220 84928 37708 103072 18144 
NE-I 17178 28626 11448 33634 22186 
NE-II 5028 23568 18540 30032 11492 
 
Detail of VPTs in North East Region along with achievement made during 2009-10 is as under: 
S. 
No. State 
Total No. of 
Inhabited uncovered 
Villages 
 ( Census 2001) 
Villages 
covered with 
VPT facility as 
on 30.4.2010 
VPT provided during 2009-10 
Under Bharat 
Nirman 
Under New VPT 
Agreement 
1 Assam 25124 23992 3 602 
2 Meghalaya 5782 3430 755 49 
3 Mizoram 707 704 15 19 
4 Tripura 858 858 6 136 
5 Arunachal 
Pradesh 3863 1677 326 186 
6 Manipur 2315 2079 323 52 
7 Nagaland 1278 1260 12 132 
8 Sikkim 450 408 0 77 
  Total 40377 34408 1440 1253 
 Efforts are being made to cover all the uncovered villages under the USOF agreement as 
per the terms and conditions of the agreement. 

41 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 The Committee note with dissatisfaction that the performance of MTNL is not upto the 
mark.  The trend of under utilization of Outlay has been seen during the first three years of 
Eleventh Plan.  In terms of percentage, it is only 54.99 per cent with respect to the allocated REs.  
Further, the Committee note that there has been a decline in the earning of MTNL.  As per the 
data furnished by the Department during 2007-08 the earning of MTNL was Rs. 5868.91 million 
but in the subsequent year it has reduced.  D uring 2008-09, the earning was Rs. 2751.74 million 
less than what it had earned during 2007 -08.  For the year 2009 -10, MTNL has projected a lost 
of Rs. 9411.05 crore.  Another disappointing observation made by the Committee is with regard 
to the outstandin g arrears.  The outstanding arrears of MTNL as on 28 th February, 2010 is Rs. 
1179.18 crore.  Further, the Committee also note the alarming trend of surrender of telephone in 
landline connections has grown tremendously.  During 2009 -10 the total connection given by 
MTNL was only 1,90,557, whereas, the surrender was 2,76,979.  This means that the surrender is 
almost double the connections provided by MTNL.  The trend of surrender has also been 
witnessed in the mobile connections.  The total connections given during 2009-10 was 5,60,129 
whereas the surrender was 1,05,641.  From the above observation, the Committee cannot but 
conclude that a lot needs to be done on the part of MTNL to improve their performance taking 
into consideration that the share of Public S ector in the network expansion has been declining 
both in wireline and wireless services when compared to the Private Sector.  Since the 
Department look after the matters relating the performance of its PSUs, the Committee 
recommend that they should thorou ghly analyse the under performance of MTNL and take 
corrective action in this regard and Committee be informed accordingly. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 MTNL is drafting its annual plan after reviewing the progress of the ongoing projects and 
the status of the new/upcoming projects to be taken up during the next year.  The reduction at RE 
stage is done based on a revised projection of anticipated expenditure keeping in view the status 
of projects.  Similarly, the payment liabilities against various proje cts are also considered while 
projecting the Budgetary Estimates for next year. 
  Provisions of funds have also to be kept for the new and upcoming projects likely to 
come in future.  However, sometimes due to the reasons beyond the control of MTNL the 
projects do not come up or are being delayed.  In such cases the funds allotted against such 
projects remain unutilized and resulting in lower expenditure. 
  The performance of MTNL during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 is given below:- 
  (Rs. in Crore)  

42 
 
BE/RE/Actuals 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Budget Estimates 2309.00 2430.97 1725.02 
Revised Estimates 1692.33 1304.28 1352.00 
Actuals 932.46 871.12 944.88* 
Percentage of 
utilization w.r.t. 
Revised Estimates 
55.10% 66.79% 69.89% 
 *unaudited 
  From above table it is clear that MTNL has been making efforts to increase the 
percentage utilization of the plan outlay every year slowly. 
   As regards financial accounts for 2009-10, the following is submitted: 
1. MTNL has entered into wage revision agreement with the non-executives as well as 
implemented revised salaries for the executives. The revision of wages have taken place 
after 10 years and the impact of it on profitability has been mainly for the year 2009 -10 
due to payment of arrears with effect from 1-1-2007 as well as the provision for retirement 
benefits. 
 
2. Unlike BSNL, MTNL is paying the pension to the erstwhile Govt. employees who got 
absorbed in MTNL and opted for combined pension. Since MTNL is paying this pension 
and since MTNL is a listed Company, as pe r accounting standard 15 (revised), MTNL has 
to provide for all future pension payments. MTNL has already taken up with the Govt. to 
provide pension by the Govt. to the employees on similar lines as BSNL while MTNL 
making contribution to the Govt. as per F R 116. Till the matter is decided, MTNL is 
paying pension as stated above and therefore had to make additional provision of Rs. 
2934.10 crore in 2009-10. It may be stated that this is the provision in the books and is not 
an immediate cash outflow. Out of this about Rs.1754 crore impact is upto the period 31 -
3-2009 and Rs.1180 crore is for the current year. The huge increase in this provision is 
due to the following: 
 
a) Wage revision with effect from 1-1-2007. 
b) Change in benefit of full pension for 20 complete d years of service as against 
existing conditions of 33 years. 
c) Some of the changes in assumptions made for actuarial evaluation based on 
increase in inflation / DA rates in 2009 -10 as compared to those obtaining in the 
second half of 2008-09. 
 
3. Increase in wage bill from Rs. 1439 cores in 2009 to Rs. 2136 crore which includes one 
time payment of arrears with effect from 1-1-2007 
 
4. A provision of Rs.449 crore for spectrum fee on 3G. 
 
 It may kindly be seen that the requirement of MTNL for staff is about 30% of the total 
employees strength but a large number of employees chose to get absorbed in MTNL and MTNL 

43 
 
had no say in the matter. Because of these liabilities and one time outgo as ex plained above, the 
loss reported as per the limited review is Rs. 2514 crore. 
 However, MTNL is making all efforts to increase the revenue in spite of the tough 
competition and rock bottom tariff for the services. It may be stated that due to timely action  
taken by MTNL in introducing GSM services, even though it got permission for the same much 
later, and timely introduction of broadband services, a substantial amount of revenue (Rs. 521.92 
crore) is being generated through these services. MTNL plans to in crease the subscriber base of 
broadband services to two millions (Wire line and wireless taken together) for the current year 
and also plans to generate new streams of revenue from enterprise business, value added services, 
mobile application etc. 
Surrender of phones and decline in the market share of wire line and wireless: 
 It is submitted that even though there is continuous growth in MTNL‟s wireless 
subscriber base, however, due to increase in competition & number of service provider in Delhi 
& Mumbai, there is marginal decline in market share. Further, with entry of new players, market 
share of existing operators get shared and market share of some of MTNL's competitors has also 
declined.   
 MTNL would like to further submit that despite of being a late  entrant in the GSM 
segment MTNL has been able to create a market share of about 16% in the GSM cellular 
segment in the two cities.  MTNL mobile subscriber base has grown to more than approx 48 
lakhs with approx 4.00 lakhs 3G customers as on date. These 3G customers have been added in a 
very short span of time since full fledged commercial launch of 3G services in September, 2009.  
It is further submitted that MTNL is making its best efforts to sustain the growth in its GSM 
Services despite facing fierce competition in its service area. 
As regards decline in the wired line percentage is concerned there is a general decline in 
the demand for the fixed lines telephone as there is a tendency to shift to mobile services because 
of its sheer convenience with rega rds to affordability and availability. This is worldwide trend 
that when liberalization takes place and monopoly is removed in telecom sector there is a churn 
in fixed line subscribers.  
However, MTNL has been able to limit the churn by introduction of bro adband, IPTV 
etc.  MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of land line 
connections.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 Commonwealth Games would start from 3 rd October, 2010 and countdown for the game 
has already begun.  This is a prestigious event for the country and MTNL has been selected as an 
official telecom partner to set up a world class communication infrastructure.  The Committee 

44 
 
note that the project w hich is being carried out by MTNL involves laying of 350 km Optical 
Fiber connecting 37 games and other venues for which State of the Art MPLS/IP Networks will 
be set up for High Definition TV, Games and Security data.  The project is expected to be 
completed by 1st week of September, 2010 at an estimated cost of Rs. 390 crore.  The Committee 
note that out of the stipulated 350 kms optical fiber to be connected for the Games, 250 kms have 
already been laid by MTNL.  Again the Committee emphasize that Common wealth Games is the 
proud event for the country when India will showcase its capabilities to the world.  As such all 
the efforts should be made by MTNL to ensure that the project is completed well before 3 
October, 2010 so that the setup is tested and the system functions properly during the 
Commonwealth Games. 
Action Taken by the Government 
  MTNL has fully geared up to meet the various challenges associated with this event 
and following is the status of progress: 
1. After completion of Commercial, Technic al and Financial  evaluation APO has been 
issued on 6th February, 2010 for an amount of Rs.392 Crore. 
 
2. Optical Fiber Cable laying activity has been started since November, 2009 and  more 
 than 275 km of Optical Fiber Cable has been laid and these activities are  undergoing in 
 full swing at all venues in parallel.  
 
3. Space had been allotted in 10 different MTNL buildings located in different parts  of 
Delhi and installation of equipments at all the locations is going in parallel and various 
component related to SDN are under installation. 
4. Manpower required for operation and maintenance of this project has been 
 mobilized internally in MTNL. 
 
 MTNL, however, depends on provisioning of the following  items by Organizing    
Committee (OC) Commonwealth Games as per time schedule to make this project a success. 
 
Dependency on Organizing Committee CWG 2010: 
 
1. Air Conditioning requirement for MTNL/ECIL/OC/TCIL equipment have been 
identified and  extra provision/augmentation for this AC requirement is to be 
arranged by OC/Venue Owners. 
 
2. AC UPS power supply for TER is to be supplied by OC. 
 
3. The completion and handover of space in various venues is dependent on the 
Organizing Committee. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER –III 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
-NIL- 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPETED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that there has been a persistent trend of all ocating reduced Outlay as 
compared to the projections in all the first three years of the Eleventh Plan.  Further, there has 
also been considerable reduction of Outlay at the RE stage.  Not only that there are considerable 
shortfalls in the utilization of even the reduced allocation both under IEBR and GBS 
components.  The aforesaid trend has been continuing from the Tenth Plan.  The Committee in 
their earlier Reports have repeatedly been expressing serious concern over the under utilization 
of scarce resou rces.  Inspite of this, there has been no improvement in this regard.  The data 
furnished by the Department substantiates the aforesaid observation of the Committee.  The total 
allocation during 2007 -08, 2008 -09 2009 -10 both under IEBR and GBS components w as Rs. 
63212.59 crore at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 51817.54 crore at RE stage.  Thus, there 
was reduction of Rs.11395.05 crore at RE stage.  Even the reduced allocation was not effectively 
utilized.  During the aforesaid three years, there was unde r spending to the tune of Rs. 21585.56 
crore i.e. 41.66 per cent of allocation provided at RE stage.  All this clearly indicates that there 
are serious problems in implementation of various schemes/projects.  The detailed analysis 
project/scheme-wise has been done in the later part of the Report.  While expressing their serious 
concern over the sorry state of affairs with regard to implementation of various projects/schemes, 
the Committee strongly emphasize that the Department should take concrete action wi th respect 
to each of the project/scheme which is under performing to ensure optimal utilization of the 
Outlay. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Both BSNL and MTNL are making sincere efforts for effective utilization of outlays by 
ensuring effective and timely planning and estimation of requirements and through rigorous 
monitoring and review of each ongoing project. 
 The progress of fund utilization is also being carefully monitored through regular reviews 
at the highest levels of the Department for optimal utilization of outlays. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
  
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
  The Committee observe that budgetary support is provided for executing the 
Universal Service Support Policy (USSP) through the Universal Service Obligation Fund 

47 
 
(USOF) for bringing rural telecom connectivity.  The resources for meeting the same are 
generated through a Universal Service Levy (USL) which is 5 per cent of the Adjusted Gross 
Revenue (AGR) earned by all the telecom operators except pure value added service providers 
like internet service provider, voice mail etc.  From the data furnished by th e Department, the 
Committee note that total amount collected as USL upto 2008 -09 is Rs. 25331.36 crore whereas 
the total allocation made to the Department of Telecommunication is Rs. 10371.44 crore i.e. just 
40.94 per cent.  With regard to the status of ut ilization of Outlay, the Committee find that 
whereas there are shortfalls in utilization of Outlay provided under IEBR and GBS component, 
the financial performance of USO Fund is quite satisfactory.  The position of not allocating 
resources commensurate with the collections even when the allocation are being fully utilized is 
a matter of concern particularly when there is a definite source of funding for USO Fund and 
there are big challenges of providing connectivity in rural and backward areas.  The Commit tee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the quantum of allocation for USO activities should be 
increased further so as to improve the rural telecom connectivity.  Besides, the Committee would 
also like to be informed about the use of the remaining Outlay c ollected through Universal 
Service Levy. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As per provisions of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act 2003, collections under 
Universal Service Levy (USL) are credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and allotment of 
funds for US OF is made through Parliamentary approvals. During the Financial Years 2002 -03 
to 2009-10, final allotment of funds received through Parliamentary approval was transferred to 
USO fund in the concerned years and the entire allocation so made and transferred  to USO fund 
was optimally utilized in the respective years.          
In BE/RE 2009-10, the Department had taken up the case for allotment of Rs.3000 crore, 
for USO Fund, with Ministry of Finance . However, an allotment of funds of Rs. 2400 crore was 
received from Ministry of Finance against this demand both in BE and RE 2009-10.  
In BE 2010 -11, Rs. 3000 crore was sought for allocation to USOF. However, an 
allotment of Rs. 2400 crore only has been received from Ministry of Finance. 
The concern of the Standing Committee in regard to the recommendations for allocation 
of funds for USO activities commensurate with the collections made under USL was also 
communicated to Ministry of Finance by the Department. In reply, the  Ministry of Fin ance has 
inter alia  intimated that while considering the proposal of DoT for constitution of USOF 
initially, Cabinet had decided the Department of Telecommunications to consult Ministry of 
Finance at the time of finalizing the amount to be transferred to U SOF and thus, Ministry has the 
authority to decide the quantum of funds to be transferred to USOF.  MoF have further stated in 
their letter ibid that the amount towards transfer to USOF is provided on the basis of claims 
pending with the DoT for releases f rom USOF. However, the concerns of Standing Committee 
have been noted by MoF for necessary action during RE 2010-11. 
The Ministry of Finance has further stated that the Licence fee from telecom service 
providers is an important component of Non -Tax Revenue  of the Union Government. It also 
stated that as the Government is committed to finance various flagship programmes of the 

48 
 
Government, the resources cannot be locked by simply lodging them in the Public Account of 
India. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
dated 21st July, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.11 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 Telephone Advisory Committee (TACs) at the district and zonal level is an important 
mechanism to keep an oversight over the implementation of various telecom projects funded by 
the Government.  In this connection, the Committee observe that the meetings of  TACs are not 
being regularly held.  These Committees are an important link between users i.e. public at large 
and the implementing agencies and can play pivotal role by getting the feedback from the users 
and communicating to the implementing agencies for  taking the desired action accordingly.  As 
such the Committee emphasize that the Department should closely monitor the outcome of the 
sittings by these Committees.  The necessary action in this regard should be taken and the 
Committee informed accordingly.  
Action Taken by the Government 
During the calendar year 2010, till date a total of 8 meetings have been held in various 
Telecom District of MTNL Delhi and 3 meetings are held in MTNL Mumbai. 
A total number of 136 meetings of TAC have been held by BSNL  since October 2009 . 
Circle-wise list is as below. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of BSNL Circle 
(No. of SSAs) 
No. of TAC 
Meetings  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of BSNL Circle 
(No. of SSAs) 
No. of TAC 
Meetings  
1 Andaman & Nicobar (1) 0 
 
15 North East – I (3) 1 
2 Andhra Pradesh (22) 21 
 
16 North East – II (3) 2 
3 Assam (7) 0 
 
17 Orissa (13) 1 
4 Bihar (19) 5 
 
18 Punjab (11) 6 
5 Chhattisgarh (6) 0 
 
19 Rajasthan (24) 4 
6 Gujarat (18) 9 
 
20 Tamilnadu (17) 0 
7 Haryana (9) 3 
 
21 Uttaranchal (7) 2 
8 Himachal Pradesh (6) 2 
 
22 UP (East) (31) 16 
9 Jammu & Kashmir (5) 0 
 
23 UP (West) (18) 9 

49 
 
10 Jharkhand (6) 2 
 
24 West Bengal (14) 2 
11 Karnataka (19) 2 
 
25 Chennai T D (4) 0 
12 Kerala (12) 9 
 
26 Calcutta TD (4) 0 
13 Madhya Pradesh (34) 26 
 
  Total (343) 136 
14 Maharashtra (30) 14 
     
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.14 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 The Committee further note  that as per the existing position local sitting Member of 
Parliament is the co -Chairman of TACs.  In this regard, the Committee may like to draw the 
attention of the Department to the district level Vigilance Committees constituted by the Union 
Ministry of Rural Development where the local sitting Member of Parliament is the Chairman.  
The Committee recommend that the local Member of Parliament should be the Chairman of 
district and zonal TACs on the line of the Vigilance Committees of the Ministry of Rura l 
Development.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 Presently, the concerned GMTD, BSNL is made the Chairman in the TAC and the 
Hon'ble M.Ps are given the status of Co-Chairman , due to the following reasons:- 
(i) The area of jurisdiction of a TAC may exceed the constituency area of the  Hon'ble M.P. 
(ii) There may be more than one M.P. in a TAC. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.17 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 
 As per the Broadband Policy, 2004, the Department has targeted to provide broadband 
connectivity to all Gram Panchayats, Government High Secondary Schools and Public Health 
Centres by 2012.  The existing status with regard to Gram Panchayats is that out of  242279 
Village Panchayats only 79924 Gram Panchayats i.e. only 32 per cent could be broadband 
enabled as on February, 2010.  The State/UT wise information provided by the Department 
indicates that the coverage of broadband to Gram Panchayats is very low i n almost all the 
States/UTs excepting Kerala, Goa and Puducherry where almost 100 per cent Gram Panchayats 

50 
 
have been covered.  Besides, the performance in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Nagaland is 
also very good.  The Committee are surprised to note that  in Daman and Diu, Dadar and Nagar 
Haveli and particularly Chandigarh which is one of the best planned cities in the country, none of 
the Village Panchayats, in these areas have been broadband enabled.  The Committee may like to 
know the reasons for non co verage of all the Village Panchayats under broadband expansion 
programme particularly in the case of Chandigarh which 17 Village Panchayats.  Besides, the 
Committee emphasize that performance with regard to providing connectivity to rural 
Panchayats should be evaluated State/UT - wise and the necessary corrective action taken so that 
all the Village Panchayats are covered by the stipulated time frame i.e. by 2012.  With regard to 
the target of broadband enabling of the Higher Secondary School and Public Hea lth Centres the 
existing status has not been indicated in any of the documents furnished by the Department.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the existing position and the steps initiated by the 
Department to provide broadband connectivity to all these schools and Public Health Centres by 
the stipulated deadline of 2012. 
Action Taken by the Government 
Gram Panchayat coverage:  
  There are a total of 2,42,069 village panchayat across the country.  Out of these, 91,365 
Village panchayats are covered through ADSL & Wi -Max broadband.In Chandigarh Secondary 
Switching Area (SSA) , there are 23 village panchayats out of which 16 have already been 
covered. Efforts are being made to cover remaining village panchayats of C handigarh. Further,  
BSNL has planned to cover all gram panchayats by March 2012. 
The major barrier in growth of broadband in rural areas is non-availability of connectivity 
upto village level. It has been targeted that all 2.5 lakh Gram Panchayats would b e extended 
broadband connectivity by 2012, from where broadband connection can be given to Higher 
Secondary Schools and Public Health Centres. For the said purpose, in order to lay OFC Cable, 
GIS mapping of existing network is going on. After GIS mapping, DPR will be prepared and 
approval will be taken from competent authority. 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B dated 21st July, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee find that date of 3G auctions has been shifted several times and at last 
now the auction is scheduled to begin from 9 th April, 2010.  As informed by the Department, the 
rules of auction have been announced on 25 th February, 2010 and they are on the DoT's website.  
As regards eligibility, as mentioned in the rules, all existing Universal Access Service License 
holders or ex isting telecom operators are eligible to bid in this auction.  In addition, foreign 
entities that have experience of running 3G services are also eligible to bid.  With regard to 
security aspects in the e -Auction, the Committee have been informed that the best practices 
followed by various auctions done by the Office of Communication in the UK, and the Federal 

51 
 
Communications Commission in the USA have been taken into consideration.  Besides, The 
auctioneers who are working for DoT have long experience of co nducting auctions in various 
European and American markets.  The Department have also informed the Committee that 
suitable steps have been taken by the Department to ensure free, fair and transparent e -Auction 
for the 3G spectrum.  The Committee hope that the Department auction the 3G spectrum in a 
successful manner.  In this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that by undergoing 
the process of e -Auction, the Department should ensure that the Indian auctioneers also get the 
experience and expertis e so that the country need not depend on the foreign countries for 
conducting such auctions in future.  
Action Taken by the Government 
The e -Auction was carried out using software which has been developed by the 
Auctioneer. This is professional software wh ich is proprietary in nature devised for the purpose 
of auction of radio spectrum exclusively. The Ministry has requirements of certain safeguards to 
be built in the e -auction system to ensure the security of the entire process for a fail -safe 
operation. Further the auctioneer was expected to have the experience of conducting at least 5 e -
auctions in the last 3 years. An Evaluation Committee had gone through the process of technical 
and financial evaluation with reference to a Request of Proposal (RFP) and finally selected the 
Auctioneer. 
 Any company including Indian company could be considered to act as an e -auctioneer in 
the future if it would meet the terms and conditions required to conduct e -Auction, prevailing at 
that time.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
  
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 The Department have inserted a Clause in the Access Service Licence Agreement which 
stipulates that Licensee shall conduct audit and provide self certificates annually as per 
procedure prescribed by Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC)/or any other a gency 
authorized by Licensor from time to time for conforming to limits/levels for antennae (Base 
Station Emissions) for general public exposure should conform to the Guidelines prescribed by 
International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (I CNIRP) from time to time.  
The Committee observe that besides the aforesaid provision, there is an urgent need on the part 
of the Department to ensure that the licencee actually conduct audit annually and the limits/levels 
for antennae (Base Station Emissi ons) for general public exposure are within the limits 
prescribed by ICNIRP.   
Action Taken by the Government 

52 
 
 For implementation of the guidelines, regarding e mission by Base Transceiver Station 
(BTSs), issued by the International Commission on Non Ionizing radiation Protection (ICNIRP), 
instructions have been issued by the Department, in the month of April 2010, to all 
CMTS/UASL Licensees. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I) 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE 
OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 On a query whether having a telephone connection is one of the parameters that debars a 
person/family from the status of BPL, the Department has responded that the matter does not 
come under their purview.  The Committee are unhappy to note the way the Dep artment has 
responded to one of the important issue which has great impact on telephone connectivity in 
rural areas.  Instead of taking the matter with the Department of Rural Development and State 
Governments, the Department have simply stated that the ma tter is not under their purview.  
While expressing displeasure over the insensitive attitude of the Department, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the matter should be clarified from the Department of Rural 
Development and the State Governments and the Committee apprised about the position in this 
regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 As desired by the Committee the requisite clarifications have been sought from 
Department of Rural Development and the Committee will be apprised accordingly. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B 
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note  that besides installing the VPTs in the Gram Panchayats, what is 
more important is that, these VP'Ts actually work upto the satisfaction of villagers who are the 
actual users.  In this background the Gram Panchayats can play an important role.  What is 
displeasing to the Committee is the casual way the Department have replied that the Gram 
Panchayats have no role in this regard.  The Committee strongly recommend that various 
telecom facilities provided with the Government funding should be a part of the ag enda of social 
audit by Gram Sabhas.  The desired guidelines envisaging the role of Gram Panchayats in this 
regard should be framed and the Committee informed accordingly.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As per the Agreement, the Service Providers who hav e installed these VPTs are 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the VPTs. The help of the Gram Panchayat is 
being sought for identifying the location for installation of new VPTs. However, as per the 
suggestion of the Committee to involve Gram Panchayats for social audit of telecom facilities 
provided with subsidy support from USO Fund, Panchayats through the Department of Rural 

54 
 
Development is being consulted to ensure that these telecom facilities are maintained by the 
Service Providers effectively. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee further note  that the members of TAC are provided landline telephone.  
In case, the member of TAC in whose area there is no telephone connectivity is deprived of the 
facility of telephone.  Telephone connectivity is the basic requirement of a TAC member as 
through it he remains connected with local masses of his area who can communicate their 
grievances as well as makes suggestions.  As such the Committee would like to recommend that 
the members of TAC should be provided mobile or WLL or landline telephones as per thei r 
preference.  The desired steps in this regard should be taken and Committee informed 
accordingly.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 Proposal for grant of mobile connection to TAC members in lieu of concessional 
telephone is under examination in the Department. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that there has been reservation by the Ministry of Finance on the 
issue of waiving of rural landline licence fee as the proposal would entail a revenue loss of Rs. 
200 crore per annum, of which Rs. 75 crore per annum will be the loss to the General Exchequer.  
The Committee also note about the viewpoint of the Ministry of Finance that at a time when the 
obligations from the USO Fund are likely to increase substantially, any accrual of deficit in 
General Exchequer is not justified.  Howeve r, the Finance Wing of the Department of 
Telecommunications have taken the case further and have forwarded for seeking suggestions to 
the USOF wing.  The Committee have now been informed that the matter is under consideration 
for decision on further course  of action.  Moreover, as stated earlier, the allocations made under 
USO Fund are far lesser than the revenue generated by the levy to form the USO Fund.  As such 
the Committee strongly recommend that decision in this regard should be taken at the earliest  
and the concerns of the Committee duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
Action Taken by the Government 

55 
 
 The concern of the Hon'ble Standing Committee on Information Technology (2009 -10) 
on Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) of the Ministry of Communic ation & Information 
Technology (DoT) regarding the issue of waiver of rural landline license fee to Telecom Service 
Providers has already been communicated to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance.  The matter is still under consideration  in the Department for decision on the further 
course of action. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)   
 The Committee note  that the Department have not taken any initiative to assess the 
impact of broadband in the growth of GDP in our country.  As such the Committee emphasize 
that a survey in this regard should be done at the earliest and the Committee be informed 
accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Department of Telecom is initiating survey to ascertain impact of broadband in growth of 
GDP in the country. Outcome of the same will be submitted in due course of time, once report is 
received.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee note that the scheme of wireless broadband connectivity in rural and 
remote areas will be taken up after BWA and 3G spectrum auction to provide financial 
assistance by way of subsidy for the wireless broadband active infrastructure such as BT S, by 
utilizing the existing passive infrastructure available with the Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) 
and this scheme would provide broadband coverage to above 2 lakh villages in 5000 blocks and 
the rest of the villages will be covered in subsequent sche mes.  The Committee hope that the 
BWA & 3G Auction is completed as per the stipulated timeframe and the scheme sees the light 
of the day.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 Formulation of the scheme is under progress. The BWA and 3G Spectrum is a pre -
requisite for launching this scheme.  The 3G and BWA spectrum auction have been completed as 
per schedule.  

56 
 
This scheme is expected to provide broadband coverage to about 2 lakh villages in 5000 
Blocks and the rest of the villages will be covered in subsequent schemes.  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note that till 29 th March, 2010 TRAI has received nine responses from 
various stakeholders.  Some of issues that have been highlighted in the responses that have been 
received by TRAI include (i) requirements of large chunk of contiguous spectrum bandwidths, 
(ii) refarming o f spectrum from the Government agencies for the newer technologies in the 
internationally identified spectrum bands, (iii) refarming of existing 2G spectrum bands 
900/1800/1900 MHz for deployment of 4G technologies and services, (iv) issue of convergence 
of different technologies and services, (v) issues & challenges in extending the broadband access 
to the rural India, (vi) requirements of licensed and de -licensed usages of the spectrum to enable 
cost effective business models that are usable in urban and rural connectivity and (vii) need to 
migrate from IPV4 to IPV6.  The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by TRAI for 
introduction of 4G spectrum recommend that the Department should look into the nitty gritty of 
the issues raised by the stakeholde rs so that 4G spectrum is introduced in the country at the 
earliest. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 TRAI has issued a pre -consultation paper to identify the issues involved in introduction of 
4G such as allocation & pricing of spectrum for such services a nd issues related to licensing. 
Various stake holders have given their views/comments at the pre -consultation stage which are 
being analysed by TRAI for preparation of consultation paper.  
 The Department shall look into the various aspects of 4G spectrum,  once the 
recommendations are given by TRAI. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 

57 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee further note  that an International study has been conducted on harmful 
effects of radiation on mobile.  World Health Organization (WHO) recommends ICNIRP 
(International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection) guidelines for restriction of 
radiation on mobile.   Accordingly ICNIRP guideline have been approved by the Department.  
The Committee also note that the Department have specified ICNIRP limits with regard to 
radiation from base station tower & mobile phones.  Presently, DoT have stipulated the system 
of s elf certification of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) for mobile phone by mobile 
manufacturers.  The Committee in this regard would like to recommend that it should be made 
mandatory for the mobile manufacturers to indicate the level of radiation on the prod uct itself 
which would ensure that these manufacturers strictly follow the ICNIRP limits recommended by 
World Health Organization (WHO).  Besides all cell companies should clearly communicate the 
potential danger of cell phone radiation and exposure.  The Committee also emphasize that the 
cell phone industry should share the responsibility of risk communications and management 
specially taking into account the projections to have 600 million connections by 2012.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take the desired action to implement 
the aforesaid recommendations of the Committee. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The Department has requested Telecom Equipments Manufacturers Association of India 
(TEMA) and Indian Cellular Association (ICA) to ask all indigenous m anufacturers for strict 
compliance of the guidelines recommended by ICNIRP for Indian Telecom  Sector regarding 
basic restrictions and reference levels for limiting EMF Exposure and “Test Schedule/Test 
Procedure for SAR measurement”.  DGFT have also been requested to direct Custom Authorities 
to clear mobile handsets, being imported, complying with the basic restrictions in terms of SAR 
value limited to 2 W/Kg localized for head and trunk in the frequency range of 10 MHz to 10 
GHZ only.  Manufacturers of mobile handsets have to furnish self -certification for complying 
with these standards in the prescribed format.  The case is being followed up with DGFT for 
necessary action. 
 The Department has also asked TEMA and ICA to write to  all the mobile handset 
manufacturers to indicate the level of radiation on the product itself and to clearly communicate 
the potential danger of mobile phone radiation and exposure. 
 Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC), under this Department, will be the nodal 
agency for monitoring the compliance of these guidelines. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 

58 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 The Committee observe that recently medial has reported about the illegal phone towers 
mushrooming in Delhi and NCR areas.  In this regard, it has been reported by the Department 
that to formulate a uniform mobile tower policy, TRAI has issued a pre consultation paper d ated 
5 February, 2010 on telecom towers and related issues.  The Committee feel that the aforesaid 
initiative has only been taken after the problem of illegal towers has been reported by the Media.  
The Committee are further concerned to note that the Depa rtment have not bothered to know the 
number of non-functional towers in the country.  The Committee are of the strong view that the 
Department itself has to play a proactive role with regard to various issues related to 
telecommunications in the country.  The problem of illegal towers in the country needs to be 
addressed.  In this regard, a country wide survey should be conducted to know the extent of the 
problem of illegal and non -functional towers in various States/UTs.  Now when the matter has 
been referred to TRAI, the Committee hope that the consultation by TRAI would be done in a 
stipulated time frame followed by guidelines by the Department to address the problem of 
telecommunication towers in the country. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 TRAI has been  requested to expedite the consultation process including issue of 
consultation paper regarding mobile towers.  The matter will be actively pursued with TRAI by 
the Department. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 The Committee are disheartened to note that out of the Rs. 211.85 crore allocated at RE 
stage only Rs. 0.21 crore have been spent as on January, 2010 as the network has not been 
commissioned.  The Committee have been apprised that the IAF network is expect ed to be 
commissioned by June, 2010 and the optical fibre cable based Defence network is expected to be 
completed by December, 2012.  The Committee strongly recommend that the steps should be 
taken to ensure that the dedicated defence network is completed by the stipulated time frame 
particularly in the context of MoU signed between the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology and Defence whereby the vacation of the spare spectrum from Ministry 
of Defence is dependent on the executions of dedicated fibre cable based Defence networks. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 An amount of Rs. 211.85 crore was allocated for the year 2009 -10 (Revised allocation) 
for the 'OFC based network for Defence Services' on 19.01.2010 . The entire amount was spent 
by 31st  March, 2010.  Further, additional fund of Rs. 55.56 crore available through surrenders 
and re-appropriation was allocated under this head and the same was also spent. Currently, the 
IAF network is at an advanced stage of completion and is likely to be completed by September, 

59 
 
2010.  Matter is being pursued with BSNL and MTNL vigorously to complet e/commission the 
network at the earliest. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ 
Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 16-4/2010-B  
dated 21st July, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
 24  February, 2011________ Chairman, 
05 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
 Confidential 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1 7th February, 201 1 from 1 500 
hours to 1 700 hours in Committee Room ‘ D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
6. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Abdul Rahman 
8. Shri Tufani Saroj 
9. Dr. Bhola Singh 
10. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
11. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
12. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
13. Shri Salim Ansari 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
15. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj   - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
 
 *****  *****  *****  ***** 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports and 
to have preliminary meeting on the subject ‘Current status of Indian Telecom 
development growth and policy including the status as well as measures to 
accelerate penetration and availability of Cellular, Broadband and Rural 
Telephony’. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following two draft 
 Reports:- 
 
(i) *****  *****  *****  *****   
 
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in their Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) 
relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Telecommunications). 
 
4. The Draft Action Taken Report on the Eighth Report relating to the 
Department of Telecommunications was adopted by the Committee without any 
modification.  The draft Action Taken Report on the Sixth Report relating to the 
Ministry of Information Broadcasting was adopted with modification in Para No. 
14 of the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the two Action 
Taken Reports in the light of factual verifications made by the 
Ministry/Department concerned and present the same to the House on a date 
convenient to him.   
 
6. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
* Matter not related to the Report. 
 

62 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 3 of Introduction] 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 4, 5, 6, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19, 23, 24, 25, 29 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36 
& 37 
 
 Total 20 
 Percentage 54.05 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 3, 9, 10, 17, 21, & 27  
 Total 07 
 Percentage 18.92 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 8, 11, 14, 16, 20, 22, 26, 28 & 33  
 Total 10 
 Percentage 27.03 
 
 
 