 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
        INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
ISSUES RELATED TO PAID NEWS  
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
47 


 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
         STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
         INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
ISSUES RELATED TO PAID NEWS 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6 May, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 May, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS  
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
 REPORT  
 PART – I  
Chapter I Introductory 1 
 i Genesis 4 
ii Forms, facets and manifestations of Paid News 6 
iii Distinction between „News‟ and „Advertisements‟ 7 
iv Need for defining „Paid News‟ 9 
Chapter II Complexities involved in the Issue of „Paid News‟ 11 
Chapter III Causes of „Paid News‟ 14 
 i Editorial Section v/s Management/Owners of Media Houses 14 
ii Working conditions and issue of wage  of Media Personnel 17 
iii Private Treaties 19 
iv Cross Media Holdings/Ownership 23 
Chapter IV Paid News and its implications on Electoral Process 29 
Chapter V Existing mechanism/ Guidelines/ Codes/ Norms/ Acts/ Organizations/ Professional 
bodies/ Legislations/ etc. 
36 
The case of M/s Jindal Steel Power Limited and M/s Zee Ltd – highlighting 
loophole in the existing guidelines/code/ mechanism 
41 
Chapter VI Measures to tackle the menace of „Paid News‟  45 
 i Efficacy of Self regulation  45 
ii Role of Press Council of India (PCI) in tackling „Paid News‟ 
PCI‟s Sub -Committee Report rel ating to 2009 General Election titled „„Paid 
News: How corruption in the Indian media undermines democracy‟ 
57 
62 
iii Regulation of advertisements by DAVP 62 
iv Complaint Redressal mechanism/ Ombudsman 63 
v Penalty 66 
vi Transparency regarding Reve nue/Assets of Media Houses and Right to 
Information Act , 2005 (RTI) 
69 
vii Awareness/Education/Training and need for a national help line to curb „Paid 
News‟ 
72 
 
 
Part-II 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
76-98 
 Annexures  
I Conclusions of the PCI‟s Sub -Committee Report on Paid News relating to  2009 
General election titled „Paid News: How corruption in the Indian media undermines 
democracy‟ 
 
99 
II Brief of the recommendations of PCI‟s Report on Paid News relating to  2009 
General election as provided by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
102 
III Information furnished by Election Commission of India on the issue of paid news 
 
103 
IV Details of the Complaints received by Press Council of India against „Paid 
News‟ since 2009 
110 
 
 
Appendices  
I Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee (2010 -11) held on                                    
20 December, 2010 
116 
II Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee (2011 -12) held on                                   
24 October, 2011 
118 
III Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2011 -12) held on                                     
11 January, 2012 
120 
IV Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee (2011 -12) held on                                     
31 January, 2012 
122 
V Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2012 -13) held on                                    
13 December, 2012 
124 
VI Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (201 2-13) held on                                    
16 January, 2013 
126 
VII Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee (201 2-13) held on                                    
26 April, 2013 
129 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
  Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
  Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
** 3. VACANT  
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
8. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
9. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
11. Shri Abdul Rahman 
12. Shri Prem Das Rai 
13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
15. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19. Shri C. Sivasami 
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
21. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
* 22. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
* 24. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
* 25. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
26. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
27. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
28. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
**      Shri Milind Deora, ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent on his 
appointment as Minister of State for Communications and IT on 12.07.2011. 
(ii) 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
  Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
***** 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Dr.  Charles Dias 
* 7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
#14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
@ 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
24. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
**27. Dr.  Bhushan Lal Jangde 
28. Shri Prabhat Jha 
  29. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
@ 31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
  
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice  Shri P. Rajeeve, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
#   Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17th May, 2012   
@     Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11th July, 2012 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar and Shri Ravi 
Shankar Prasad, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
(iii) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2012-13) 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   - Chairman  
LokSabha 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
 3. Shri RajendraAgrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
* 6. Shri Khagen Das 
  7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri RajenGohain 
9. Smt. DarshanaJardosh 
10. Shri H. D. Kumaraswamy 
11. Shri BaidyaNath Prasad Mahato 
12. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
13. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
** 14. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
15. Shri Tapas Paul 
16. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
17. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RajyaSabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
# 27. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
@ 30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri BrahmDutt  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta  -  Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg -  Additional Director 
4. Mrs. Rinky Singh  -  Executive Assistant 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.12.2012 vide  Shri Ramsinh Rathwa, vide  Lok Sabha Bulletin 
Part –II dated 13.12.2012. 
**    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 09.01.2013 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II dated 09.01.2013. 
#      Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.03. 2013 vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II dated 01.04.2013 
@ Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P. Rajya Sabha resigned on 11.02.2013 from Committee. 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2012 -13), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Repor t on their behalf present the Forty -
seventh Report on ‘Issues related to Paid News’ relating to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) selected this subject for 
detailed examination and Report to the Parliament. In view of the wide ramifications of the 
subject and considering the need for wider consultation, the examination of the subject could 
not be completed during the term of the Committee (2010 -11). The Standing Committee on 
Information Technology (2011 -12), therefore, reselected the subject to continue further, the 
examination. Since the examination remained inconclusive during the term of the Committee 
(2011-12), the present Committee again selected the subject to complete the unfinished task.  
 
3. To elicit wide opinion on the subject, a Press Communiqué was issued through print and 
electronic media on 15 th December, 2010 seeking views/suggestions from 
experts/stakeholders/organizations/public at large. The Committee also sought vie ws of the 
Election Commission of India, former Chief Election Commissioners, self -regulatory bodies on 
media, Press Council of India, Prasar Bharati and the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting on the subject.  
 
4. The Committee  also took evidence of the experts, journalists, News Broadcasters 
Association, Prasar Bharati, former Chief Election Commissioner, former members of Press 
Council of India, President of Editors Guild of India, President of Indian Journalist Union, Centre 
for Media Studies, Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat, President of Haryana Commission of 
Journalist and the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
 
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 26 th April, 2013 considered and adopted the 
Report. The Committee were immensely benefitted by the suggestions/contributions made by 
the Members of the Committee for which I express my sincere thanks to them.  
 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati who tendered their evidence before the 
Committee. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to the 
organizations/individuals who furnished written information/views as well as those who 
appeared before the Committee and made available necessary information for consideration of 
the Committee, which was of great help to the Committee in arriving at conclusions. 
 
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for of the invaluable assis tance 
rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
29 April, 2013 Standing Committee on  
09 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Information Technology 
(v) 

 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Introductory 
 
Media, due to its inherent nature of reach and influence on masses, plays a 
vital role in a country‟s political, economic, social and cultural set up and is 
considered as an important vehicle of communication to carry information to the 
people. Rapid advancement in Communication and Information Technology has not 
only led to convergen ce of technology but also had paved way for media to 
permeate our lives through various communication modes viz. Newspaper, radio, 
Television, internet, mobile phone etc.  According to the data furnished by the 
Ministry, as on 31.12.2012, there are around 93,985 registered publications, 850 
permitted television channels out of which 413 are under News and Current Affairs 
category and 437 under non -news category and Doordarshan runs 37 channels. 
Besides, there are over 250 FM radio stations and numerous inte rnet websites.  
Media, which is considered as the fourth pillar of democracy, not only acts as a 
repository of public trust but also plays a significant role in shaping the human 
mind.  All forms of programmes/articles have their significance in doing so, 
particularly „News‟ which aims at providing correct and timely information to the 
people.  
1.2 „News‟, according to Press Council of India (PCI), is meant to be factual, 
neutral, fair and objective, whereas information and opinion from „Advertisements 
are paid  for, by corporate entities, Governments, organisations or individuals.  
However, off late a dangerous trend of presenting the paid information as news 
content has spread at remarkable pace in some section of the Media. The Ministry 
of Information and Broa dcasting, in this regard, has stated that there have been a 
number of media reports that sections of the electronic and print media have 
received monetary considerations for publishing or broadcasting in favour of 
particular individuals or organisations or  corporate entities, what is essentially 
„advertisement‟ disguised as „news‟ and this has been commonly referred to as the 
„Paid News Syndrome‟.  
 
1.3 The trend of presenting the advertising content, that is paid for, as „News‟ is 
a serious and damaging fraud on the innocent audiences/readers/viewers/public. It 
not only undermines/threatens the democratic process but also affects 
financial/stock/real estate market, health, industry and is also a tax fraud. 
However, according to the News Broadcasters Association  it is just a question of 
ethics.  
 
1.4 Highlighting the nature and spread of the menace, PCI‟s Sub -Committee on 
„Paid News‟ during 2009 General Election, in its Report, as submitted by the 
Ministry, inter-alia stated as under:- 

 
 
2 
 
“The entire operation is cl andestine. This malpractice has become 
widespread and now cuts across newspapers and television channels, 
small and large, in different languages and located in various parts of the 
country. What is worse, these illegal operations have become “organized” 
and involve advertising agencies and public relations firms, besides 
journalists, managers and owners of media companies. Marketing 
executives use the services of journalists – willingly or otherwise – to gain 
access to political personalities. So -called “rate cards” or “packages” are 
distributed that often include “rates” for publication of “news” items that 
not merely praise particular candidates but also criticize their political 
opponents. Candidates who do not go along with such “extortionist” 
practices on the part of media organizations are denied coverage. 
Sections of the media in India have willy -nilly become participants and 
players in such practices that contribute to the growing use of money 
power in politics which undermines democratic processes a nd norms – 
while hypocritically pretending to occupy a high moral ground.” 
1.5 Even though there have been reported nexus between media professionals, 
corporate lobbyists, politicians etc., and the cases „Paid News‟ in the media, most 
cited instances in th e memoranda, submitted to the Committee, are 2009 General 
elections; Assembly elections of Maharashtra, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, 
Bihar; etc.  The most recent being Assembly elections held in December, 2012. The 
PCI‟s fact finding team on Gujarat el ection (2012) revealed some of the very 
damaging findings on Paid News. The Report of Fact -Finding Team, submitted to 
the Committee, states that at least 444 suspected cases of paid news were reported 
in Gujarat and soon after conclusion of second Phase of  polling on 17 th December, 
2012, 126 confirmed cases of paid news were identified, with 61 candidates in poll 
fray admitting to have paid for such news in electronic and print media. However, 
according to the District level Media Certification and Monitori ng Committees 
(MCMCs), as submitted by the Ministry, 495 suspected cases of paid news were 
reported in Gujarat of which the 414 were confirmed cases. 
1.6 „Paid News‟ is not just an election time phenomenon. Citing a non -election 
instance of „Paid News‟, th e President of Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat (ABGP), 
during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“As regards business, you know everybody wants to get his product 
popularised. But if he gives that in an advertisement, people do not 
believe it. If it is presented as news/as an editorial/ as a talk, people start 
believing it. You must be knowing about the fame case of Munir Khan. 
There was an interview going on for so many weeks on the television 
Channel. He was selling his products. You must be knowing that a famous 
actress Tabussum was talking with him. So, he got so much popular that 
he gained. He said that he forfeited medicines. He popularised a potion 
and collected a huge amount of money. When I filed an RTI, by that time, 
there were 100 FIRs filed against h im. He ran away with all the amount. 
So, this is what happens in the case of „Paid News‟ when it is presented 
not as a news and advertisement as an editorial or a talk.” 
1.7 Elaborating further, on the issue, Rural Affair Editor, The Hindu,                              
Shri P. Sainath submitted as under:- 

 
 
3 
 
“Non-election transactions include the suppression of major scams in 
sections of the media that have access to the facts. A practice that 
entrenches extortion, bribery and blackmail, or even media -corporate-
political collusion. These sometimes burst out in the open - as in the 
CoalGate scam.  But non -election Paid News also involves very large 
transactions that draw far less attention. ....xxx....the largest English 
newspaper in the country run full pages of „news‟ in multiple editions. The 
same, identical full pages of „news‟ and features also appeared as 
„advertisements‟ at another time and date in the very same newspaper. 
Non-election transactions are obviously more everyday and prolific. The 
launching and marketing of new products happens around the year. Paid 
News in the media often works these into „packages.‟ Company X is set to 
launch a new car. From days in advance „mood pieces‟  or „colour pieces‟  
on the vehicle begin to appear under the bylines of  regular, bonafide 
journalists and photographers. Around the time of the launch, the car 
pops up, seemingly by coincidence, during the news bulletins of a channel 
or on the news pages of a major daily. This is at its most visible during 
the launch period of major Bollywood films (whose budgets include buying 
both media space and favourable reviews). In one case, the hero and 
heroine of a film then just hitting the theatres (Bunty aur Bubbly) 
appeared as anchors reading the news on a particular channel.” 
1.8 Revealing another dimension to the non -election transaction of „Paid News‟, 
President, Editors Guild of India, submitted during evidence:- 
 “We have had meetings with the then Chairman of the SEBI which 
regulates all listed companies in the Stock Exchanges and SEBI wanted to 
discuss the issue with the Editors. Two or three meetings were held and I 
attended those meetings. We looked into the issues and SEBI started 
looking as to whether TV Anchors are influencing the Stock Market with 
their coverage. So the re is a move by SEBI which is addressing the 
financial side of the problem which we are also endorsing. All significant 
companies are part of the Stock Market.” 
1.9 Enumerating the role of journalists/media/institutional response on paid 
news, Rural Affair Editor, The Hindu, in his memorandum, submitted as under:- 
“The journalists and photographers merely do what they‟re told, 
sometimes willingly, often not.  The “Paid News” scandal of 2009 burst 
out into the open in part because several journalists working  within such 
media, disgusted at the debasement of their role, acted as whistle -
blowers. There are however, also willing participants amongst some 
sections of journalists.  Often these are very high -profile, high ranking 
ones who may not even have paused to consider the nature of the activity 
they‟re undertaking. 
What is astonishing though, is the conspiracy of silence within the media 
(and their corporate backers) over the cancer of Paid News.  Every other 
sector or institution (including Parliament) has d ebated the issue 
vigorously.  In the media there is silence.  Just a handful of publications 
..xxx.. have ventured into that terrain at all.  There are a large number of 
publications that have not carried a single word on Paid News, a large 
number of chann els that won‟t touch the issue.  In itself, that is a clear 

 
 
4 
 
indicator of how compromised the media has been, how widespread the 
cancer is.  
It should be mentioned that there are journalists, usually senior ones at 
„executive level‟ positions in their organ isations, who have gone along 
with and are okay with the phenomenon. The Zee -Jindal scandal is not a 
stray or isolated example.  There are some senior journalists -- who seem 
to me to be journalists no longer, but corporate executives -- who have 
played an active role in the spread of this practice. Some of these do so 
for personal gain. Some actually believe it is a simple matter of space -
selling, necessary for survival and profit..xx.. 
It also means that when Parliament discusses any issue affecting the 
interests of the corporate media -- say a Broadcasting Bill - the public will 
be kept in the dark about the real nature of the debate. They will know 
only what these dominant media allow them to know.” 
1.10 Nevertheless, some of the stakeholders/experts who  deposed before the 
Committee also stated that it is because some section of Media has raised concern, 
the issues associated with „Paid News‟ is being discussed. Besides, the issue has 
come to the forefront primarily because these revelations, about media selling the 
news space, have raised a serious question mark on the credibility of Journalists 
and media.  
1.11 Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject „Issues related to 
Paid News‟ for detailed examination and report.  Taking cognizance of  the 
sensitivity of the matter and the demand of the subject for wider consultation, the 
Committee at preliminary stage, issued a press communiqué to elicit the 
views/suggestions from individuals/experts/stakeholder/organisations/public at 
large.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of various experts, stakeholders, 
former PCI Member, News Broadcasters Association, former Chief Election 
Commissioner, Editors Guild of India, Journalists/ Union/Association, Centre for 
Media Studies, etc.  The Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to get clarifications on various points 
relating to the subject.  As a result of such interactions/discussions, several 
loopholes/shortcomings related to Paid News ha ve come to the notice of the 
Committee. Taking all those factors into account including the delay on the part of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to come out with a concrete action to 
deal with the menace, the Committee in their report have rev iewed the genesis of 
„Paid News‟, existing mechanism/guidelines/codes/norms/organisations/legislations 
in this regard and measures required to tackle the malpractice. These aspects are 
detailed in succeeding paragraphs.   
(i) Genesis  
 1.12 „Paid News‟ is not a recently discovered phenomenon. In fact the 
phenomenon is old, complex and deep rooted in the system and is spreading its 
cancerous roots rapidly. According to Rural Affair Editor, The Hindu, „Paid News‟ is 
not about corruption of individual rogue jo urnalists but it is a complex, highly -

 
 
5 
 
structured trade involving the media, corporations and sometimes dominant 
sections of the media of the political class and there is not a single major state in 
the country without such instances. This menace surfaced p rominently after 2009 
General elections. However, according to Shri T.K. Krishnamurthy, former Chief 
Election Commissioner, even in the 2004 Parliament elections, Election Commission 
started noticing this malpractice.  
1.13 Regarding genesis of „Paid News‟ , quoting the Memorandum of Andhra 
Pradesh Union of Working Journalists (APUWJ), Press Council of India in its Sub -
Committee Report on „Paid News‟ during General Election, 2009 has stated that the 
syndrome, during the general elections of 2004, small and l ocal newspapers in 
towns and district headquarters in some parts of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat 
started this practise in an organised way. These small newspapers owned and 
edited by the same person entered into agreements with the local leaders of 
prominent parties or candidates and started publishing propaganda material of 
these parties or candidates as news for a fee in the run up to the elections. The 
Union observed that during 2009, when the Fifteenth Lok Sabha General elections 
and the legislative elect ions to the state of Andhra Pradesh were held 
simultaneously, advertising copy appeared as „paid news‟ along with a credit line of 
a staffer of a newspaper in order to mislead readers into believing that the article 
had in fact been written by a reporter of the newspaper. 
1.14 Adding further on development of „Paid News‟ phenomenon, Shri Y.C. Halan, 
former PCI member, during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“It has developed over the years and it reached its peak in the last 
elections.  The main reason for th e paid news is that media is now being 
controlled by the owners.  About 20 or 30 years back, the institutions of 
Editor and Publisher, that means the owner, were different. Owners were 
not the editors and editors were not the owners.  This emerged out of t he 
freedom movement.  The forward -looking businessmen established 
newspapers and newspapers were either pro -Government or anti -
Government.....xxxxx.....So, we have to understand the emergence of 
media in the Independent India.  It continued the same way fo r a couple 
of decades and then started deteriorating.  It started deteriorating when 
media became powerful.  Everybody realised that media is the only 
source of reaching to the people and the credibility of media was very 
high.  This is the background in which the candidates who were contesting 
the elections realised that influencing media by one way or the other 
would pay much more than paying to other sources like advertisements, 
publicity, etc.....xxxxx.....That is how the paid news phenomenon 
developed.”   
1.15 On the sudden upsurge of this phenomenon, as observed during 2009 
General elections, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, during 
evidence, submitted:- 
“On the first issue about why this has suddenly become a phenomenon 
although we have been fighting elections ever since Independence.  Sir, a 

 
 
6 
 
general trend that we find from the report of the Press Council of India to 
an extent, although may be not spelt out very clearly – is and in our 
interactions with various bodies is that com pared to the past, the media 
has become increasingly corporatized. There is obviously a greater 
emphasis on the business aspect of the media perhaps vis-à-vis compared 
to the more public spirited ventures which it was considered to be in the 
past.  This ce rtainly seems to be an important aspect of why this 
phenomenon of paid news has become more pronounced of late…”   
(ii) Forms, facets and manifestations of Paid News 
1.16 According to Press Council of India (PCI), „Paid News‟ has acquired different 
forms over last six decades from accepting gift on various occasions, foreign and 
domestic sponsored travels, besides benefits and payment of money. In addition, 
few stakeholders have cited examples of award ceremonies being sponsored by 
some media houses wherein  industrialists/professionals/personalities, who are the 
sponsors/regular advertisers for their media houses, are awarded and this is a 
regular news phenomenon. 
1.17 Highlighting other manifestation of this malpractice, former Chief Election 
Commissioner, Shri T. K. Krishnamurthy, in his Memorandum submitted to the 
Committee, stated as under: 
“Paid News‟ is only one aspect of the problem. We have heard a few cases 
where the Journalists blackmail the contesting candidates stating that if 
they are not properl y rewarded monetarily or otherwise they would 
boycott publishing about them or deliberately spread news against them.  
Here there is no payment as such but it is vindictive action for non 
payment.  It would be very difficult to prove the offence here unles s and 
until there is evidence of the blackmail. This seems to be more prevalent 
in regional papers.” 
1.18 Another facet of this phenomenon, as cited in the PCI‟s Sub -Committee 
Report on Gujarat election, submitted to the Committee, is as under:- 
“Interestingly Mr. Deepak Rajani of Aajkal daily, an eveninger of Rajkot, 
was in a denial mode about paid news and said his paper was carrying lot 
of items out of personal relationship, which is very significant in Gujarat 
social set up. He said his own brother was contesting from Rajkot and 
asked how he could expect money from his brother.” 
1.19 When the Committee desired to know whether this instance fall under paid 
news, PCI in their written reply stated as under:- 
“Since the newspaper itself had admitted carrying lot of news items out of 
personal relationship, this prima-facie falls under paid news.” 
  

 
 
7 
 
(iii)  Distinction between ‘News’ and ‘Advertisements’  
1.20 Advertisements disguised as „News‟ or „Advertorials‟ has blurred the 
boundary between the two.  The Min istry of Information and Broadcasting, in their 
written reply, submitted to the Committee, informed that according to  the 
Guidelines of the Press Council of India, „News‟ should be clearly demarcated from 
„Advertisements‟ by printing disclaimers and shoul d be strictly enforced by all 
publications. As far as „News‟ is concerned, it must always carry a credit line and 
should be set in a typeface that would distinguish it from advertisements.  
1.21 Expressing their view in the same context, Prasar Bharati sta ted that  „News‟ 
should be clearly distinguishable from „Advertorials‟ and the media house must 
clearly declare that a particular item is an advertorial.  It should be in different 
letter font in print media.  In case of electronic media, the word „Adverto rial‟ must 
remain superimposed during entire transmission of such advertorial.  
1.22 According to Shri Paranjoy Guha Thakurta, former PCI Member, in the recent 
years in India the distinction between „News‟ and „Advertisements‟ has been sought 
to be deliber ately blurred, if not, obliterated altogether. When the advertisements 
are camouflaged as news or when news is shown/published by selling editorial 
space it becomes very difficult for the viewer/reader to distinguish between news 
and advertorials/advertise ments. It becomes hard to distinguish whether a 
particular programme or review is a legitimate one or is it paid for. Even if paid 
content has been labelled as advertisements it is done in a very small font and that 
too with the abbreviation „Advt.‟ in som e corner.  Adding further, during evidence 
he submitted as under:- 
“There is no difference between an advertisement and paid news. The 
difference is that in the case of Paid News, it does not appear as if it is an 
advertisement. The type face and the font size are the same, and there is 
no disclaimer which could show these four letters „advt.‟. There is no 
mention anywhere that somebody has paid some money to publish this 
particular item in a newspaper or a publication. So, as the various 
guidelines of the Press Council of India over the years have shown, the 
reader should not be fooled. The reader should know what is an 
advertisement and what is not an advertisement. There should be a clear 
demarcation in the way in which this is printed and there should be  a 
disclaimer.” 
1.23 The Chairman, Centre for Media Studies, Shri N. Bhaskara Rao, in this regard 
submitted during evidence:- 
“..xx..Just putting some small letters in the corner or somewhere is not 
good enough..xx..Many times the television channels just put a small note 
in a corner.  You cannot see it.  There are eight points in the television 
screen. An ordinary viewer cannot keep track of that..xx..Television 
channels should designate certain hours..xx..Like Pakistan and South 
Africa did, you can design ate certain hours, like 5.30 and 6 o‟clock.  For 
example, there are certain blind belief programmes are there.  

 
 
8 
 
Unfortunately, they have better discipline. They have fixed timings.  They 
are all paid programmes.  They follow a fixed timings.  They should n ot 
bring it in -between the news or in -between the on -going programmes, 
which are popular.  They should distinguish according to time 
identification.  
- Second is there should be much bigger indication that it is paid by so 
and so.  Paid by whom is also ver y important. If that is not there, then 
how will you identify whose interest is being reflected.   Paid by whom is 
also as important as paid.  So, that needs to be taken into consideration 
as far as television channels are concerned.” 
1.24 Suggesting ways to distinguish between advertorials and News report, The 
Editor, Medianama, Shri Nikhil Pahwa, in his memorandum stated as under:- 
 “In case of TV, a particular feature i.e. paid /sponsored, should at all 
times, display the text „THIS SHOW IS AN ADVERTISEM ENT‟ for the 
duration of the show, at the top center of the screen in a font size that is 
the same as the median font size of the News channel ticker. In addition, 
all advertorials should be treated as advertisement and the advertiser 
should be directly he ld responsible for claims made in these advertorials, 
just as with any advertisement.” 
1.25 In view of the above suggestions, the Committee desired to know from the 
Ministry about their view for distinguishing News and Advertisements for both print 
and electronic media. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“In so far as the electronic media is concerned, Rule 7(10) under 
Advertisement Code of Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Rules, 
1994 formulated under Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
states that, all advertisements should be clearly distinguishable from the 
programme and should not in any manner interfere with the 
programmes... 
Also Rule 6(1)(d) under Programme code states that „No programme 
should be carried in the cable service which contains anything obscene, 
defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half truths‟.  
These provisions help distinguish News and programmes from 
advertisements. However, for strengthening this further, it can be 
suggested that the chan nels clearly mark the advertisements/ sponsored 
programmes and advertorials as “advertisement” at a specified location 
on the screen with adequate contrast and in the language of the 
programme and/ or subtitle. 
PCI, under section 13(2)(b) of the Act has fo rmed „Norms of Journalistic 
Conduct‟ which cover the principles and ethics regarding journalism. Norm 
36 prescribes guidelines on the subject „Advertisements‟ which states that 
advertisements must be clearly distinguishable from editorial matter 
carried in  the newspaper. Newspapers while publishing advertisements 
should specify the amount received by them. The rationale behind this is 
that advertisements should be charged at rates usually chargeable by a 
newspaper since payment of more than the normal rates would amount to 
a subsidy to the paper.” 

 
 
9 
 
1.26 Highlighting the excessive advertisements in programmes of the televisions,  
President, Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat (ABGP), during evidence, submitted as 
under: 
“Time-slot provided to advertisements is muc h higher. In ten minutes 
programme, there are even five minutes advertisements. Even in news, 
advertisements are there. Advertisements should not be more than 10 per 
cent, that too with quality contents and providing complete awareness to 
the viewers. 
1.27 On the issue of time allocated for advertisements and guidelines, the 
Committee while examination of Demands for Grants (2011-12) were informed that 
the code regarding advertisements is not being followed strictly. Wherein, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, during evidence, submitted as 
under:- 
“As per the Advertising code, if I am not mistaken and subject to 
correction, I think advertising is to be limited to 12 minutes per hours. 
But I would admit that this is not being followed.” 
(iv) Need for defining Paid News 
1.28 The increasing trend of presenting advertisements in the garb of news has 
posed a need for having a comprehensive definition for „Paid News‟ so that „News‟ 
and „Advertisements‟ can be clearly demarcated. Emphasizing on  the need for 
qualifying „Paid News‟ the Minister of Information and Broadcasting while replying to 
a question on 18th December, 2012 in Lok Sabha stated as under:- 
“With regard to paid news, ....xxx..... It is something which troubles us as 
much as it tro ubles you.  But we remain engaged with the Election 
Commission of India, with the Press Council of India to try and find a 
common ground which can then be transferred into a legal formulation 
which then can be successfully administered.  It is because, the  challenge 
as all of us understand in this is to find and determine that what 
constitutes or qualifies as paid news.  Therefore, once we have answered 
that fundamental question and put a legal formulation onto it, I think the 
rest of the process will become easy.” 
1.29 According to the Report of PCI‟s Sub-Committee on „Paid News‟,  during 2009 
General Election, Andhra Pradesh Union of Working Journalists (APUWJ) is the first 
union of journalists to raise its voice against paid news and is also the first bod y to 
have coined the phrase „Paid News‟. 
1.30 Various stakeholders/experts/organisations, in their submissions to the 
Committee, highlighted the need for having a comprehensive definition for „Paid 
News‟. Some of the views/definitions are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Stakeholders/ 
Organisations/ Experts 
Views/Definitions 
1. Prasar Bharati Any content,  whether true, untrue or 

 
 
10 
 
partially true,   transmitted to the general 
public, either by  publishing it in print 
media, or  by broadcasting through 
electronic media, or  through any other 
digital or non -digital medium, in 
exchange of pecuniary consideration 
received or to be received by the 
transmitting  print or electronic media, 
from any person, organization or 
institution interested in any manner in 
such transmission, without clearly 
segregating it  from paid advertisements,  
with intention to  make the recipients 
believe that the content is a genuine 
news item. 
2. Press Council of India Any news or analysis appearing in any 
media (print and Electronic) for a price in 
cash or kind as consideration. 
3. News Broadcasters 
Association (NBA) 
 „Paid News‟ may be defined to mean and 
include News, whether political News, 
business News, sports news, 
entertainment news or news  relating to 
any other field, reported or omitted to  be 
reported (whether by way of news 
bulletins.  Current affairs programmes, 
special programmes or any other 
programmes by whatever name called), 
in consideration of, or as quid pro quo 
for, any financial or non -financial benefit 
or reward what so ever. 
4. Chairman, Centre for Media 
Studies, ( Shri N. Bhaskara 
Rao) 
It could be described as „quid pro quo 
news‟ and may better be described the 
phenomenon as „unfair‟ or „camouflaged‟ 
news or advertisement. 
 
1.31 On being asked for a comprehensive definition of  Paid News, the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting endorsed the definition provided by PCI that „Any 
news or analysis appearing in any media (print and Electronic) for a price in cash or 
kind as consideration‟.  

 
 
11 
 
Chapter-II 
Complexities involved in the Issue of ‘Paid News’ 
1.32 The issue of „Paid News‟, according to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, is complex as it may be a treaty between two private parties with 
mutual consent or could be a clandestine financial transaction which is diffi cult to 
establish. 
1.33 On the issue of proving the menace, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting submitted as under:- 
“…..xxxx……Though there is a well established procedure to take action for 
such violations, the problem is to establish the violati on itself per se. 
There are so many different ways which can be adopted towards obliging 
the channels financially that it is extremely difficult to establish a violation 
in this regard.” 
1.34 According to The President, Editors Guild of India, Shri T.N. Ni nan, in the 
normal process, it cannot be identified, unless the person discloses it. 
1.35 In this context, former Chief Election Commissioner, Shri T.K. 
Krishnamurthy, during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“I agree that in 95 per cent of the cases we canno t prove, but I still I 
believe that we can prove at least 5 per cent in some cases. They will 
leave some trace.  For example, the telephonic talk he had with that 
person. We can try to find out the telephonic message.  It is possible to 
do it within a part icular time limit. So, if it is proved, then that person 
should be disentitled from functioning as a journalist.” 
1.36 On this issue, another former Chief Election Commissioner,                                    
Shri N. Gopalaswami, in his memorandum subm itted to the Committee, stated as 
under:- 
“Some of the Election Observers also brought to the notice of the 
Commission that advertisements camouflaged as news have been noticed 
in the vernacular press.  Though they carried the legend „advt‟ at the end, 
it was in a such small font that, unless looked at carefully, it would not be 
noticed easily, and was thus intended to mislead the reader to treat the 
item as „news‟…xx...in the case of visual media, things are more 
complicated and so detection will be more difficult.   
A channel may simply ignore a contesting candidate if he has not „paid‟ 
and this is more difficult to pin down as a malpractice by the authorities 
namely, PCI or ECI. 
Further, as the visual media coverage is transient in nature, malpractice 
indulged in by visual media may escape detection.  The visual media can 
resort to campaigning for a candidate by putting the „paid news‟ as a 
scrolling text which, being more transient becomes more difficult to pin 
down the visuals….. 

 
 
12 
 
Further complications co uld arise because the transactions could well be 
in cash leaving little by way of trail/evidence.  …xx.. But as detection is 
very difficult, unless the candidates leave trails, that provision may prove 
ineffective in curbing the menace.  The candidates and the errant media 
could resort to more „sophisticated‟ methods to throw the scent off any 
investigation by not repeating the mistakes made in the past ---the same 
text appearing in many newspapers; articles proclaiming the victory of 
one candidate in the fr ont page and his rival in the last page; writing of 
the legend „advt‟ even in the smallest of fonts etc., and thus making it 
difficult to catch the wrong doings.” 
1.37 Commenting on the issue of „circumstantial evidence‟ Prasar Bharati stated 
that the prac tice of paid news can be detected by an analysis of the coverage 
pattern.  If any unusual coverage pattern is noticed, a regulating body should 
immediately institute an inquiry. Explaining it further, the CEO, Prasar Bharati, 
during evidence before the Committee, stated as under:- 
“I can suggest remedy straight away. Only problem is capturing and 
proving..xx..This menace that has been pointed out has to be contained 
through some method. But it is very slippery. It is very difficult to catch 
unless there is some sting operation.…xx..How do you prove that ten days 
ago something was broadcast.” 
1.38 He added:- 
“…xx.. It can be kept for one month (television). Storage is not a problem 
now-a-days..xx..Now-a-days with cloud computing, you can send it to the 
satellite and store immense amount. 
The question is, how do you retrieve it? You need a retrieval mechanism 
before you put in storages. This is where the difficulty arises. If „X‟ 
channel puts into storage, when I want to retrieve, I can retrieve only the 
data. When I put in storage, storage has to be done through 
classification, cataloguing and then put it into storage.  
That is where little difficulty comes in and we would submit that an 
independent investigation authority in which the Press as it exists, the 
electronic media as it exists can also have a hand. We have also been 
talking of self -regulation all through. All we are saying is, self -regulation 
cannot be left open ended, but has to be fructified within a time. So, we 
have built up this Advertising Code  and we also have the Governing 
Principles. The question is, who executes it? That is where the catch lies. 
Is there any fear of the law? As it stands today, the differentiating line 
between an advertisement, paid news and who pays the amount, the 
accounts must be open to inspection. That is the first thing.” 
1.39 Views expressed by the PCI‟s Sub -Committee, in its Report on Paid News 
relating to 2009 General Elections, on the complexities involved in the menace, is 
as follows:- 
“The problem is not in defini ng what „Paid News‟ is but in trying to 
establish that money has changed hands, that a payment has been made 
by a candidate who has stood for elections or his political party or his 
representative or associate to a representative of a media company that 

 
 
13 
 
has published or broadcast the so -called “news” in favour of the 
concerned candidate. Since such payments are invariably made in a 
clandestine or illegal manner, in the form of hard cash and not by cheque, 
and since official records (in the form of receipts or bills/invoices) are 
deliberately not kept or recorded in the concerned media company‟s 
balance sheet or statements of account, the only way such transactions 
can be unearthed if search -and-seizure raids are conducted by the 
concerned law-enforcing authorities, including officials of the Income Tax 
Department or members of the police force…xx..Though the phenomenon 
of widespread practice of “paid news” has been verbally confirmed and 
vindicated by politicians and campaign managers of political parties, there 
is no recorded documentation that would firmly establish that there has 
been exchange of money between media houses/advertisement 
agents/journalists and politicians/political parties. The problem in 
establishing the practice of “paid news” is simply on e of obtaining hard 
proof or conclusive evidence. With one notable exception (Shri Parcha 
Kodanda Rama Rao of the Loksatta Party in Andhra Pradesh), no 
complainant has been able to provide the Press Council of India with 
documents as proof of money having been paid to carry positive news. 
Even the „rate cards‟ that had been formulated by media houses and had 
been passing around during elections were just typed sheets of paper 
which carried nothing on it to attribute it to a newspaper/television news 
channel that had put it together nor anything that could be attributed to a 
journalist/advertisement agent.”  
1.40 When the Committee asked PCI as to whether a methodology can be 
developed to prove paid news cases, they replied as under:- 
“It is for the Ministry to consider. So far Press Council is concerned, 
similar reports by different newspapers would lead to circumstantial 
evidence. However, no straight jacket methodology is possible. Can be 
studied on case to case basis.” 
1.41 Responding to the same query, the Ministry endorsed the view of PCI. Asked 
further about their views for considering circumstantial evidence as a strong basis 
for taking action against the guilty, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“On receipt of complaints, the question of circumstantial  evidence as the 
basis for action in respect of a particular instance would be looked into by 
the respective agency, i.e. PCI in respect of complaints of paid news in 
the print media and Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) in respect of 
content on Satellite TV channels.” 
1.42 On being enquired further as to what could be done to overcome the 
difficulties in handling „Paid News‟ cases, the Ministry stated that a thorough 
discussion with all the stakeholders may suggest ways and means to overcome this 
problem. 
  

 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER-III 
Causes of ‘Paid News’ 
1.43 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee were 
informed by Prasar Bharati that „Paid News‟ is a logical culmination of the crass 
commercialism in the media, which has now reached the level of bl ackmail and 
extortion. According to Rural Affair Editor, the Hindu „Paid News‟ is a natural 
outcome of the convergence of the editorial, advertising, public relations (PR) and 
lobbying industries (the last officially non -existent in India). This „industry‟  has 
become so organised that large PR firms, professional designers and advertising 
agencies handles contracts worth many crore rupees – not just to position 
advertisements but to create „news‟.  Propaganda put out as „news‟ was customised 
by these image -creation agencies to appear as „exclusive‟ news articles in the 
publications these appeared in.  The Committee also came across possible causes 
that have led to the rise of „Paid News‟ and important one of these have been dealt 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
(i) Editorial Section v/s Management/Owners of Media Houses 
1.44 Almost all the submissions before the Committee emphasised on the decline 
of independence of the journalists. The reason cited for this decline is the 
imposition of contract system of emplo yment on journalists. According to                   
Rural Affair Editor, the Hindu, this is in vogue across most of the media spectrum 
with a few honourable exceptions and loss of independence of Journalists/reporters 
have been reduced them to marketing a gents, advertising copy writers, 
stenographers, etc.  
1.45 PCI‟s Sub-Committee Report on Paid News relating to 2009 General Elections 
revealed the following:- 
“...xx..Proliferation of the “paid news” phenomenon can be related directly 
to the diminution of the role and the status of editors in media 
organizations and the erosion of the freedom enjoyed by journalists under 
the Working Journalists Act. As more and more senior journalists chose to 
work with their employers under fixed term contracts, they opted  out of 
the protection that was accorded to them under the provisions of the Act. 
Until the 1970s and the 1980s, many editors would not brook any 
“interference” from the management of the company they would be 
employed by – the number of such editors started dwindling as more and 
more senior journalists started acceding to every whim of their managers 
and employers instead of their editors. With managers playing a more 
influential role in the selection and presentation of news, it was not 
surprising that the importance of the news started getting determined by 
the revenues that would be generated for the media company.” 
  

 
 
15 
 
1.46 In this regard, Shri Y.C. Halan, a former PCI Member, during evidence before 
the Committee, submitted as under:- 
“Then..xx..the credi bility of the editorial was greater than the 
advertisement.  Therefore, it was realised by the parties that if anything is 
written in their favour as an editorial item, it would have more credibility 
and people would believe that.  As the institution of ed itor collapsed, 
hardly there would be any professional editor in any newspaper in the 
country.  Unfortunately the owners are also editors.  Therefore, those who 
control the newspapers, those who own the newspapers also control the 
news.  Therefore, the agreement between the election candidates and the 
owners of the newspapers became easier. That is how the paid news 
phenomenon developed” 
1.47 On this issue, Rural Affair Editor, the Hindu in his memorandum to the 
Committee, submitted as under: 
“One point made repeatedly - and completely kept out of the media was 
this: the rise of Paid News was also made possible by the decline of the 
independence of the journalist. That decline had strong origins in the 
destruction of journalists unions on the 1980s and 1990s , and in the 
imposition of the contract system of employment on journalists now in 
vogue across most of the media spectrum with a few honourable 
exceptions. This is a most valid and relevant point. In earlier times, a 
victimised journalist could fall back on the support and energy of his / her 
peers and fight it out with the help of his / her union. Legal recourse 
under the Working Journalists Act was also more common and effective. 
The active smashing of the unions by managements - who then imposed 
a one-year or 11 -month contract system of employment amputated the 
independence of the journalist.” 
1.48 Elaborating the circumstances leading to paid news, the Prasar Bharati in 
written reply, submitted as under:- 
“From the last decade of the 20 th century, chang es in norms became 
palpable.  Media was begun to be seen more as any other business than a 
mission.  It became more committed to its balance sheet and profit and 
loss accounts than its social and political responsibilities towards the 
country.  In this process, the owners of newspapers drastically curbed the 
functional and professional freedom of journalists.  During earlier times, 
editors used to be stalwarts.  They were gradually reduced as pygmies, 
who were required to dance at the tune of their employer s if they wanted 
to keep their jobs.  Many owners started doubling as editors -in-chief 
themselves. While payment and facilities of journalists improved, they 
soon lost their professional pride and begun behaving like any other 
employee with responsibility towards their bosses rather than masses.  
During earlier times, field reporters and editorial staff were required to 
keep their hands off the marketing side and there was clear dividing line 
between the two. Gradually, this dividing line vanished and journ alists 
soon begun to be indistinguishable from marketing and sales people.”  
 

 
 
16 
 
1.49 When the Ministry was asked about their views on the need for segregating 
the Management and Editorial Section of a Media House, they replied as under: 
“Para 37(A) of the PC I‟s „Norms of Journalistic Conduct‟ relating to 
„Management-Editor Relationship‟ makes a well recognized distinction 
between the editor and the journalists on the one hand and the manager, 
the executive or the administrator on the other. It has also been l aid that 
in discharge of the editorial functions the editor is supreme and superior 
even to the owner. The editor, under no circumstances can be asked by 
the proprietor to serve his private interests.” 
1.50 Further, taking note of submissions of the stakeh olders to implement the 
recommendations of Wage Board/Press Commission etc., the Committee asked the 
Ministry to provide details of the recommendations of the Commissions/ 
Committees that has been set up to evaluate and improve the working condition of 
Media personnel and also about the implementation of its recommendations. 
Responding to this, the Ministry in their written reply, submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has not set up any 
Commission/Committee to evaluate and improve the working condition of 
media personnel. However, PCI has instituted a study on contractual 
appointment. The report recommends that all the employees of a 
newspaper establishment covered within the definition of Working 
Journalists Act should be given the protection of the provisions of the 
Act.” 
1.51 Analyzing the PCI report titled „A study working Journalists Act vis -à-vis 
appointment of Journalists on contract', as submitted to the Committee, following 
facts associated with the contractual system of working were revealed:-  
“All the employees of a newspaper establishment covered within the 
definition of Working Journalists Act, should be given the protection of 
the Provision of the Act…xx..the harsh reality remains that there is 
absolutely no protecti on available to those journalists under the Act 
who have been appointed under the contractual system, which is a 
matter of a concern being voiced time and again by several quarters.  
The contractual employment is gradually creating a separate category 
of journalists, a category which does not enjoy benefits under the Act.  
Though the journalists under contractual employment often accept 
hefty pay packets and also get substantial wage increases, their 
freedom increasingly comes under a cloud of uncertainty a s soon as 
the date for the contract renewal approaches. It is often seen that no 
sooner than the contractual term nears completion the journalist 
comes under pressure to show “results” and the remaining period till 
the renewal of contract is often laced wi th uncertainty and fear of an 
“abrupt transfer” without giving any option or choice of freedom.  
Several instances were cited before the Sub -Committee which 
portrayed exploitation of journalists under the contractual system of 
employment as they were eithe r given a paltry sum every month or 

 
 
17 
 
shunted out or transferred without citing any reasons of exigencies of 
the organisation.” 
1.52 PCI, in its another Sub -Committee Report, „Election Coverage Monitoring 
Committee on Paid News related to Gujarat Election, 2 012‟, as submitted to the 
Committee, stated as under:- 
“Some of the Editors and Journalists admitted that Paid News contract 
deals are signed at the top level and all they get are time to time 
„instructions‟ to carry a particular news item or photographs. However, 
they claimed that the phenomenon of paid news in Gujarat Election has 
come down significantly as compared to previous elections in the State. 
They cited two reasons; one the reluctance of the national level political 
parties to indulge in paid new s and the strict vigil of the Election 
Commission.” 
1.53 According to PCI, there should be a clear distinction between the 
management and editorial staff in media companies and that the independence of 
the editor should be maintained and safeguarded.  
 
(ii) Working conditions and the issue of wage of Media Personnel 
1.54 Various experts/stakeholders also emphasised that the trend of having 
newspapers without the editors and owners becoming the Editors, as the other 
probable cause of „Paid News‟. On this iss ue, a former PCI member, Shri Y.P. Halan 
stated that media owners themselves take the money and the whole system of 
„Paid News‟ have become institutionalised. When asked about the course of action 
to tackle this, he stated during evidence:- 
“That is a diff icult question....xxx....the media institution has become 
such a big phenomenon that journalists who are really interested in 
rightful and responsible reporting, they find it difficult to do that.  
There are situations in which the journalist is pressed to  withdraw the 
story and there are cases in which the journalist has either succumbed 
or he has resigned or left the organisation. That may be the main 
reason why many journalists are leaving away. I mean, they are going 
into the corporate sector as PR pers ons and others. This was not the 
phenomena earlier.  There are two types of journalists. Those who are 
not influenced by the ideals and principles of journalism, they are 
happy, and those who want to be really journalists, they are unhappy. 
That is the situation.”   
1.55 Submissions of some of the experts/stakeholders/organisations, with regard 
to working conditions of media personnel, are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
experts/ 
stakeholders/ 
organisations 
Views/Suggestion 
1. President, Indian 
Journalists Union 
and a former 
Member of PCI 
Management is 100 per cent responsible for paid news 
and the main culprit is always the owner and there is 
pressure from the owner who are running the media. 
Journalists have to work on diktats of his people, who 

 
 
18 
 
(Shri S.N. Sinha) are going to pay, then he is not going to be fully free, 
this will become a very dangerous trend....xxx.... if the 
journalist says no to the owners that they are out of 
the job.  
 
2. Editor of 
Rajasthan 
Prawakta (Shri 
Rajesh Kumar 
Sharma) 
Party affliction and  corporate affiliation of the Editors 
and correspondents is one of the reason for this 
phenomenon. So segregate Newspapers and 
Publications from the industries. 
3. News Editor, 
Doordarshan 
Samachar  
(Shri Sanjay 
Kumar) 
 
Paid News which is prevalent in jou rnalism is due to 
the monopoly of owners and there should be check on 
ownership of media houses. 
4. Rural Affair 
Editor, The Hindu 
We need serious legislation to curb the growth of 
media monopolies and the concentration of media 
power in the hands of very  few. The Indian scene is 
bursting with wannabe Rupert Murdochs and Conrad 
Blacks. If we cannot stop the spread of these 
monopolies, we have no chance of fighting the cancer. 
Indeed, Paid News will be just one milestone on the 
journey to a lot worse. Perha ps we need a new Press 
Commission -- not one that acts as a stooge of 
government -- that studies and publicly debates what 
the dangers to a free and fair media in this country 
are. That should include looking at the „contract 
system‟ of employment. Into th e union -busting 
practices of media managements -  those unions also 
have a role in upholding press freedom. 
 
1.56 Highlighting another factor, that has led to this menace that is the wage 
scenario in media industry for journalists, President, Indian Journ alists Union, 
during evidence submitted as under:- 
“A lot of people think that good salaries are being paid if you are hired 
on contract.  Yes, people have been paid good salaries but if you go 
outside Delhi or even in Delhi itself, in big newspapers Repor ters and 
sub-Editors are working at a salary which is less than even the 
minimum wages fixed in this country.  Forget about the salaries 
prescribed by the Wage Board, they are working at salaries less than 
even the minimum wages prescribed by the Governmen t for 
graduates.  What I feel is that all the time you have to strengthen the 
Working Journalists Act because until you make the journalists free 
from these pressures this type of paid news will come.” 
1.57 In this regard, the President, Haryana Union of J ournalists and National 
Secretary of National Union of Journalists, Haryana, during evidence, submitted 
that most of the media organisations are not implementing the recommendation of 
the Wage Board and around 80 per cent of the Journalists are getting wag e 
between 8 -10 thousand. Because of this they are facing lots of problem and 
management takes benefit of this situation. According to him, most of the 
journalists/reporters are working on contract basis and are given commission on 

 
 
19 
 
bringing advertisements a nd in the process they have started working as market 
representatives.  Some newspapers just give their I -Card and ask them to get 
business.  
1.58 One of the stakeholder, in his memorandum to the Committee also submitted 
that only qualified and well paid p rofessionals should be allowed and stringers 
should not be used by media houses. 
1.59 On the same issue, another stakeholder in his written memorandum 
submitted as under:- 
“The trend of having an army of stringers, especially in vernacular 
papers, is a disquieting trend. They are ill paid, though the proprietors 
are making fortunes. They are expected to earn themselves through 
collecting advertisements giving them some commission. In order to 
survive some of them take to blackmailing and lobbying. Only thos e 
can manage to retain independence who have other means of earning 
their livelihood. The journalist bodies should pay proper attention to 
this phenomenon and evolve some mechanism to fight this menace.”  
1.60 In the same context, Press council of India, i n its Sub -committee Report on 
„Paid News‟ relating to 2009 General Election, suggested the following:- 
“Media organisations should refrain from the practice of engaging 
stringers and correspondents who double up as agents collecting 
advertisements for thei r organisations and receiving a commission on 
the revenue that accrues from advertisements instead of receiving 
stipends or retainers, if not, regular salaries. If working conditions and 
conditions of job security for journalists are improved and the 
autonomy of the editorial staff upheld in media companies, this would 
to an extent curb the phenomenon of „paid news‟.  
1.61 Commenting on the above observation of PCI‟s Sub Committee on „Paid 
News‟ relating to 2009 General Election, CEO, Prasar Bharati during evidence 
submitted as under:-  
“In this Press Council Report, there is a very interesting 
paragraph..xx..It says that media organisation should refrain from the 
practice of engaging stringers and correspondents who double up as 
his agents...xx..This sort o f thing is openly going under our noses.  
Especially, if you go into a small town, you will find that they are 
coming to you frequently and then the relationship becomes 
commercial.  If you do not do that, then, trouble starts.  This is 
happening and this is controllable as a breach of condition of that 
agency.  Temporary suspension of licence, I feel, is enough to put 
people back into order and stopping advertisement or some other 
form.  The Cable Regulation is something like that you can keep 
manipulating saying: „I will stop you for seven days‟.  
(iii) Private Treaties 
1.62 Elaborating on the complexities involved in „Paid News‟, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated during evidence that another form 

 
 
20 
 
of this syndrome which has bee n brought to the notice of the Press Council by the 
Securities and Exchange, Board of India (SEBI), is in the form of „Private Treaties‟ 
between Media companies and corporate entities. According to the Ministry, ‟Private 
Treaty‟ is an agreement between the  media company and another non -media 
company in which the latter transfers certain shares of the company to the former 
in-lieu of Advertisements, space and favourable coverage. 
1.63 According to Prasar Bharati, „Private Treaties‟ are another form of paid n ews 
and they militate against the rights of people to be informed accurately and 
truthfully.  Likewise, „Cross Media Holdings‟ promote monopolies in media and come 
in the way of free flow of information.  Forwarding their suggestion on curbing the 
trend of private treaties, Prasar Bharati, inter-alia submitted as under:- 
“Private treaties must be brought to public knowledge by concerned 
media houses till they are in practice.  Ideally, they should be either 
banned or be subjected to control by a regulating body.  Cross Media 
Holdings should also be subject to strict control and regulation.” 
1.64 News Broadcasters Association, a self regulatory organisation for News and 
current affair channels, in their written submission to the Committee, stated as 
under: 
“Every news broadcasting organisation and every person -in-charge of 
a news broadcasting organisation (including members of the Board of 
Directors, persons holding positions of monitoring and control over the 
editorial, publication and/or management functions  of a news 
broadcasting organisation, including without limitation executive 
directors, chief executive officers, editors and producers of the news 
broadcasting organization) must be mandated to disclose to the public 
on the website/s of the news broadcast ing organisation any 
shareholding, investment, other equity participation or financial 
interests or conflict of interest of any nature whatsoever (including 
specifically any “private treatise”), in or with, any entity (including a 
person whether natural or  legal, company, partnership firm, sole 
proprietorship concern, society, trust, political party, association of 
persons and any other organisation of like nature). Disclosure should 
also be mandatory of such shareholding, investment, other equity 
participation or financial interests or conflict of interest of any nature 
whatsoever (including specifically any private treatise) of immediate 
relatives in respect of any broadcasting entity.” 
1.65 The Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu, elaborating his views on „Private Treaties‟ 
stated as follows: 
“The „Private Treaty‟ was a device created ....xxxx to legitimise and 
regularise its boosting of corporate marketing as news. What is the 
Private Treaty? 
Say a medium -scale retailer gets into a Private Treaty with (some 
newspaper). He does that because he wants to enter the big league of 
retailers. The Treaty means (the said newspaper) acquires 7 -10 % of 
the shares of that company against guaranteed advertising and no 

 
 
21 
 
negative coverage. It becomes difficult for the journal ists of a 
newspaper when it has 240 private treaties. It also raises the question 
of when the newspaper is a part owner of 240 companies, whether 
that remains a newspaper or does it become an equity firm? Note that 
the Private Treaty is no concealed secret – they‟re very proud of it.” 
1.66 He added:- 
“There is Paid News in the „supplements.‟ Here‟s how it works. The 
front pages of supplements ....xxxxxx..... carry a small line under the 
masthead: „Advertorial, Entertainment, Promotional 
Feature.‟...xxxx.....the same pages carrying this disclosure in the city 
„supplements‟ then inevitably feature in them main newspaper in 
outlying editions ...xxx...without any such disclaimer or „disclosure.‟  
In the non -metro editions the paid news content is used directly, 
dispensing with even the fig leaf of a disclaimer. (Even in the metros, 
the practice is hardly known or understood by readers.)”   
1.67 He further added: 
“When any action is sought to be taken against this or other racketeering, 
they drop the „we are just a business‟ argument. Instead, it becomes “an 
attack on press freedom.” That usually scares off any governmental 
department wishing to take action” 
1.68 According to the PCI‟s Sub -Committee Report on Paid News related to 
General Election, 2009, submitted t o the Committee, in the quest for profit certain 
media organizations have sacrificed good journalistic practices and ethical norms. 
Individual transgression which was, until recently, considered more of an aberration 
than a norm has become institutionalise d over the years. Further, outlining the 
genesis of „Medianet‟ and „Private Treaties‟ phenomena, it has been stated as 
under:- 
“In the 1980s....xxxx......the rules of the Indian media game began to 
change. Besides initiating cut -throat cover -price competit ion, marketing 
was used creatively to make Bennett, Coleman Company Limited (BCCL) 
one of the most profitable media conglomerates in the 
country.........xxxx............xxx........xxxxx.............xxxxxxx.........xxxxx.. 
The media phenomenon that has caus ed considerable outrage of late has 
been BCCL‟s 2003 decision to start a “paid content” service called 
Medianet, which, for a price, openly offers to send journalists to cover 
product launches or personality-related events.  
...xx..  ...xx..  ..xx..  ...xx... ..xx.. 
Besides Medianet, BCCL devised another „innovative‟ marketing and PR 
strategy..........xxxx.........The „Private Treaties‟ scheme pioneered in the 
Indian media by BCCL involves giving advertising space to private 
corporate entities/advertisers i n exchange for equity investment – the 
company officially denies that it also provides favourable editorial 
coverage to its “private treaty” clients and/or blacks out adverse 
comment against its clients.”  

 
 
22 
 
1.69 PCI also submitted a Report, on the issue of „Private Treaties‟ by the Media 
Companies, to the Committee wherein following facts are delineated: 
“In July, 1999 the Securities and Exchange Board of India mandated 
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 to protect 
the interest of inv estors expressed its concern that many media 
groups are entering into agreements, called “Private Treaties‟ with 
companies which are listed or coming out with a public offer for stake 
in the company and in return providing media coverage through 
advertisements, news reports, editorials etc. It noted that such private 
treaties help to promote and build „brand‟ of the company through 
print or electronic media, which the media group owns in exchange of 
shares of such company.  It apprehended that such agreemen ts not 
only give rise to conflict of interest but result in dilution of the 
independence of press vis -à-vis the nature and contents of the 
news/editorials reporting, to such companies. That such treaties may 
lead to commercialization of news reports as it would be based on the 
subscription and advertising agreement entered into between the 
Media group and the company.   
..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx.. 
SEBI has said that if a newspaper or a magazine or media organization 
has a Private Treaty w ith a company, which is listed or is about to list 
its share, then the concerned publication should announce the details 
of the Private Treaty along with any news/editorial/free advertorial of 
the Company. These announcements should be immediately 
recognizable by the readers, and should be prominently positioned and 
with the same headline and body type as the news/editorial/free 
advertorial.  Such disclosure would enable the reader to distinguish 
between regular news and advertisements vis -a-vis news and 
advertisements generated as quid pro quo through a private Treaty.  
SEBI has also said this disclosure of Private Treaty connection should 
not be a one time publication, but should be published every time 
news and advertisement generated for a company with w hich the 
Media Company has private Treaty, is published. 
The Council accepted the recommendation of the Sub -Committee that 
the Press Council of India should give wide publicity to these 
guidelines.  A circular should be issued to all newspaper, news 
agencies and magazine.   Reputed media website like The Hoot should 
be requested to prominently display these guidelines on their website.  
The guidelines should be publicized through international media 
website dealing with freedom of the press, and rights of r eaders. SEBI 
may be requested to make announcement in websites and publications 
which serve the investors. 
The Council also accepted the recommendation of the Sub -Committee 
that the SEBI may be requested it to examine whether it is proper for 
Companies to offer free share to various stakeholders, including media 
groups, in return for various unpaid services. 
The Council further accepted the recommendation of the Sub -
Committee that the SEBI may be requested by the Council to furnish a 
six monthly report on t he declarations made by Listed Companies 

 
 
23 
 
under Clause 53 and 54 of the Equity Listing Agreement about the 
Private Treaties entered with media companies.” 
1.70 In this context, the PCI referred to the existing guidelines for financial 
journalists that had been framed in 1996 and also endorsed the views expressed by 
the SEBI. Besides, PCI stated that the relevant guidelines should be made 
applicable and mandatory not only to financial journalists but to owners of media 
companies as well. This would be in the interest of transparency and fairness and 
would reduce the incidence of biased news about companies being published that is 
inimical to the interests of investors.  
(iv) Cross Media Holdings/Ownership 
1.71 On the other precursor of „Paid News‟ i.e. Cross M edia Holdings, the Ministry 
in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry is seized of the issue of monopolistic practices in the 
various segments of broadcasting sector and accordingly a reference 
to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India ( TRAI) was made on 
16.5.2012 to examine the entire gamut of media ownership issues.  
The Ministry has requested TRAI to provide recommendations on 
specific issues of vertical integration within the various segments in 
the Broadcasting Sector as in the prese nt scenario, more and more 
broadcasting companies owning television channels are venturing into 
various distribution platforms, namely cable TV distribution, DTH, and 
IPTV etc. and similarly many companies owning distribution platforms 
are also entering in to television broadcasting.  TRAI has also been 
asked to look into the issue of horizontal integration wherein 
companies have controls/ownerships across print, TV and Radio.  TRAI 
recommendations are awaited.” 
 
1.72 From the TRAI‟s consultation paper, avai lable on its website, the Committee 
inter-alia note as under:  
“In the year 2008, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB) 
had sent a reference dated 22 nd May 2008, seeking the 
recommendations of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
for bringing out a policy for the restriction in ownership of companies 
seeking licenses/ permissions/ registrations under various policy 
guidelines. Further, in response to a query from TRAI, the MIB, vide its 
letter dated 26th August 2008, clarified that to examine the issue in its 
entirety and looking at the increasing trend of print media entering 
into broadcasting sector, TRAI should also include print media while 
examining the need for any cross media restrictions vis -à-vis 
broadcast media.  
 
After follo wing an exhaustive consultation process, TRAI, on 25th 
February 2009, gave its recommendations to the Government covering 
the issues of horizontal integration, vertical integration, limit on the 
number of licenses held by a single entity, concentration of control/ 
ownership across media and control/ ownership across telecom and 
media companies. TRAI had recommended that the necessary 

 
 
24 
 
safeguards should be put in place to ensure that plurality and diversity 
are maintained across the three media segments (Print, Television and 
Radio). MIB should carry out an analysis based on detailed market 
study to determine such safeguards. On the issue of vertical 
integration in the broadcasting sector, TRAI had recommended that 
the broadcaster should not have ‗control„ in distribution and vice 
versa. TRAI further recommended that after working out the required 
safeguards for horizontal and vertical integration, the mergers and 
acquisition (M&A) guidelines for the sector may also be put in place to 
prevent media concentration and creation of significant market power.  
 
TRAI also recommended that no restriction should be imposed on cross 
control/ownership across telecom and media sectors at this point of 
time; however, this issue could be reviewed after two years.  
 
In 2009, M IB sponsored a study through Administrative Staff College 
of India (ASCI). The study dealt with the nature and extent of cross 
media ownership, existing regulatory framework, relevant markets and 
international experience. ASCI submitted its study report in cluding its 
recommendations to MIB, in July 20091. The ASCI report 
recommended that cross media ownership rules for broadcasting, print 
and new media must be put in place since there is ample evidence of 
market dominance in certain relevant markets. On the issue of vertical 
integration the report suggested that the cap on vertical holdings 
should be carefully determined based on existing market conditions. 
Amongst other recommendations, it also recommended that 
disclosures regarding cross media affiliations and ownerships should be 
in the public domain.  
 
There are no cross media ownership restrictions across Print, 
Television and Radio in the country. However, in the FM radio sector 
enabling provisions have been made for compliance of any media 
ownership rules as and when they are prescribed by the Government. 
As far as vertical integration of media entities in broadcasting sector is 
concerned, certain restrictions have been put in place in the guidelines 
for obtaining license for Direct -to-Home (DTH) platfo rm and in the 
Head-end in the sky (HITS) policy of the Government dated 
26.11.2009.  
 
 
MIB has vide reference dated 16 th May, 2012, requested TRAI to re -
look the issue of vertical integration in the broadcasting and TV 
distribution sector and cross media h oldings across the TV, Print & 
Radio sectors. MIB has requested TRAI to suggest measures that can 
be put to address vertical integration in order to ensure fair growth of 
the broadcasting sector. Further, TRAI has been requested to suggest 
measures with respect to cross media ownerships with an objective to 
ensure plurality of news and views and availability of quality services 
at reasonable prices to the consumers.  
 
During the formulation of the consultation paper, an exercise was 
undertaken by TRAI to co llect and collate information regarding 
shareholding pattern, market share of various TV/ radio channels, 
newspapers as well as various distribution services offered by various 

 
 
25 
 
companies operating in the broadcasting and print sector and their 
cross media holdings. In this effort, fifty four companies/group 
companies, mentioned in the ASCI report, engaged in broadcasting, 
print and distribution activities were asked to update information 
concerning their company, as available in the ASCI report... 
 
This consultation paper seeks the comments/views of the stakeholders 
on the need, nature and level of restrictions and safeguards with 
respect to vertical integration in the broadcasting and distribution 
sectors and cross holdings across various media sectors.” 
 
1.73 When asked to spell out the procedure and criteria for owning/opening a 
channel, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting grants permissions to 
companies registered under the companies Act 1956, for operating a 
satellite TV channel. The applications for new TV channels are 
examined in the light of the eligibility criteria as prescribed in the 
Policy Guidelines for Uplinking and Downlinking. The applications are 
forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for obtaining se curity 
clearance for the Company and its Board of Directors.  The applications 
are simultaneously sent to the Department of Space/Department of 
Revenue as the case may be for obtaining necessary clearances. The 
Net worth of the company is also examined to determine the eligibility 
of the company among other eligibility criteria. Permissions are issued 
by the Ministry to the applicants after obtaining Inter Ministerial 
clearances and Registration and Permission Fee as applicable.”  
1.74 Various stakeholders, in their submission before the Committee, stated that 
there should be a regulation on starting TV channels/newspapers and a limit on 
ownership of a media house. Some of the views/suggestions of the experts/ 
stakeholders/ organisations regarding ownership of media houses and Cross Media 
Holdings/Ownership received by the Committee, are as follows:- 
Sl. 
No 
Experts/ 
Stakeholders/ 
Organisations 
Views/ Suggestions/ observations 
1. Former Chief 
Election 
Commissioner  
(Shri                           
T.K. 
Krishnamurthy) 
There should be a regulation of a political party starting TV 
channels.  I find that it is not directly started by political 
parties.  Normally, the members are allowed to start these 
channels but they are used as a vehicle for broadcasting 
political massages during the election period.  If a person 
has got certain interest in a media, I think he must be made 
to disclose that interest in the affidavit that he files at the 
time of nomination so that people get to know that this 
person has got an advantage of a media usage. 
  
 2. Prasar Bharati Right of any political party or corporate body to open a 
channel should not be curbed as they already have such 
right in respect of print media.  However, they should be 
subjected to strict regulation.  Also, s uch affiliations should 
be part of the name of the channel e.g. ABC Channel, a 
mouth piece of XYZ party.  
 
  

 
 
26 
 
3. Former PCI 
member  
(Shri P. Guha 
Thakurta) 
Right now, in India, we do not have any restrictions, cross 
media restrictions of any kind. We have no restrictions on 
anybody owning any newspapers, any magazine, any TV 
channel, any website.  So as of now any political party, 
there is no restriction for any political party starting any 
publication.  So, as of now, the law of the land is that 
anybody ca n start any publication provided you adhere to 
the rules which are there.  
4. Publisher-Editor, 
Rajasthan 
Prawakta 
(Shri Rajesh 
Kumar Sharma) 
 
Absolute ownership of big media houses should be 
checked. The big newspapers should be published by 
Trust/Committee and should be controlled by the 
Government.  
5. President - Media 
Watch (an NGO) 
(Shri M.B. Pillai) 
and Secretary, 
Media Watch, 
Kerala (Shri N.B. 
Raje) 
Enact laws, on the part of newspapers and other media 
organisations, to disclose their ownership pa ttern and 
publish their balance sheets. 
 
1.75 The other suggestions received are:- 
 Cross ownership has to be stopped as multiple ownership is capturing 
/controlling every media and destroying small newspapers too. 
 Funding of media houses to be brought int o the public domain. 
Individuals active in politics should not have direct or indirect 
ownership in privately -owned media companies and in public owned 
media companies, not more than 1/1000th of the total valuation of the 
company.  
 There should be a ban on channels run by MPs/MLAs.  
 Parliament may lay a Code of Conduct in regard to the ownership of 
media units and TV channels by political parties. 
 Mass media should be freed from the clutches of big business houses, 
politicians, corporate sector and fix a li mit on investment in media 
houses so as to make big houses incapable of having upper hand. 
 Permission to operate a channel should not be more than five years 
instead of the present provision of ten years. 
1.76 In addition,  a glaring flaw regarding the laun ching/starting of 
newspaper/channel, as highlighted by the Fact Finding Team of PCI on „Paid News‟ 
in Gujarat Assembly Election, is as under:- 
“‟Sandesh‟ Gujarati newspaper recently launched in October this year 
Sandesh TV in the State, while „Gujarat Sama char‟ newspaper 
launched its GS TV channel on December, 10. 2012 (just three days 
before the first phase of Assembly polls). Timing of launching these 
channels, just around the Assembly polls, has put a question mark on 
the credibility of the news items ca rried out by each of them. Leaning 
to a particular political party in the polls fray, by each of these 
channels was visible in the coverage. Even common viewers on the 
street could make out the coverage having been „sponsored‟ for 
required favours.” 

 
 
27 
 
1.77 Further, on the issue of delinking the media from industrial houses and about 
having ceiling/limit on the ownership of media houses, , former Chief Election 
Commissioner, Shri T.K. Krishnamurthy, during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“It is desirable but we  cannot completely close it, probably because 
media itself will require investment. But there must be some kind of a 
limit for industrial houses investing in media.  You cannot completely 
shut it out.  But I personally feel that the investment limit has to  be 
specified......xxxx......Yes, it should be both ways.  It is because we 
have come across some instance where the media has been given 
shares as a compensation for publishing some news. 
“....xxxx.....investments in these companies which are starting eit her 
the newspaper or the TV channels need to be regulated.  For example, 
either the channel itself invests in various industries either by direct 
investment or by indirect investment in the sense that instead of 
giving them money, the media is provided wit h shares in a particular 
company and so on.  So, there must be a ceiling limit on the 
investments in any business other than the media.  Similarly, 
companies investing in media business should also have a specified 
ceiling limit.  In my opinion, it should not be more than 5 per cent.  
Only then you can bring some kind of independence in the media 
management. But then the specified percentage can be considered, 
discussed and a decision can be taken on that.....xxxx.....if TV channel 
or a newspaper is being s tarted by a group of people, but getting 
support from one industrial group, now there is no limit, they can put 
25 per cent, 30 per cent or 40 per cent. Five per cent I gave off the 
cuff; it could be even 10 per cent. It does not matter. It means it gets 
distributed. The ownership gets distributed, four or five or six 
industrial houses can join together and form a company. But it is not 
concentrated in one hand. That is the first point. The second thing I 
thought I should mention is that just as in trade an d commerce you 
have restricted trade practices commission, when you mentioned 
about specific provision, restrictive or unfair practices during the 
election time, can be covered under the Press Council Act.”  
1.78 He further added:- 
“..xx..As far as paid ne ws phenomenon is concerned, it is a direct off -
shoot of money power in Indian electoral scene. But, it is not so much 
evident in other countries although in certain western countries the 
Press is bought. But, they are more transparently done so that they 
can identify that this particular newspaper gives only this particular 
party‟s views. People know that. But here, there is no such thing 
because many newspapers are considered to be independent; but they 
are not. So, it is a perception of the people.” 
1.79 On being asked to respond to the suggestions of the various stakeholders, on 
the ownership of Media houses, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
commented as under: 
“So far as the instances of Paid News on TV Channels owned by 
Political parties are  concerned, the Election Commission has already 
issued guidelines for dealing with candidates advertisements on 
TV/cable Channels owned by political parties or their functionaries‟ 

 
 
28 
 
official bearers during elections..xx.. Regulation of Ownership of Media 
houses cannot be forced in view of right to freedom of speech and 
expression. In pursuance of freedom of press a particular class cannot 
be restricted form ownership in Media sector. However, distinction 
between functions of management and editorial autonomy  is 
preferable. Moreover, in present times, media industry is also 
technology driven, hence like any other industry, requires funds to 
grow…xx..Differential treatment or harsh measures on investment in 
the media would impact the sector adversely.” 
1.80 Nevertheless, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also stated that 
there cannot be any restriction on any particular class from ownership of media 
companies.   

 
 
29 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Paid News and its implications on Electoral Process 
 
1.81 For an effective democracy check and balance between various organs of the 
Government i.e. Executive, Legislative and Judiciary is inevitable and the effective 
role of fourth pillar i.e. media is imperative to achieve this balance. However, the 
rise of „Paid News‟, especially  during Election, has undermined the essence of a 
democratic process. According to Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu, „Paid News‟ mocks 
the electoral process, often reducing it to farce and it would be incorrect to say that 
'Paid News' is purely an election time phenomenon. However, obviously its greatest 
impact on general public comes during elections. 
1.82 Quoting PCI‟s Report on Paid News during 2009 General Election, the Ministry 
stated that the election-time „Paid News‟ has three dimensions. The First one is, the 
reader or the viewer does not get a correct picture of the personality or 
performance of the candidate in whose favour or against he decides to cast his 
vote. The second is, contesting candidates perhaps do not show it in their election 
expense a ccount thereby violating the Conduct of Election Rules and the last is 
those newspapers and television channels which received money in cash but did not 
disclose it in their official statements or accounts violates the Companies Act 1956 
as well as the Income Tax act 1961. 
1.83 As narrated in the earlier part of this Report, several instances of „Paid News‟, 
in the General and Assembly Elections  have indicated as to how democratic 
process is being affected by this syndrome. However, Election Commission‟s historic 
verdict in October, 2011, disqualifying Uttar Pradesh‟s then sitting MLA Smt. 
Umlesh Yadav from contesting again for three years under Section 10A of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951, for suppressing expenditure in her election 
accounts, has set a trend by making her not only the first political victim of the paid 
news phenomenon but also the first sitting legislator to be disqualified for excessive 
expenditure.  
1.84 Election Commission, in their Order dated 20 th October, 2011, in the ins tant 
case observed as under:- 
“In the context...., another aspect which needs to be kept in view is 
that by suppressing expenditure on „paid news‟ and filing an incorrect 
or false account, the candidate involved is guilty of not merely 
circumventing the la w relating to election expenses but also of 
resorting of false propaganda by projecting a wrong picture and 
defrauding the electorate. The press Council of India has rightly 
observed in its adjudication order in the present case that „The format 
of the imp ugned material was such that it would appear as a news 
report to the layman and word ADVT printed at the lowest end rather 
appeared to accompany a small boxed Appeal by the candidate. There 
was beyond doubt a possibility of confusing the voters when the 
elections were just a day away and all campaigning has stopped. Such 

 
 
30 
 
an attempt by the candidate to mislead the electorate runs grossly 
counter to, and in the face of, the Supreme Court‟s solemn declaration 
in People‟s Union for Civil Liberties vs Union of I ndia and others (AIR 
2003 SC 2363) that the electorate should be made aware of the 
candidate‟s antecedents, assets, liabilities and educational 
qualifications so that they can make an informed choice about their 
representative while exercising their franchise.” 
1.85 According to  Shri N. Goplaswami, former Chief Election Commissioner, the 
Election Commission‟s exercise of power under Section 10A of the Representation of 
People Act, 1951 to disqualify a candidate, who resorted to „Paid News‟ and failed to 
include that expenditure in his/her election expenditure statement, is a welcome 
step. However, he added that there are two cases which are still pending before the 
Election Commission of India on the score of „Paid News‟ and concealing of 
expenditure, one against the MLA from Maharashtra and the other from Jharkhand.  
1.86 According to a recent media report by Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu,  the 
political class is more honest than the media when it comes to „paid news‟ during 
elections and this can be judg ed by the fact that several poll candidates have 
owned up to this corrupt practice. At least, after the Election Commission and the 
Press Council of India gives notices to them and holds inquiries into the matter. 
They have acknowledged guilt by belatedly adding their „news‟ buying expenses to 
their election statement of accounts. According to the media report, there are 
instances where candidates have accepted in writing that they have bought „Paid 
News Advertisements‟, but not a single newspaper have acce pted that they 
received money and published news. 
1.87 Further, referring to the disqualification of a MLA from Uttar Pradesh, various 
stakeholders/experts in their memoranda have raised a question on the existing 
provision of penalty for media, that is, i f the candidate/individual found guilty of 
getting published an „Advertisement‟ as News/Advertorial is punished/debarred then 
why the media is just warned or just made to express/scroll regret. Besides, how it 
can be just an ethical issue for the media and a matter of corruption for the others. 
Answering to these questions, former Chief Election Commissioner (CEC), Shri T.K. 
Krishnamurthy, during evidence, stated as under: 
“I feel that the media is equally guilty of this offence and it should be 
punished.”  
1.88 Adding further, the former CEC stated that the disqualification of MLA from 
Uttar Pradesh under the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 came there because of 
violation of the ceiling on the individual expenditure. However, if there is a violation 
by the political party, it does not deal with that. He submitted another point for 
consideration of the Committee that is since the election expenditure incurred by 
political parties does not come under any ceiling, the Representation of Peoples‟ 
Act, 1951 sh ould be enlarged to cover the expenditure incurred by the political 
parties as well; and the political party should be made to pay a monetary penalty or 

 
 
31 
 
some kind of a fine on them so that they would refrain themselves from indulging in 
this. Several submissions before the Committee have endorsed this suggestion.  
1.89 On being asked whether the proposed ceiling on expenditure by political 
parties should be based on their being a national party or a state/regional party, 
the former CEC responded as under:- 
“Ceiling should be different for the national parties and it should be 
different for the State/regional parties. It need not be the same because 
the regional parties concentrate only on a limited number of States 
whereas the national party is expected to s pend throughout the country.  
The ceiling again should be in relation to the Parliamentary Elections as 
well as in relation to the State Elections.  For example, if there are 
simultaneous elections both for the States and for the Parliament, then the 
ceiling should be in relation to that and not should be in relation to a 
particular State.” 
1.90 In addition to the suggestion contained in some of the Memoranda, 
submitted to the Committee, for making  „Paid News‟ as an electoral offence, Shri 
Paranjoy Guha Th akurta, former PCI member, during evidence, submitted as 
under: 
“I believe that it is very important for the Parliament of India to amend 
sections 1, 2, 3 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 so that this 
coverage masquerading of advertisement as news should be made into a 
cognizable punishable offence. It is already being treated as an electoral 
malpractice under the conduct of election rules by the Election 
Commission of India. If sections 1, 2, 3 of the Representation of People 
Act are amended, then it would give further strength to curb this 
practice.” 
1.91 In this context, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated as 
under:- 
“Election Commission has also forwarded a proposal to the Ministry of Law 
and Justice proposing amendment in th e Representation of People (RP) 
Act, 1951 to make paid news an electoral offence which is under 
consideration.” 
1.92 In addition, responding to a starred Q. No. 216(c), the Minister of State in 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on 12th March, 2013 stated as under:- 
“The issue of paid news has been included in the agenda for all party 
meeting on issues relating to electoral reforms. Besides, the issue of 
electoral reforms in its entirety has been referred to the Law 
Commission of India for conside ration and to suggest comprehensive 
measures for changes in the law. Before initiating any legislative 
measures, the issue requires to be examined on the basis of 
recommendations to be made by the Law Commission and also in 
consultation with the stakeholders.” 
1.93 On the implications of „Paid News‟ on electoral process some of the 
views/suggestions of the experts/stakeholders/organisations are as follows:- 

 
 
32 
 
 Strict action should be taken against the people‟s representatives who 
indulge in „Paid News‟. Those found guilty, their election should be declared 
null and void or alternatively they may be debarred from contesting election 
in future. 
 
 The ruling party may not be allowed to publish their achievements by way of 
advertisements in the State/Centre during t heir rule at Government‟s 
expenses atleast six months before elections. 
 
 A committee should be made under the Election  Commission of India to 
monitor the issue of „Paid News‟.  If found guilty, then on the report of 
committee the Election Commission should  have the power to take action. 
The committee may consist of Supreme Court Judges, media, State Election 
Commission, Chairman of Prasar Bharati etc.  
 
 For two and a half years, the Election Commission of India played a brilliant 
role in fighting paid news and the damage the paid news did to democracy. 
.... It created extensive new rules and regulations to fight the practice. It 
expanded monitoring of poll campaigns to a new level altogether.... The ECI 
even started a whole new division within its structure to confront the Paid 
News phenomenon: the expenditure monitoring division. It is correctly 
headed by an Income Tax commissioner - Paid News is very much an IT 
scam as well....The ECI, however, faltered at the last hurdle in a case 
relating to Maharashtra Assembly which is now pending in Supreme Court.” 
 
1.94 While examining the subject another issue has been raised by various 
stakeholders/experts and that is about the anomaly in the Supreme Court‟s order 
dated 13th April, 2004 according to which television channels and radio stations are 
prohibited or banned from broadcasting election campaign related news after 
campaigning stops 48 hours before polling is scheduled to take place. However, a 
similar ban does not apply to the print media and hence, newspapers  carry election 
campaign related news and advertising even on the morning of polling. Even Press 
Council of India is of the view that this anomaly should be rectified with immediate 
effect by the Election Commission of India. 
1.95 In this regard, a former PCI Member Shri Paranjoy Guha Thakurta, during his 
evidence before the Committee, submitted as under:- 
“There is one anomaly in the Act and the interpretation of the 
Supreme Court in the Act. Let me draw your attention to the report 
that I submitted to you .... which says that the Supreme Court of India 
has enjoined the TV channels to stop broadcasting campaign related 
information on candidates and political parties 48 hours before 
elections can take place. This needs to be extended to the print 
medium. So far, this restriction does not apply to the print medium. If 
it applies to the electronic medium, why not the print medium.”  
1.96 Further, endorsing the above view, a former CEC, in this regard, submitted 
as under: 
“I would say whether it is possible to b an political advertisements in 
electronic media beyond a particular time limit. For example, now we 

 
 
33 
 
say two days before the election there should not be any canvassing.  
But then the print media is exempted from it.  We have 
advertisements during this period.” 
1.97 Considering the severity of the problem and the impact of „Paid News‟ on 
Elections, the Committee asked about the existing provisions in the Election Code of 
Conduct to overcome the maladies of 'Paid News'. To this, the Ministry, in their 
written reply submitted as under: 
“The Election commission has directed that maximum vigilance may be 
observed by making use of the existing provisions of law so that 
incidence of „Paid News‟ or surrogate advertisements in print and 
electronic media in the contex t of elections are arrested.  The legal 
provisions under section 127A of the Representation of People Act, 
1951 make it mandatory for the publisher of an election 
advertisement, pamphlet etc. to print the name and address of the 
publisher as well as the pr inter and failure to do so attracts penalty of 
imprisonment up to two years and/or fine of Rs. 2000/ -. Section 171H 
of the IPC prohibits incurring of expenditure on, inter alia 
advertisement without the authority of the contesting candidate. The 
Election C ommission‟s detailed guidelines in this regard covers the 
declared or specified release as advertisement inserted in the 
newspaper etc and disclosure of amount paid for such advertisement.   
For the purpose of section 127A (1) of the RP Act, 1951, “electio n 
pamphlet or poster” means any printed pamphlet, hand bills or other 
document distributed for the purpose of promoting or prejudicing the 
election of a candidate or group of candidates.  Thus, Paid News would 
fall under the category of the „Other document ‟ liable to be included in 
election pamphlet and poster and action taken accordingly.  Hence an 
obvious case of news reporting in print media dedicated/giving 
advantage to a particular candidate or the party while ignoring/causing 
prejudice to other candidates or parties would require investigation.   
The Election Commission, for the purpose of investigation has directed 
the Chief Electoral Officers of all the States to constitute the District 
level Committee in each district to do vigorous scrutiny of all 
newspapers being published or having circulation in the district in 
order to locate political advertisements in the garb of news coverage 
appearing during the election period.” 
 
1.98 On being asked about the concrete measures suggested by the Election 
Commission, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated as under: 
“The Election Commission has issued instructions for constituting the 
District level and State level   Media Certification and Monitoring 
Committee for scrutiny of paid news. The Election Commi ssion 
requested the Press Council of India to provide a district -wise list of 
the Independent Journalists/Citizens for inclusion in the District level 
MCMC.  The PCI has forwarded a list of former members of the Press 
Council for the purpose of consulting them for selection of journalist in 
the Committee.  The PCI also suggested that eminent media 
educationists of the States form University/College recognized by 
University Grant Commission and also media researchers specializing 

 
 
34 
 
in psephology from Centres l ike Centre for Media studies, Delhi.  The 
Election Commission has requested the CEOs of Assam, Kerala, 
Tamilnadu, West Bengal and Puducherry accordingly and has also   
forwarded the list of former members of the Press Council for selection 
of journalists for the District level MCMC to check and monitor the Paid 
news.”    
1.99 The Committee were also informed that in order to monitor the expenditure 
of political parties and candidates, the Election Commission of India has issued 
standing instructions to be f ollowed by those who are responsible for the printing 
and publication of such election posters and pamphlets, etc. 
1.100 Considering the provisions of the standing instructions for the printing and 
publication and apprehending that a candidate can be trapp ed by other candidate if 
he/she issues notices in opponents favour therefore putting the candidate into trap, 
the Committee desired to know about such possibility of mala -fide intention.  The 
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting during evide nce replied that all 
legal provisions have this possibility. 
1.101 Regarding the authority to disqualify the candidates Shri T. K Krishnamurthy, 
the former Chief Election Commissioner submitted as under:- 
“As far as the paid news is concerned, I would say that the Election 
Commission should be authorised by the Representation of Peoples‟ 
Act to enquire into any allegations of paid news and if it is found to be 
true, the Election Commission should be authorised to disqualify the 
candidate....” 
1.102 On being asked whether the PCI could be entrusted with the task, the former 
CEC responded as under:- 
“If this power cannot be given to the Election Commission, atleast it 
should be given to the Press Council..xx.. The Press Council should 
have the ability to disqu alify a candidate or to impose a penalty on a 
political party. Penalty need not be necessarily monetary penalty; it 
can be a penalty in some other form. But they must have the power 
after due enquiry to pass a reasonable order by which they are able to 
punish a party or a candidate…xx…For example, the High Courts have 
power over election petitions. There is no contradiction at all because if 
you want to give an independent status for an enquiry, Election 
Commission can take up the matter with the Press Coun cil and the 
Press Council can take a decision.” 
1.103 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their background note, also 
stated that realizing the threat posed by „Paid News‟ to functioning of an 
independent media in the country and the working o f Indian democracy by 
influencing free and fair elections Press Council of India constituted a Sub -
Committee comprising Shri Paranjoy Guha Thakurta and Shri Kalimekolam 
Sreenivas Reddy to examine the phenomenon of paid news observed during the 
2009 Lok Sabha Election. The Report (72 pages) titled „Paid News: How corruption 
in the Indian media undermines democracy‟ was submitted to PCI in March, 2010. 

 
 
35 
 
Chairman, PCI, then appointed a drafting committee to prepare a final report for 
the consideration of the Co uncil. This twelve member Drafting Committee again 
drafted a final report on „Paid News‟ (15 pages). A brief conclusion of the sub -
Committee Report and recommendation of final Report, as submitted by the 
Ministry, is placed at Annexure-I and II  respectively. Some of the significant 
recommendations related to the Electoral process, as outlined in the PCI‟s Sub -
Committee on Paid News are as under: 
“It should be mandatory for all candidates/political parties to fully 
disclose their equity stakes and/or financi al interests in 
newspapers/television channels on which news about their 
candidates/parties as well as interviews with candidates and/or 
representatives of the political parties are published or broadcast. If a 
candidate is being interviewed or given posit ive publicity on a 
particular newspaper/television channel, the association (financial or 
otherwise) of the candidate with the newspaper/television channel if 
any must be disclosed to the reader/viewer. 
Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, should be 
amended by Parliament to make the practice of paying for news 
coverage in newspapers and television channels an “electoral 
malpractice” or an act of corruption and made a punishable offence. 
The Election Commission of India should set up a special cell to receive 
complaints about “paid news” in the run -up to elections and initiate a 
process through which expeditious action could be taken on the basis 
of such complaints. In order to place a check on frivolous complaints 
being made a time limi t of, say, one month from the date of 
publication or broadcast of the report should be imposed. The Election 
Commission of India should nominate independent journalists and/or 
public figures as observers in consultation with the Press Council of 
India who would accompany the election observers deputed by the 
Election Commission of India to various states and districts. Just as the 
deputed election observers are expected to report and keep a check on 
any malpractices in election campaign and the conduct of e lections, 
these nominated journalists could report on instances of activities of 
practice of paid news to the Press Council of India and the Election 
Commission of India.  
The Press Council of India should constitute a body of media 
professionals with wide  representation at the national/state/district 
levels to investigate (either suo -motu or on receipt of complaints of) 
instances of “paid news” and the recommendations of such a body – 
after going through an appellate mechanism -- should be binding on 
the Election Commission of India and other government authorities.” 
1.104 Information furnished by Election Commission of India on the issue of paid 
news is placed at Annexure-III.  

 
 
36 
 
CHAPTER-V 
Existing mechanism/ Guidelines/ Codes/ Norms/ Acts/ 
Organizations/Professional bodies/ Legislations/ etc. 
1.105 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee came across 
various guidelines/ Codes/ Norms/ Acts/ Organizations/ Professional bodies/  
Legislations in existence to check the „Paid News‟. Some of t hese include Working 
Journalists Act, News Broadcasters Association Code, Press Council of India Act and 
its Norms of Journalistic Conduct, Indian Broadcasters Foundation Guidelines, Mint 
Code of Journalistic Conduct, Cable Television Networks (Regulation)  Act, 1995, 
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, Code for Commercial Advertising on 
Doordarshan, etc. When the Ministry was asked to provide details about the 
existing mechanism/ Guidelines/ Codes/ Norms/ Acts/ Organizations‟/ Professional 
bodies/ Legislations/  etc., so as to check the „Paid News‟, they stated as under: 
“In pursuance of the twin objective of preserving the freedom of press 
and maintaining and improving the standard of newspapers in India 
and also to inculcate the principles of self -regulation among the press, 
the Government has set up the Press Council of India (PCI), an 
autonomous body under the Press Council Act, 1978. The PCI under 
Section 13(2)(b) has developed „Norms of Journalistic Conduct‟ that 
cover the principles and ethics r egarding journalism for adherence by 
media. PCI has also laid down guidelines on reporting of specific issues 
of public and national importance.  In 1996, it drew up a set of 
guidelines that are applicable to financial journalism and also on 
reporting of elections. 
 
The PCI conducts hearing into the complaints of violation of 
Journalistic Ethics and Norms through its Inquiry Committees.  The 
Inquiry Committees, after written and oral submission of the parties, 
submit its recommendations in the matters to th e full Council for 
action.  Under section 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978, the Council 
can warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, editor or the journalist 
as the case may be.  
 
As regards the electronic media, all TV channels are required to 
comply wit h the Programme & Advertisement Codes failing which 
action can be taken as per the terms and conditions of 
permission/registration.  The Advertisement Code stipulates that all 
advertisements should be clearly distinguishable from the programme.  
The Progra mme Code prohibits carriage of programmes containing 
anything deliberate, false, suggestive, innuendos  and half -truths.  
Though there is a well -established procedure to take action for such 
violations, the problem is to establish the violation per se.  The re are 
so many different ways which can be adopted towards obliging the 
channels financially that it is extremely difficult to establish a violation 
in this regard.  However, if a violation is established the Ministry is well 
within its power to take actio n which may include taking the channel 
off-air either permanently or for a limited period. 
......xxxxx... In addition to the existing mechanism to curb the menace 
of paid news, the Government is also considering  the 
recommendations of the Standing Committ ee on IT on „The Press and 

 
 
37 
 
Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011‟ regarding need to 
curb the menace of paid news and to propose penal provisions in the 
Bill.” 
1.106 The Ministry has also outlined the „Norms and Guidelines issued by NBSA in 
November 2011‟ which provides as under: 
“Every news broadcasting organization shall disclose conspicuously in 
an appropriate manner during broadcast of a programme, on their 
television channel/s and on their website/s, including during a news, 
current affairs, sports, entertainment or promotional broadcast as to 
whether the content of such broadcast has been paid for by or on 
behalf of the Entity that is subject matter of such broadcast in any 
manner whatsoever; and whether such broadcast is an „advertorial‟ or  
other media marketing initiative.” 
The self -regulation mechanism put in place by the broadcasters, 
however, does not replace the existing regulatory function of the 
Government, arising out of the extant statute, namely, Cable 
Television Networks (Regulati on) Act, 1995 and Rules framed 
thereunder. While self-regulation is aimed at facilitating better content 
regulation at broadcasters‟ level, it does not mean that the 
Government will abdicate its overall statutory functions. Government 
steps in as warranted  by the existing Act, wherever self -regulation 
does not succeed in content regulation. 
1.107 Further, when the Ministry was asked whether the existing provisions in 
various Acts to check malpractice of 'paid News‟ adequate, they stated as under:-  
“The existing provisions of laws of the land, including the provisions of 
the Companies Act, 1956 and the Income Tax Act, 1961 have the 
potential to check the malpractices of paid news, but the problem is to 
establish the violation per se.  PCI‟s Report on Paid News also indicates 
that the payment and receipt of money for paid news is a clandestine 
operation.” 
1.108 Highlighting further on the existing monitoring mechanism, the Ministry 
submitted as under:- 
At the centre, the Government has set up a state -of-art El ectronic 
Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) to monitor and record channels on a 
24x7 basis. The capacity of the centre was enhanced during the year 
2010-11 from 150 channels to be able to monitor 300 Channels at a 
time on a random basis. The EMMC has enabled t he Ministry to suo 
moto take action without depending on the recordings provided by the 
channels which were subject to manipulation by the channel. This set 
up has strengthened the regulatory system and reduced the time 
period required for taking action in case of violations.  
..xx.. ..xx.. ..xx.. ..xx..            ..xx.. 
  

 
 
38 
 
State level and District level Monitoring Committees  
 
The implementation of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995 at the local level falls within the domain of the local authorities of 
the concerned State Governments.  
Section 2 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
provides that “authorised officer”, within his local limits of jurisdiction, 
means a District Magistrate, or a Sub -Divisonal Magistrate or a 
Commissioner of Police. Further, Sections 11 and 12 of the said Act 
provide that the authorized officer has the power to seize and 
confiscate the cable operator for violation of the provisions of the Act.   
In order to enforce the Cable Act and Rules at th e State/District level, 
the Ministry issued order on 6.9.2005 for “Monitoring Committee for 
the Programme and Advertisements telecast by Cable TV channels” at 
the State, District/local level. Subsequently, detailed guidelines were 
issued by this Ministry o n 19.2.2008 providing for District level 
Monitoring Committee and State level Monitoring Committee. 
..xx.. ..xx.. ..xx.. ..xx..            ..xx.. 
So far, 16 States viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Ka rnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Rajasthan, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal have set up State level Committees. 5 
Union Territories, namely, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, 
Daman Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Laksha dweep have also set up 
State level Committees. So far as District level Committees are 
concerned, 276 Districts across India have already set up such 
Committees.” 
1.109 On being informed by the Ministry, as narrated in earlier part of the Report,   
that Ad vertisement and Programme Code has not been strictly followed, the 
Committee desired to know about the follow up action taken by the Ministry. 
Responding to this, the Ministry in this regard, has submitted as under:- 
“This Ministry has set up an Electronic Media Monitoring centre to track 
violations of the Advertisement Code and the Programme Code as 
provided in the Cable Act. Violations are also referred to the self -
regulatory body i.e., ASCI (Advertising Standards Council of India), for 
taking up with the  concerned advertiser/ advertising agency. Ministry 
takes appropriate action after receiving the report of ASCI in such 
cases. IMC (Inter -Ministerial Committee) has also been constituted in 
the Ministry to look into violations of Programme and Advertising 
Codes and to recommend suitable action depending on the gravity of 
violation.” 
1.110 However, the Ministry themselves have accepted that there is no mechanism 
to enforce the Election Commission‟s code to channels and newspapers. 
1.111 Elaborating further on the measures, to be taken for strict enforcement of 
the existing codes of conduct by the media, the Ministry in their written reply stated 

 
 
39 
 
that the Government steps in if a channel is found violating the Programme and/ or 
Advertisement Codes. The Ministry also submitted as under:- 
“Every broadcaster through various Policy Guidelines has been 
mandated to follow the Programme and Advertisement Codes as 
prescribed under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 
and Rules framed there under. For regulation of content on Satellite TV 
channels, an Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) chaired by Additional 
Secretary (I&B) has been constituted, with representatives from other 
Ministries, which gives its recommendations on alleged violation and 
suitable action to be taken against the channel. The IMC functions in a 
recommendatory capacity. The final decision regarding penalties and 
its quantum is taken on the basis of the recommendations of IMC.” 
1.112 News Broadcasters Association (NBA), a self -regulatory body was also asked 
about the existing mechanism and measure to tackle the menace. To this, President 
of the NBA, during evidence, stated as under: 
“On the news side, we started carrying scrolls saying that if any 
member of the public has any complaint on a ny content of our 
channels, he may report the matter to the News Broadcasting 
Standards Authority. On the entertainment side also, a similar body 
has been set up and so we now have a Broadcasting Content Authority 
on that side as well. 
Sir, paid news is ce rtainly bad. We do not want it and nobody should 
indulge in it. But I think it is something that has to be regulated by us 
within our mechanism for self -regulation that we have got. I honestly 
believe that the State should not have a role to play in this. We have 
leading lights in democracies of the world where self -regulation has 
worked very well and that is exactly what is needed. Paid news is 
certainly bad and it should be regulated in the self -regulatory 
mechanism.” 
1.113 Further, representative of the NBA, during evidence, added:- 
“…xx..Sir, my humble submission to the Committee is that in case 
there is any incident of paid news that comes to the notice of any 
member of the public or any member of the polity, there is a 
framework that is laid down for r edressal. That person can go to the 
channel concerned and if dissatisfied, he can go to a broader redressal 
mechanism that is headed by a person of eminence of Justice Verma. 
These avenues are available for redressal and they have proved to be 
very effective in the last couple of years of self-regulation.” 
1.114 On the efficacy of existing Code/ Guidelines/ Acts/Norms and the success of 
various professional bodies like Editors Guild of India, Indian Broadcasting 
Foundation, Advertising Standards Council of India, News Broadcasters Association 
etc., for tackling the menace of „Paid News‟, NBA, in their written reply, submitted 
that recognizing the importance of the issue, they have put in place a set of Norms 
and Guidelines on Paid News.  

 
 
40 
 
1.115 Responding on the same query, Prasar Bharati in their written reply, 
submitted as under: 
“In the absence of any statutory regulator, other measures adopted so 
far have not been very effective in checking the menace of „paid news‟.  
There has been an effort to regulate t he functioning of private 
channels through the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act 1995.  
However, there is no mechanism put in place to enforce the provisions 
of the Act.  Steps in the direction of self -regulation by various media 
bodies have been virtually ineffectual due to lack of teeth.” 
1.116 When asked to provide suggestions for making the existing mechanism/ 
organizations/ bodies/ norms/ codes/ guidelines/ acts, etc., efficient enough to curb 
the menace of „Paid News‟, Prasar Bharati submitted as under: 
“Self-regulation has not been very successful in respect of private 
Indian media. Perhaps an independent regulator is very much needed.  
Independent regulator should be under the control of the Government.  
This should be a multi-member body of independent persons, who may 
be appointed in consultations with representatives of media bodies. 
1.117 On this issue, CEO, Prasar Bharati, during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“People are imprisoned for tax violations. It is the question of ruling of 
law extending itself. It cannot happen overnight.  It will happen slowly.  
It will happen if we keep up the pressure. I would submit that this is 
an area where amendments need to be brought in. The choice of 
amendments ….. xxxxx… I would submit, it should be through an array 
of instruments. The legal authority lies in the Cable Television 
Networks Regulation Act.  This is the only Act in which we may not 
need to go in for a new Act. A little bit of tweaking here and there. 
This is administered by the Ministry o f Information and Broadcasting, 
which  can enforce provisions where there is a grey area, by insisting 
on an undertaking and then acting upon that undertaking „that you 
have undertaken at every level that you have not done it for a 
consideration‟. 
….xxx…… So what we suggest and what we always suggest to the I&B 
Ministry is to issue guidelines in this respect because it is the nodal 
agency to take care of the Act. They can take action against the 
channels who violate those guidelines and provisions of this A ct 
because the Cable Networks Act gives powers to the Ministry to take 
action in consultation with the State Government and District 
Magistrate.”   
1.118 He further added:- 
“Those guidelines have to be very effectively monitored and Prasar 
Bharati can alwa ys reiterate the guidelines which we follow in this 
regard because we have clear guidelines, code of conduct for 
ourselves.  We can certainly suggest to the I&B Ministry that these can 
be issued to other channels and they may also replicate them 
otherwise action would be taken by the Ministry because everything is 
there.  But that code and all those kinds of things are not binding on 
private channels and private newspapers and other people at all.  Like 

 
 
41 
 
these days, viewers do not know, if something comes, w hether it is 
sponsored advertisement or news because of want of guidelines that it 
should be properly scrolled and if it is not declared as advertisement, it 
is news.” 
1.119 However, according to the former Chief Election Commissioner,                                
Shri T.K. Krishnamurthy, instead of creating new institutions, it is better that there 
is a set up within the Press Council or the Election Commission. The reasons 
provided by him are as under: 
“It is because for the Ombudsmen again there would be time lost in 
exchanging correspondence with the Election Commission as well as 
the Press Council before taking any decision.  So, my humble 
suggestion is that it should be either with the Press Council or with the 
Election Commission. 
I have no objectio n at all if it is going to the Press Council. The 
objection that I have is, please do not create one more institution to 
create more problems in terms of time and then that institution will 
become all powerful with the other two may not even be able to 
communicate with them. So, it is better to have some kind of an 
institutional mechanism within the existing institutions.” 
1.120 The Committee also desired to know whether the Ministry has done a study 
on the usefulness of the self regulating bodies viz. PCI, NBA etc., the Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting during evidence, submitted as under: 
“We do not get any periodic reports from them.  There is no 
prescription like that.  Our BCCC had submitted their annual report 
about three, four months  back.  But most of the violations are 
basically in the domain of news broadcasting.  They do claim that they 
have a website where they put all their actions and also actions taken 
by them.  Some have been reported.  In a recent case they had really 
put a fine of Rs. 1,00,000 on one of the news channels for violations.  
I think, this was for not verifying the source.” 
 
The case of M/s Jindal Steel Power Limited and M/s Zee Ltd – 
highlighting loophole in the existing guidelines/code/ mechanism 
 
1.121 During the course of examination of the subject, M/s Jindal Steel and Power 
Limited (JSPL), in their letter dated 19 th December, 2012, invited attention of the 
Committee to certain alleged unethical malpractices of M/s Zee News Limited and 
stated that M/s Zee News has aired considerable number of programmes containing 
wrong, manipulated, untrue and per-se defamatory contents against M/s Jindal 
Steel and Power Limited (JSPL). They also stated that M/s Zee News have violated 
Point No. 4 and Point No. 6 of the Code of Ethics and Broadcasting Standards of the 
News Broadcasters Association and that of Rule 6(d) and (i) of the Programme and 
Advertising Codes prescribed under the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994. 
 

 
 
42 
 
1.122 During evidence, the representatives of M/s JSP L drew attention of the 
Committee, to the following issues: 
“The issue of „paid news‟ -- one of the issues that this august 
Committee is discussing -- is a very serious problem. Even more 
serious is the issue of extortion by using newspaper or TV 
channels…xxxx….In fact, it is far more serious than „paid news‟ 
because they are indulging in criminal acts. …xxxx.. Now, in this case, 
till today, no action has been taken by the Ministry despite repeated 
complaints by us. Seven letters have been sent by us from October till 
December. An inter -Ministerial Committee meeting took place on                 
4th January, 2013, where we made a presentation, but thereafter it 
seems that on the pretext that this matter is sub-judice before the 
criminal courts and before a d efamation court, that is, before the 
Mumbai High Court where a defamation suit has been filed by us, so 
far, nothing further has moved and it seems that no action is being 
taken in this very very serious matter. 
.....xxxxx.....The General Clauses Act says that whoever has the power 
to do something, also has the power to take away that. So, any license 
granted, if having a channel requires a license from the Ministry of 
I&B, which it does, a license has been given to them by the Ministry of 
I&B, this Ministr y has the right to revoke that license under the 
General Clauses Act. This Ministry has come out with certain guidelines 
in what sort of situations we can do what, and they have a particular 
guideline under which they say that in cases of serious violations which 
are against public interest, we can even revoke the license.  
We have given all these things to the Ministry and said that this would 
squarely come within the guideline no. 8.1 of the Ministry. There is 
also a programme code which the Ministry has which says that only 
these are the things that you can do and these are the things that you 
cannot do, under the Cable Networks Act, which is a statutory 
provision in which there are various things that you cannot do – you 
cannot defame somebody, you canno t falsely say something against 
somebody, etc., which is what they have done here.” 
1.123 Section 8.1 of the Uplinking guidelines referred to above, reads as under: 
“In the event of a channel/teleport/SNG/DSNG found to have been/  
being used for transmitti ng/ uplinking any objectionable unauthorized 
content, messages, or communication inconsistent with public interest 
or national security or failing to comply with the directions as per para 
5.9 above, the permission granted shall be revoked and the company 
shall be disqualified to hold any such permission for a period of five 
years, apart from liability for punishment under other applicable laws.” 
1.124 M/s JSPL, further, submitted as under: 
“Now, if some programme is being shown about somebody which is 
false for the purpose of extorting money, my question is, would it not 
come under objectionable unauthorised content inconsistent with 
public interest? If somebody shows something false about somebody 
with a view only to extort money from him, that would clear ly, in my 

 
 
43 
 
submission, come within objectionable unauthorised content 
inconsistent with public interest....” 
1.125 When the Ministry was asked to clarify on M/s JSPL‟s submission, they stated 
that though the NBA has examined the issue in light of its Code o f Ethics, the 
Ministry is also examining the issue separately. The Ministry, further, added as 
under:- 
“(i)  The matter was placed on 04.01.2013 before the Inter 
Ministerial Committee (IMC), constituted to look into violations of 
Programme and Advertising codes by private satellite TV networks, for 
affording an opportunity for personal hearing to M/s JSPL. In the 
meeting, M/s JSPL made a detailed presentation about the issues 
involved. M/s Zee News Ltd. was also called for making their 
submissions before th e IMC. M/s Zee News Ltd. has stated that they 
have sought personal hearing by way of abundant precaution, as they 
learned that M/s JSPL made allegations against them. However, they 
also pleaded that an opportunity should be given to them to explain 
their side of issues raised by M/s JSPL. 
   
(ii) After hearing both the parties, it was decided by the IMC that 
M/s Zee News Ltd needed to clarify certain issues pointed out by M/s 
JSPL. M/s Zee News Ltd (ZNL) was asked to submit their response by 
7.2.2013, which  on request of M/s ZNL, was extended upto 
14.02.2013.  M/s ZNL has submitted their response vide their letter 
dated 14.02.2013, which is under examination and is coming for 
consideration of the IMC in its next meeting scheduled on 7 th March, 
2013.” 
 
1.126 In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“Sir, I would like to very humbly submit that the process is on; they 
have also drawn our attention to this provision; and it is correct that 
this is although an administrative guideline, it does not have the 
sanction of a law, but it certainly gives authority.  For instance, taking 
another case, if there is a blatant lie about our national security, I 
think the Ministry is absolutely mandated to really invoke this 
particular Section and take action against the channel. So, there is no 
doubt that this provision has been there essentially to be made use of.  
But it has to be made use of in a manner, which is legally tenable 
…xxx...That is what the I MC is doing, because they have a member 
from the Law Ministry as well.   So, they have had a discussion with 
them.  It is my information that they are going to have further 
discussions to understand very clearly that whatever they do,   should 
not actually appear so blatantly wrong that it is quashed in the court of 
law.  That would not be a good thing to happen.” 
1.127 The Secretary, also, stated:- 
“The key words are whether it is in consistent with public interest or 
national security.  Then, this Section is attracted. I think, we will have 

 
 
44 
 
to really take a call whether a dispute between the two private entities 
is a matter of public interest or not.” 
1.128 When Ministry was asked to state whether NBA had taken cognizance of this 
case suo-motu, they replied as under: 
“With regard to the Zee News case, NBA/ NBSA have informed this 
Ministry about suo-motu notice taken by them. Their communication is 
reproduced verbatim as follows: 
“....xxx....... on the basis of material forwarded to NBSA by Justice 
(Retd) Markandey Katju, Chairman, Press Council of India (PCI), the 
NBSA took suo motu cognizance of the matter and issued notice on 
19.10.2012, to the concerned parties.  
During the course of hearing on 31.10.2012, NBSA was informed by 
the parties that an FIR had been lodged on 2.10.2012 by M/s Jindal 
Steel & Power Ltd. (JSPL) against officers of Zee News Ltd (ZNL) and 
the same was under investigation. Further, NBSA was informed that a 
suit had also been filed by JSPL against ZNL on 25.10.2012 in the High 
Court of Bombay at Mumbai making claims arising from the same 
subject matter.  
Accordingly, the matter was “sub judice” even before any information 
was forwarded to NBSA and therefore the NBSA could not take 
cognizance of the matter.” 
1.129 On the matter being sub-judice, the Committee asked the representatives of 
M/S JSPL to clarify further. Responding to this, a representative of M/s JSPL, during 
evidence, submitted as under: 
“Absolutely not for the simple reason that the issue of revocation of 
licence cannot be d ealt with either by the police or the Magistrate 
where the complaint is pending or by the High Court in the defamation 
suit.  This relief of cancellation of licence to a channel can only be 
granted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  Therefor e, 
for them to take a stand that “Look, we cannot do anything till the 
matter is sub judice” is, in my submission, completely wrong because 
if you do not take some action against somebody who is using this big 
weapon of being in the media, of having a chan nel, of being able to 
show anything against anybody and who is using it as a blackmail, 
then who else can take action?  This will be dereliction of duty.” 
  

 
 
45 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
Measures to tackle the menace of  ‘Paid News’ 
1.130 With regard to regulating the menace  of „Paid News‟ some 
experts/stakeholders have advocated for State involvement whereas others have 
recommended for self -regulation and some other have suggested for multi -tier 
regulation including ombudsman and self regulation as first tier of regulation and at 
second tier a body/authority/organisation with legal/statutory backing or limited 
external regulation. 
1.131 When asked about the best line of action to tackle this menace, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting during evidence submi tted as 
under:- 
“It would be very necessary, in my view, and very important for the 
Committee to have discussions with a wide section of the people and 
perhaps the Election Commission of India and the Press Council itself, 
the SEBI because of the financial  interests as well as, I think, the 
members of the Press Council who had drafted the report and may be 
journalists who have written on this subject from time to time, the 
representatives of organisations like the Editors Guild which also took 
a very strong view and issued a very strong statement on paid news. I 
think a number of people would be more than happy to depose before 
the Committee. On your direction, we have already issued an 
advertisement in the paper inviting comments so that you can receive 
it in writing. After that, the Committee may like to discuss with some 
of them. 
As Secretary of the Ministry, I do feel that it is very necessary to build 
a very strong public opinion which would ultimately be the answer. 
Whatever may be the penal provision t hat we prescribe, if there is a 
general feeling among the people at large that this is something which 
is diluting their rights for free flow of information and they are being 
fed information which is not correct, I think that would perhaps be the 
best antidote in the long run.” 
1.132 On the query about the strategy and time frame to tackle the issue, the 
Ministry stated that the matter requires prior consultations with stakeholders after 
receiving the recommendation of GoM proposed to be re -constituted and since it 
requires wider consultations, no time frame in this regard could be given. 
1.133 However, considering the views/suggestions of the Stakeholders, the 
Committee have analyzed following issues to curb the malpractices.  
(i) Efficacy of Self regulation  
1.134 As pointed out by the former Chief Election Commissioner,                            
Shri T.K Krishnamurthy, the most critical issue for curbing „Paid News‟ is to have a 
regulatory mechanism as media resort to taking leverage under freedom of 
expression. Besides, almost all the individuals/experts/stakeholders/organisations, 

 
 
46 
 
except News Broadcasters Association (NBA), have advocated on the need for 
having an oversight/regulatory mechanism so as to curb the syndrome. 
1.135 The CEO, Prasar Bharati, on the issue of having a regulator, during evidence 
before the Committee submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in fact, has been 
working on this for a very long time and, in fact, a Draft Bill has been 
circulated to the stake holders, a number of meetings were held by the 
hon. Minister of Information and Broadcasting but a final position has 
not yet emerged. 
The consultation between the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
and the Ministry of Law and stake holders has been going on for at 
least five years now for forming an independent regulatory authority to 
regulate all these  things and there is always a debate, the media 
people come and it is a very tricky situation. They say that they have 
their own Code of Conduct thoug h practically that is not seen in 
everyday functioning of the private channels and fine line between 
advertisement, paid news and news, that has become quite blurred 
and it is becoming more and more blurred every day.” 
1.136 A written Memorandum from Assoc iation for Democratic Reform Mazdoor 
Kisan Shakti Sangthan stated that media in India is essentially self regulated by an 
industry body, the Editors Guild of India and a statutory body-Press Council of India 
which is ineffectual because it has no real powe r and also because of its 
constitution.   It inter-alia quoted an eminent Chief Editor‟s speech delivered to 
media professional on 3rd December, 2010 which is an under:- 
“Paid News:  a year ago in Editors Guild we asked editors to take a 
pledge-a pledge somewhere that they should be ready, at least in their 
own individual capacity, to resist proprietors who will want paid news 
without norms of disclosure ....xxxx....We got about 18-20 editors only 
answering and giving that pledge.  A majority haven‟t done s o.  It 
required the election commission to intervene (…..) we could have a 
code of conduct, we could devise it but are editors going to be willing 
to adhere to that code of conduct....xxx...”  
1.137 On the issue of regulation, the Ministry, in their writte n reply stated that 
media should be self regulated and further added as under:- 
“In the democratic structure of the country, freedom of speech and 
expression is one of the fundamental rights.  The freedom of press in 
India flows from this right.  The media , while reporting should not be 
under any compulsion. In this scenario, media, on its part should 
convey correct and fair information to the people.  The instance which 
has been brought out in Radia tapes is extremely disturbing.  
However, the Ministry feels that it is an aberration. The Parliament has 
passed the Press Council Act, 1978 which provides for regulation of the 
media by its peers.” 
 

 
 
47 
 
1.138 Regarding regulation for electronic media, apart from self -regulation, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:-  
“As regards the electronic media, all TV channels are required to 
comply with the Programme & Advertisement Codes failing which 
action can be taken as per the terms and conditions of 
permission/registration. The Advertisement Code stipula tes that all 
advertisements should be clearly distinguishable from the programme.  
The Programme Code prohibits carriage of programmes containing 
anything deliberate, false, suggestive, innuendos and half -truths.  
Though there is a well -established procedure to take action for such 
violations, the problem is to establish the violation per se.  There are 
so many different ways which can be adopted towards obliging the 
channels financially that it is extremely difficult to establish a violation 
in this regard. However, if a violation is established the Ministry is well 
within its power to take action which may include taking the channel 
off-air either permanently or for a limited period...xx.. 
Besides, broadcasting industry is also making attempts to self 
regulate, stipulate codes of ethics and standards for itself.” 
1.139 However, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting during 
evidence before the Committee took the stand that if the Standing Committee 
provides a definitive view on the need of h aving a regulator/ self -regulation/ and 
the manner in which the Ministry have to proceed, it will strengthen their hands 
and provide better clarity on the issue. 
1.140 Considering the opinion of the Ministry on self -regulation, the Committee 
desired to know the efficacy of self -regulation mechanism/body and whether it has 
been able to check the menace of „paid news‟. The Committee also asked whether  
the Codes of Ethics and Standards stipulated by self -regulating bodies of Media 
industry been effective in inculcating „self regulation‟ in media or not. Responding to 
this query, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their written reply, 
submitted as under:- 
“Ministry of Information and Broadcasting feels that the media should 
be self-regulated.  The  instances of paid news in print media can be 
tackled with the steps being considered in the proposed amendments 
in the PRB Act based on the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on IT in regard to the Press and Registration of Books Bill.  
Besides, ot her various other steps being taken by PCI, Election 
Commission of India and M/o I&B may also help check the instances of 
paid news.       
This Ministry has been of the view that content generation falls 
exclusively in the domain of broadcasters and self -regulation could be 
an effective mechanism for a healthy content regulation. For giving 
this mechanism an opportunity to become robust and effective, 
complaints received in the Ministry against a news channel are sent to 
NBA in the first instance for placin g before NBSA for appropriate 
action.  

 
 
48 
 
The News Broadcasters Association (NBA), as part of its self-regulation 
mechanism, has formulated a Code of Ethics and Broadcasting 
Standards covering a wide range of principles to self -regulate news 
broadcasting. NBA has also formulated News Broadcasting Standards 
Regulations. They have set up a Two - Tier structure to deal with 
content related complaints. At Tier I, complaints are dealt with by the 
individual broadcasters at their level. At Tier II, NBA has set up Ne ws 
Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA).  
...........xxxxx...........xxxxx............xxxxx............xxxxx............xxxxx 
The self -regulation mechanism put in place by the broadcasters, 
however, does not replace the existing regulatory function of t he 
Government, arising out of the extant statute, namely, Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and Rules framed 
thereunder. While self-regulation is aimed at facilitating better content 
regulation at broadcasters‟ level, it does not mean that t he 
Government will abdicate its overall statutory functions. Government 
steps in as warranted by the existing Act, wherever self -regulation 
does not succeed in content regulation.” 
 
1.141 On the same issue, PCI, in their written reply stated as under:- 
“Self-regulation is futile and meaningless, because self-regulation is an 
oxymoron.  All social activity has to be regulated.  Regulation is 
different from control. In control, there is no freedom, while in 
regulation, there is freedom but it is subject to re asonable restrictions 
in the public interest. The Press Council is in favour of regulation and 
not control, and this regulation should be by an independent statutory 
authority like the Press Council of India and not the government.”  
 
1.142 In this regard,  News Broadcasters Association‟s (NBA) submission to the 
Committee is that Paid News‟ must be a part of the self -regulatory regime and 
ought not be legislated upon.  The agency is of the opinion that the issue of „Paid 
News‟ is clearly an „ethics issue‟ an d therefore must squarely be a part of the self -
regulatory regime that NBA has initiated so far and which has successfully evolved 
since then. In addition, NBA is of the view that multiple agencies should not be 
created or entrusted with the task of monito ring and enforcing prohibition on Paid -
News as this would create conflicts and inefficiencies in implementation. 
1.143 It was noted that there are various self -regulatory organizations viz. News 
Broadcasters Association (NBA) (for news and current affairs formed in 2007 -08), 
Indian Broadcasting Federation‟s Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) 
(for non news and current affairs/general entertainment ch annels formed in 1999), 
Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI),  Press Council of India (PCI),etc.  
1.144 When asked about their mechanism s and competency to deal with other 
body/association with different standards/code of ethics, the President, NBA, during 
evidence, submitted as under:- 

 
 
49 
 
“The News Broadcasting Standards Authority has jurisdiction over 
every channel that is owned by any of t he member of the News 
Broadcasters Association.  There are about 40 national channels.  For 
example, when the Government says that there are 300 news 
channels today, there are in fact only 45 news channels. The rest of 
the channels are normal entertainment  channels which do not have 
any element of news.  Even half an hour news a week would make 
that a news channel for the purpose of those guidelines.  I think, we 
need to differentiate between the two.  It is really very difficult for me 
to speak for the ent ire broadcasting fraternity.  But, if we confine 
ourselves to 24 -hour news channels, I think, most of our 24 -hour 
news channels, whether they are regional or national, are members of 
the News Broadcasters Association.  We are going around and trying to 
increase the membership.” 
 
1.145 Highlighting a major drawback of self-regulatory body/mechanism, President, 
Editors Guild of India, during evidence, submitted as under: 
“As an association what can we do? We can only put moral pressure. 
We have no legal powers against our members.”  
1.146 The Committee received numerous suggestions/views from the experts/ 
stakeholders/ organisations on the issue of regulation. Some of the significant ones 
are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Individuals 
experts/ 
stakeholders/ 
organisations 
Suggestions/Views 
1. Prasar Bharati  Self-regulation as an open phenomenon has not 
succeeded.  But self -regulation, if you want to 
make it start, then you have to put the keys on. 
You have to propose a draft of a body saying 
that this is the draft body th at we want to set 
up.  And within that draft body, I would submit 
two layers.  One is the consultative and judicial 
layer, that is seniors, and the other is the 
execution layer.  In the execution layer, it should 
comprise of an independent investigator and  an 
independent complaint office and suppression of 
identity of the complainant, whistle blower.   
 
…xx….         …xx….          …xx….              …xx…. 
 
Self-regulation has not been very successful in 
respect of private Indian media. Perhaps an 
independent regulator is very much needed.  
Independent regulator should be under the 
control of the Government.  This should be a 
multi-member body of independent persons, who 
may be appointed in consultations with 
representatives of media bodies. 
 
  

 
 
50 
 
2. Press Council of India If the Press is to function effectively as the 
watchdog of public interest, it must have a 
secure freedom of expression, unfettered and 
unhindered by any authority, organized bodies or 
individuals. But, this claim to press freedom has 
legitimacy only if it is exercised with a due sense 
of responsibility. The Press must, therefore, 
scrupulously adhere to accepted norms of 
journalistic ethics and maintain high standards of 
professional conduct. Where the norms are 
breached and the freedom is def ied by 
unprofessional conduct, a way must exist to 
check and control it. Yet, control by Government 
or official authorities may prove destructive of 
this freedom. Therefore, the best way is to let 
the peers of the profession, assisted by a few 
discerning l aymen to regulate it through a 
properly structured representative impartial 
machinery. A need for such a mechanism has 
been felt for a long time both by the authorities 
as well as the Press itself all over the world. 
 
…xx….         …xx….          …xx….              …xx…. 
 
Regulation is acceptable only through the 
mechanism of self regulation with statutory 
backing. 
3. Akhil Bhartiya Grahak 
Panchayat 
(ABGP) 
It is admitted fact that every system need a 
regulatory mechanism to monitor its programme 
and improve efficiency. Checks and balance are 
part of the system thereby considered 
necessary. Regulatory provisions are more 
relevant in case, issues are directly effecting the 
public interest. Recently Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting finalized certain no rms 
incorporating cancellation of licence after five 
violation in programme code. However, it had 
been resisted by broadcasters on the plea of 
freedom of speech and expression as granted 
under constitution. In this regard, Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court observation /judgement 1995 in 
the case of “airwaves” had also been referred. 
Freedom of speech is welcome but simultaneous 
responsibility in self -regulation cannot be 
ignored. Society demands that spirit of 
judgement be implemented in toto and not as 
per suitability or convenience. Therefore, we 
have our reservations towards complete 
independent regulatory mechanism at this stage 
as per experience in power sector. 
There should be a regulatory body to check and 
control the media.  The members of this 
regulatory body sh ould be independent 
Journalists.  

 
 
51 
 
4. President, Editors 
Guild of India 
 
 
Editors Guild had taken a strong position on the 
problem of `Paid News‟ which we believe 
undermines the whole ethos of credible and free 
press.  We initially asked the members that w e 
have to sign an affidavit stating that they will not 
be party to any `Paid News‟. A substantial 
number of our members have actually signed the 
affidavit. We have taken up the issue with the 
Government. We had a meeting with the Election 
Commission also.  We wanted them to take 
action in relation to election issues and the Chief 
Election Commissioner had said that they would 
take action.  We did not know, as a voluntary 
body, what else we could do, but we have 
discussed the issue. There is one suggestion 
which I would like to make to the Committee 
which is that the issue has to be addressed 
without affecting the freedom of the Press.   
 
5. Association for 
Democratic Reforms 
 
An independent regulatory mechanism is needed 
to restore media standards and public respect for 
the fourth estate....xxx....Regulatory mechanism 
completely independent of State is needed to 
restore media standards.  Two -tiered approach, 
predominantly self -regulation with limited 
external regulation for serious violations.  A well 
defined Ombudsman role in media companies as 
first level of internal regulation and at second 
level, an organization consisting of all media 
ombudsman.  Finally an independent 
Commission with legal powers to investigate 
serious transgressions and levy penalties both on 
the media house and ineffectual ombudsman. 
The appointment can be along the lines of 
Central Information Commission (CIC), Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC), Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) etc. 
 
6. Former PCI Member  
(Shri Pranjoy Guha 
Thakurta) 
Self-regulation is good; a voluntary code of 
conduct is good, but it is not enough. Today, 
unfortunately, the biggest newspapers, the 
biggest television channels have shown the way 
on how to be corrupt.......They are named; all 
the publications are named in this report. Again, 
we did not have the power of the Income -Tax 
Department or we did not have the power of the 
CBI, so we did not catch somebody giving money 
to another person. But we have circumstantial 
evidence; we have people on record. Not a single 
allegation in this report is anonymous. Every 
allegation has been attributed to some 
individual, person or organization. Every 
individual or organization against whom these 
allegations were made was given an opportunity 

 
 
52 
 
to give their reply and everyw here the reply has 
been given; some chose not to. So, every single 
allegation has been substantiated. ....xxx..... 
Self-regulation is always the best. But what 
happens when some people cross that proverbial 
lakshman rekha? For them, you need some 
regulation. I would also urge that a suitable 
authority be set up by an Act of Parliament for 
the electronic media, especially the television 
medium because television medium has become 
huge. Twenty years ago, there was one 
broadcaster. Today the Ministry of Inform ation 
and Broadcasting tells you that there are more 
than 700 television channels, and more than 350 
are News and Current Affairs. 
 
These are all important steps that could be 
taken. The Election Commission of India has 
taken some steps. The Securities and  Exchange 
Board of India has taken some steps. It is now 
up to our hon. Law -makers to take further steps 
so that this kind of corruption which undermines 
the very basis of democracy could be stopped or 
if not stopped, at least, could be curbed. I am 
not saying that you can stop everything, but at 
least it should be curbed. 
 
7. Former Chief Election 
Commissioner, (Shri 
T.K. Krishnamurthy) 
A legal provision to enable the authorities to 
disqualify/penalise such candidate with proper 
supervisory mechanism is the need of the 
hour........  
 
A suggestion was made some time back that 
State funding will be able to get rid of this paid 
news phenomenon.  I do not agree at all 
because this paid news phenomenon will 
continue even if State funding is taking place 
because these are all done in a subtle manner 
and in a clandestine manner and the payment is 
either in cash or in kind depending upon the 
circumstances of each case.  The first thing that 
we came across was a number of political parties 
using TV channels for con veying political 
messages not only through advertisements but 
also through episodes, programmes and so on.  
The dialogues were mischievously crafted to 
drive home the message that it is for a particular 
political party.  
 
…xx….         …xx….        ..xx….              …xx…. 
 
I have no objection at all if it is going to the 
Press Council. The objection that I have is, 
please do not create one more institution to 
create more problems in terms of time and then 
that institution will become all powerful with the  

 
 
53 
 
other two may not even be able to communicate 
with them. So, it is better to have some kind of 
an institutional mechanism within the existing 
institutions.  
8. Rural Affair Editor, 
the Hindu 
We also need to, on the one hand, push and 
prod the media towar ds greater self -regulation, 
towards evolving a code of conduct, towards 
making their operations clear and transparent. 
At the same time, strengthen regulators like the 
Press Council of India, SEBI etc., in their 
respective fields. Self-regulation is not proving to 
be sufficient  -  but simply enforcing the laws 
that exist in terms of taxes, market regulations, 
press council norms, and applying them as 
honestly to media corporations as to anyone 
else, will make a great difference. 
 
9. Chairman, 
Centre for Media 
Studies 
(Shri N. Bhaskara 
Rao) 
Various bodies like Indian Broadcasting 
Federation (IBF) and News Broadcasting 
Association (NBA) may be involved in 
formulating guidelines to curb the menace of 
„Paid News‟.  Political/electoral reforms are 
needed to cur b „Paid News‟.  No single initiative 
can curb such deviant behavior. So, three 
pronged strategy like News media, Professional 
Bodies-like academicians, independent 
researches, civil society groups and  agencies 
like PCI, EC, Information Commission, TRAI et c. 
are required. 
State bodies like PCI, EC, TRAI etc, need to be 
proactive. 
10. Former PCI Member  
(Shri Y.C Halan) 
It is true that media is un -regulated today, 
particularly the electronic media. But in no 
country the media regulation has proved 
effective.....xxxx.. Media by and large is 
responsible but there are pockets and there are 
times when media becomes irresponsible. It 
depends on the maturity of the Government and 
the wisdom to devise a certain way in which the 
credibility of the media is not affe cted and the 
media works under a regulatory mechanism 
which can be used in a way that the credibility of 
the news is not concerned and it is not misused 
by the Government. It is a very difficulty 
situation and way I know but since the problem 
is being confronted and discussed very widely in 
the society and the Governments and all the 
political parties are worried about it, I think, 
some solution can be found out when we pull out 
from this political instability. ....xxx...A national 
law is required.  A law, in the long run, would be 
effective provided it does not interfere with the 
functioning of the newspapers.  That is my view. 
 
  

 
 
54 
 
1.147 Other suggestions received are:- 
 Self Regulation by the media would not achieve the desired results. 
 The best way to deal  with this issue is to have a very strong neutral 
and impartial regulatory body alongwith speedy and strong judicial 
system.  
 A separate wing to monitor the paid services may be created to have a 
strict vigil on the issue. 
 Self regulation would neither be adequate nor workable in view of 
huge profits. A strict law has to be enacted for checking, malpractices. 
 In case media is unable to hold up as worthy of possessing the tag of 
journalistic integrity, perhaps it is time for the Government to step in 
and put in place such requirements and expectations. 
 Over-regulation of media will restrict the freedom of the press. 
Independent Regulatory body with power to penalize. Guidelines for 
print and TV, Radio should be made applicable to internet and mobile 
business.  Registration of Online and Mobile Media business. 
Guidelines for bloggers also required.    
1.148 Emphasising the need for regulating media particularly for broadcasting 
sector, the Committee note that in a judgement made in Indraprashta People & 
ANR vs. Union of India, Hon‟ble High Court has inter-alia observed as under:- 
“The absence of state intervention on its own is no guarantee of a rich 
media environment. On the contrary: to promote a media environment 
characterized by pluralism and diversity, Stat e intervention is 
necessary….Freedom of expression is not an absolute right and it can 
be restricted to protect the rights of others…This debate in India has 
been won by the latter viewpoint evidenced by the fact that the print 
as also the broadcast media and the third form of mass communication 
i.e. cinema has been regulated by legislation…Under self-regulation the 
media voluntarily commits to uphold a code of ethics that it itself 
drafts….but ethics itself is a complex and controversial subject due to 
society not being homogeneous…. 
 
Thus,.... as we find pertaining to cinema and print media, there is no 
reason why the legislature does not put in place a statutory, regulatory 
body, and taking cue from The Cinematograph Act 1952 and The Press 
Council Act 197 8 legislate to have a statutory Board comprising men 
and women of eminence in the field of Law, Science, Art and Culture, 
Literature, History and Social Sciences.  
 
Since broadcast has been regulated by The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act 1995 a nd The Cable Television Network Rules 1994 
and there exists a Programme Code as also an Advertising Code, 
violation whereof entails action under Section 16, 17, 19 and 20 of The 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act 1995, finding no statutory 
regulatory body constituted, meaning thereby, as per the extant law 
the duty would fall on the executive to ensure that the mandate of the 
legislation is complied with, a situation which would be an anathema in 
a democratic set up inasmuch as it would put broadcas t under the 
direct control of the state, we recommend that a statutory regulatory 
body be constituted consisting of men and women of eminence. 

 
 
55 
 
Security of tenure of a kind should be provided for the Members of the 
Board so that they are free from Government interference.” 
 
1.149 As seen from the above, almost all the views and suggestions mentioned by 
various experts/stakeholders, except NBA, are not in favour of self regulatory 
mechanism being the only option. When asked about having a mechanism to curb 
this menace, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted that the 
matter regarding institutional mechanism to check paid news is under 
consideration. 
1.150 However, when asked for an opinion on suggestions of having a single 
agency with multiple t ier for investigation, monitoring taking legal action, etc., for  
tackling the menace, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated:- 
“The Ministry is of the view that the print and electronic media are 
different in nature, hence the regulation should also  be different.  
Besides, the election time paid news is being tackled with under the 
existing provisions of Representation of People‟s Act and the election 
time paid news is monitored by the State/District Committees formed 
by the Election Commission of In dia whereas the mandate of 
investigation and adjudication lies with the PCI in case of paid news in 
print media and with the Ministry in respect of cases in electronic 
media through Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC).   It would therefore 
not be feasible for a single agency to monitor, investigate as well as to 
adjudicate the instances of paid news.” 
1.151 Further, elaborating the Prasar Bharati‟s view point that self-regulation is not 
very successful and there should be an independent regulation, the CEO, P rasar 
Bharati, during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“If you want a completely unbiased and unpaid approach, then we are 
there.  We are running channels before they were born.  We know how 
to run channels.  We know what goes on.  We know what our reporters 
go through.  We are aware of it.  They have commercialized; we have 
not.  Yet we earn about half of our keep through sponsored 
advertisements mainly on the public campaign route.  We know how 
the industry runs.  We are there now for 25 years, 30 years in full 
operation..xx.., I would submit that you also call us because if there is 
anything that goes contrary to what the hon. Committee feels, we can 
point out immediately.” 
1.152 In this context, the Ministry was asked for their opinion on making Prasar 
Bharti a part of Self-regulatory organization viz. NBA, IBF etc. To this, the Ministry, 
in their written reply, stated as under:- 
“Prasar Bharati is an autonomous body under this Ministry. Prasar 
Bharati has been actively negotiating with IBF (Indian Broadcas ting 
Foundation) for taking Board membership of IBF Board, being the 
largest broadcaster in India in terms of coverage and capacity.” 
International Scenario 
1.153 When the Committee desired to know from the Ministry as to whether they 
have conducted any study of the international practice to curb the issues related to 
Paid News, they replied that no such study has been conducted by the Ministry. 

 
 
56 
 
However, they submitted that India‟s self regulatory initiative is in line with the 
International Best Practices seen in developed countries such as the USA, UK and 
Germany where they are known as SROs (Self Regulatory Organizations).  
1.154 On the same query, the Press Council of India stated that they have not 
studied mechanism adopted by other countries to tackle the menace of paid news.  
1.155 NBA inspite of claiming that they are studying the issue and they will revert 
back did not furnish any information subsequently.  
1.156 On this issue, Vice President, Akhil Bharitya Grahak Panchayat, cited 
mechanism prevaili ng in four countries viz. United States of America, Sweden, 
Australia and Ireland which are as under:- 
“United States of America 
The Federal Communications Commission is an independent United 
States agency. The FCC was established by the Communication Act of 
1934 and is charged with regulating interstate and internal 
communications by radio, television, wire, satellite and cable. The 
FCC‟s jurisdiction covers the 50 States, the District of Columbia and 
U.S. possessions.  
Sweden 
There are two agencies (i) Th e Swedish Radio and TV Authority which 
grants licences for digitizing  terrestrial television, local community, 
radio broadcasting and issues publishing licences for databases, and 
(ii) The Swedish Broadcasting Commission overseas the content of 
radio and television broadcasts. 
Australia 
The Australia Communication and media Authority (ACMA) established 
in 2005 is a statutory authority within the federal government portfolio 
dealing with broadband, communications and digital economy. It is 
responsible for t he regulation of broadcasting, the internet, radio 
communication and telecommunication. 
Ireland 
The Broadcasting Bill 2008 announced by the Government of Ireland in 
May, 2008 is expected to significantly change the broadcasting 
landscape in the Country. Th e primary focus is the drafting of the Bill 
has been to ensure that broadcasting sector delivers on the needs and 
wants of the viewer and listener.”  
1.157 Some other suggestions from stakeholders/organisations/experts on 
international scenario received by the Committee are as under:- 
 Most countries of the world, not all, many democracies of the world 
have two separate organizations for the print and electronic media. 
This is going to be even bigger problem because the Internet and what 
„freedom of expressi on‟ means on Internet has become a huge issue. 

 
 
57 
 
In India, other than the Ministry of I&B and the Cable TV Rules, there 
is no regulator for the electronic medium; under the IT Act, there are 
no regulators for the Internet. For the print medium, you have the 
Press Council. In my opinion, you should have either two separate 
organizations or one comprehensive type of Communications 
Commission, like the UK model of Office of Communications or like the 
American model, the FCC, Federal Communications Commission. Bu t 
UK also has the Press Complaints Commission. UK has a hybrid one. 
You should have some system in place. To me, it is immaterial 
whether it is a separate organization or one – whether you make the 
Press Council bigger or smaller. 
 
 Press Councils vary wide ly in prevalence (e.g. USA does not have a 
national level PC, but there are PCs in four states of the USA) and 
constitution; however all Press Councils are self -regulatory bodies to 
promote fairness and accuracy in news reporting.  The British PCC 
(Press C omplaints Commission) is one of the most efficacious, and 
works by „dealing with complaints, framed within the terms of the 
Editors‟ Code of Practice, about the editorial content of newspapers 
and magazines and the conduct of journalists‟.  However the PCC  too 
has often been criticized for being toothless (it has no legal powers) 
and not adequately representing the interests of the consumer. 
 
 We do not need to waste our time doing what other countries are 
doing.   Our country is altogether different and distinguished. So, what 
the USA is doing is absolutely useless to us, to take note of.  The 
smaller countries have better mechanisms. However, those are not 
applicable. For example, South Africa has a better mechanism than 
USA or UK.  But, unfortunately, they  are not talked about because 
everything is USA and UK. 
1.158 During the course of examination, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting informed that the Prime Minister of UK set up an Inquiry Committee 
under Lord Justice Leveson. From the Justice Leveson Report on the culture, 
practices and ethics of the press, submitted in November, 2012, the Committee 
note that various issues viz. regulatory models for future, protecting journalists, 
access to information, media employment, press and poli tics, plurality and media 
ownership, etc. have been dealt with.  
 
(ii) Role of Press Council of India (PCI) in tackling Paid News 
 
 
1.159 Various stakeholders in their Memoranda, submitted to the Committee, 
adversely commented on the efficacy of PCI especially to tackle the menace of „Paid 
News‟ and suggested for providing more power to PCI for its expansion. According 
to Ministry of Information of Broadcasting, Press Council was established with a 
specific purpose and had a two -fold purpose underlying the objective of the Press. 
One was, of course, to protect the freedom of the Press from any interference. The 
other was to develop codes of conduct for the Press. The whole purpose of its 
existence is to meet both these objectives.  

 
 
58 
 
1.160 On being asked about  the functioning of PCI, the Ministry, in their written 
reply, submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry feels that PCI has been fulfilling its objectives of 
preserving the freedom of press and maintaining and improving the 
standards of the newspapers in the country.”     
1.161 However, according to PCI, the Council is invested only with authority of oral 
observations which carry ethical moral force and in the absence of an express 
authority it is difficult to enforce compliance of its direction. Therefore, the Co uncil 
has sought amendment in the Press Council Act seeking more powers. 
1.162 In this connection, PCI in its report on „Paid News‟ relating to 2009 General 
Election has delineated following recommendations for strengthening the Council:- 
“The Press Counci l of India should constitute a body of media 
professionals with wide representation at the national/state/district 
levels to investigate (either suo motu or on receipt of complaints of) 
instances of “paid news” and the recommendations of such a body – 
after going through an appellate mechanism -- should be binding on 
the Election Commission of India and other government authorities. 
..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  
A proposal to amend Section 15(4) of the Press Council Act, 1978, to 
make the directions of the Council binding on government authorities, 
has been pending for a long time and should be amended to provide 
the Council more „teeth‟.” 
1.163 According to some of the former members of PCI, who deposed before the 
Committee, the Council is a toothless body without any power. 
1.164 In addition, depicting the internal scenario of the Council‟s composition, a 
member of the Sub -Committee of PCI who drafted the Report on „Paid News‟, 
during evidence, submitted as under:- 
“After the report was given by the two Members of the Sub-Committee 
in April, 2010, a drafting Committee was set up. That Drafting 
Committee met and finally there was a division within the Council as to 
whether the full report of the Sub -Committee should be annexed. The 
Members p resent and voting on that particular day by a very thin 
majority said no and we will not annexe it.  I and some others said 
that we want to give a dissenting note. We were not allowed to give a 
dissenting note.  There was a show of hands.  That was how it 
happened.” 
1.165 Elaborating on the underlying pressure existing within the PCI,                            
Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu, in his memoranda submitted as under:- 
“When the controversy broke out during and after the 2009 elections, 
the PCI in 2010 appointed a two -member committee headed by 
veteran journalists Paranjoy Guha Thakurta and Sreenivasa Reddy to 
investigate it. The committee produced a devastating 72 page report 

 
 
59 
 
laying bare the ugliness of what had happened during the elections.  
The PCI, under pressure from media owners then shamefully 
suppressed its own report. It put up instead, a 12 -page truncated 
report deleting all the names of the offenders and their actual 
practices. The PCI was brought to its knees by the power of corporate  
media.” 
1.166 On being asked to clarify, on the reported deficiencies about functioning and 
efficacy of PCI, the Ministry was silent on this.  
1.167 On the need for empowering PCI, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting submitted as under:- 
“Matter regarding empowerment of PCI by amendment of PC Act has 
been raised in the PCI‟s report on Paid News which is under 
consideration of the Government.” 
1.168 Various stakeholders in their Memoranda submitted to the Committee, 
advocated for reviewing the comp osition of PCI. In this regard, When the 
Committee asked about the need for revaluating the composition of PCI, Secretary, 
PCI during evidence stated as under: 
“To an extent, yes, but not on the count that the Members tend to 
protect each other. This has n ot been our experience in the last 40 
years.” 
1.169 Various stakeholders/experts/organisations in their memoranda argued for 
amending/strengthening PCI. Some of the suggestions, regarding this are as 
follows:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Stakeholders Suggestions/Observations 
1. Association for 
Democratic Reforms 
The PCI is inefficient both because it has no 
real powers but also because of its constitution  
-- 20 out of 28 members are media industry 
representatives, 5 are MPs and one each from 
the Sahitya Academy, University G rants 
Commission and the Bar Council of India.  
2. Samachar Sampadak 
Doordarshan 
Samachar 
(Shri Sanjay Kumar) 
 
PCI is ineffective to curb the menace of Paid 
News. The Council should be given more 
powers and strengthened.  
 
3. Chairman, Centre 
for Media Studies 
(Shri N. Bhaskara 
Rao) 
PCI is not geared up, it is not equipped, it is not 
structured.  It is combination of all the three. It 
is neither structured in terms of its composition, 
nor is it geared up in terms of capabilities.  It is 
not a priority as far as the functioning of the 
Press Council is concerned. Justice Sawant, 
when he was the Press Council Chairman in 

 
 
60 
 
1993, was the one who really brought up these 
issues 
4. Former  Member PCI 
(Shri S.N.Sinha)  
 
PCI be empowered to adjudicate cases of paid 
news and to award penalties including 
suspension of publication/channel.  EC may also 
be asked to take action against the election 
candidate/political party. 
 
5. Rural Affair Editor, 
the Hindu 
It is best the Press Council is dissolved,                       
re-constituted as the Broadcasting Council 
(bringing the electronic media into the 
umbrella, too) and given meaningful powers. 
....xxx......The missing element in media 
democracy here is accountability. Once the 
corporatization mode reigns supreme, the 
dominant media are accountable to no one bar 
a few top shareholders. The media cannot have 
it both ways, and neither can the corporations. 
If you say you are a business and not a 
platform for journalism, then the rules and 
scrutiny that apply to all busine sses must apply 
to you as well. Freedom of the Press must not 
be allowed to degenerate to Freedom of the 
Purse. It already has happened. 
Strengthen public broadcasters, their skills and 
their autonomy. …xxxx…. There is a desperate 
need to revamp, improve, expand and make 
ever more accessible, public broadcasters in 
this country. For that, they would have to have 
a greater sense of autonomy from government 
-  and correspondingly greater accountability to 
the public as well. 
 
1.170 Other suggestions received are:- 
 Press Council of India needs to be given more powers and strength. 
 Press Council of India (PCI) Act may be amended to make its 
recommendations binding. 
 Empower the Press Council of India to take stringent action against 
the journalists, editors, owners, publishers of Newspapers and other 
media houses. 
1.171 Another issue which emerged, while examining the subject, was conversion 
of Press Council into Media Council or expansion of Press Council as Media Council 
so as to include electronic media under its jurisdiction.  
1.172 On the issue of bringing electronic media under Press Council of India or for 
having an Ombudsman/body for electronic media some of the views/suggestions of 
are as follows: 

 
 
61 
 
The Press Council 
 The Press Council has proposed that the  electronic media be brought 
within the ambit of the Press Council and with representative of 
electronic media also on the body to be named Media Council of India. 
Establishment of the Media Council and Empowerment of the Press 
Council of India together with the mechanism adopted by the E.C.I can 
help to monitor the trend. 
 
Whereas electronic media is not under the control of the PCI, for print 
media it has already enunciated Guidelines..xxx.. The Council is also 
represented on the Committee set up by the E lection Commission of 
India for the purpose of examining the cases referred it  to by the  
Media Certification and Monitoring Committee. 
 
Editors Guild of India 
 
I think it would have to be a completely different kind of a body, not 
within the Press Counci l. We have to view that the issues concerning 
the print media are different from the issues concerning the electronic 
media and they should be ideally treated separately because the 
impact that the electronic media has on the public is radically different 
from the impact that the print media has where a literate person reads 
a newspaper sitting in his house. So, to treat them under the same 
umbrella is bit of a problem. They should be treated separately 
because there is a discussion on creating a Broadcasti ng Council. I 
think that is the direction to go and print media should be dealt with 
separately. 
 
1.173 Other suggestions received are:- 
 
 Even the Press Council can tackle this. Make it a Media Council. They can do 
it. There are suggestions that there shou ld be nominated journalists or a 
group or committee of journalists in every district of the country. 
 
 Constitute Media Council instead of Press Council for effective redressal of 
grievances against electronic media; Media Council should be made more 
effective and competent. 
 
 A body like Press Council of India should also be constituted for electronic 
media. 
1.174 In this context, PCI, in its meeting held on 27 th August, 2012, passed a 
Resolution to have more powers and for conversion of PCI into Media Counc il. In 
view of this, the Ministry was asked to clarify whether the PCI is authorized to pass 
such type of resolution suo-motu. To this, they stated as under:- 
 
“Section 13 of the Press Council Act read with Section 15(4) 
sufficiently empower the Council to  pass resolution and the power has 
been upheld by the Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi on 22.09.75 in the 
matter of KK Birla Vs. Press Council of India and others.  
 

 
 
62 
 
However, the issue of setting up of Media Council is to be considered 
by the Government and any  such measure would require deliberation 
and approval of the Parliament.” 
 
PCI’s sub-Committee Report, relating to 2009 General Election, titled ‘‘Paid 
News: How corruption in the Indian media undermines democracy’ 
 
1.175 The Ministry, in their written Not e, submitted that realising the dangers of 
„Paid News‟ to democracy as well as the right to freedom of expression enshrined in 
Article 19 of the Constitution of India, PCI appointed a Committee to examine the 
phenomenon of paid news observed during the Gen eral Elections, 2009 and after 
deliberating on the issue, PCI released its „Report on Paid News‟ on 30 th July, 2010. 
However, as narrated in the earlier part of this Report, the report of                              
Sub-Committee on Paid News related to 2 009 General Election was not made 
official for 14 months due to the internal pressure.  
1.176 The Committee forwarded the memoranda of stakeholders to the Ministry 
seeking their comments on the suggestions made by experts/ organisations/ 
stakeholders/ publ ics at large. In reply, commenting on the submissions in 
Memoranda, the Ministry stated that most of the suggestions are covered under 
PCI‟s Report/ PCI‟s sub -Committee Report on „Paid News‟ which is under 
consideration. Therefore, the Committee desired to  know about the status of the 
PCI‟s sub -Committee Report, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted as 
under: 
“A Group of Ministers (GoM) has also been constituted to examine the 
Report on Paid News prepared by the Press Council of India and to 
give views on a comprehensive policy and institutional mechanism to 
address the phenomenon of paid news.  The issues were deliberated 
upon by the GoM, however the recommendations of the GoM could not 
be finalized.  Later, it was decided that the GoM on Paid New s would 
not be re -constituted and the issues, as and when considered 
necessary may be placed before appropriate Cabinet 
Committee/Cabinet. However, since the issue is sensitive and requires 
Inter-Ministerial consultations, the Cabinet Secretariat has been 
requested to re-constitute the GoM on Paid News.” 
(iii) Regulation of advertisements by DAVP 
1.177 Some of the stakeholders, in their submission before the Committee, stated 
that if a particular media house is critical about Government, it faces 
reduction/stoppage of Government advertisements. In this regard, the Committee 
also came across a media report wherein a glaring revelation has been made by 
PCI, Chairman, indicating that advertisements are being used by Governments to 
arm-twist media companies to have favourable coverage.  
1.178 Some of the suggestions received by the Committee, in this context, are as 
follows:-  

 
 
63 
 
 There should be DAVP disclosures about disbursements from public 
funds, in terms of advertisements from DAVP and State Governments 
must be disclosed by publishers on quarterly basis on their website as 
well as on the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting‟s website.  
 All forms of concessions granted to journalists by the Central and State 
Governments and advertising revenue from Government  and 
companies exceeding a certain value should be mandatorily disclosed. 
 The Government should immediately ensure that all advertisements 
about proposed projects/projects under implementation and their 
achievements should be banned. Most often, different Departments of 
the Government decide to release huge advertisements on a specific 
day, highlighting a specific issue. This needs to be curbed and banned. 
All Departments may disclose annually the expenses incurred on 
advertisements. This may be carefully scrutinised. 
1.179 Asked about the views of the Ministry, in this regard, they submitted as 
under: 
“There is an established advertisement policy of the Government of 
India which has been formulated on various factors such as 
circulation/TRP, representation of small and regional papers etc.  The 
objective of Government advertisements is dissemination of 
information and wide publicity to the schemes/programmes of the 
Government......xxxxx....Govt. advertisement campaigns are subject 
to the Model Code of Conduc t.........xxxx........ The advertising spend 
of the Government is always in accordance to the established 
Advertisement policy.” 
(iv) Complaint Redressal mechanism/ Ombudsman  
1.180 Most of the stakeholders, in their submission before the Committee, raised  
concern over the lack of systemic complaint redressal mechanism/lack of 
Ombudsman in all the media houses for looking into the complaints of „Paid News‟. 
On this issue PCI opined that there should be an Ombudsman in all the media 
houses that can serve as the first tier of redressal/monitor mechanism.  One of the 
stakeholders, in his submission to the Committee, stated that complaints and 
redressal mechanism should be simple, effective and time-bound. 
1.181 When asked for the details of the complaints received by PCI, in the past few 
years, they submitted a table of complaints (Annexure-IV), reveals the following: 
“During 2009-10, PCI received 17 complaints of which 9 were closed 
because of non -pursuance and for 8 PCI decided to censure the 
respondent newspaper by giving warning. 
During 2010-11, PCI received 2 complaints which were closed due to 
non- pursuance and because of outside charter. 
During 2011 -12 PCI received 11 complaints of which 1 is under 
process, 1 got closed because the matter was sub-judice and in 
remaining 9 cases PCI decided to censure the respondent newspaper 
by giving warning. 

 
 
64 
 
During 2012-13 PCI received 9 complaints of which 1 is closed being 
time barred as the publication was during election and remaining are 
under consideration.” 
1.182 In light of the above, when the PCI was asked to comment on the cases that 
were closed because of non -pursuance, the Secretary, PCI, during evidence, 
submitted as under: 
“In the latest data which we have sent ..xxx.., we have indicated that 
about 40 complaints had been decided though several of them had to 
be closed for non pursuance because the people who approached the 
Council did not follow it up.  But out of these 40 complaints, 17 
complaints were upheld where the papers had been warned or 
censured for having indulged in paid news.” 
1.183 On the Committee‟s apprehension that the complainant might not pursue the 
case because he/she might be scared of the muscle power of the Press, the 
Secretary, PCI stated as under: 
“Sir, we appreciate this.  It could be h appening.  I can convey this to 
the Council so that it could take this into consideration.  But what the 
Press Council is trying for now is to see whether the newspapers could 
give an undertaking of a kind that they will not indulge in paid news in 
future.  So, it is a kind of mediation process which we are just trying 
now.” 
1.184 When enquired from News Broadcasters Association (NBA) about the details 
of the complaints being received by them, they submitted as under:- 
“NBA has been in existence since July,  2007. The News Broadcasting 
Standards Authority has been operational since 2 nd October 2008 and 
in this period the NBSA has received/dealt with around 198 
complaints. However, not a single complaint received has been in 
relation to the malpractice of “Paid News.” 
1.185 On the suggestion of appointing ombudsman in all media houses, NBA 
submitted as under:- 
“In principle, the idea of appointing an ombudsman would be a 
positive step. However, the position of Ombudsman should be a 
completely „honorary‟ without any „perquisites‟.” 
1.186 In this regard, the Association for Democratic Reforms, submitted as under: 
“The contract for a good ombudsman should contain fixed -term and 
non-renewable, with complete independence from the editors and 
owners through strictly p redefined conditions for termination...xxx...  
an independent commission with legal powers to investigate serious 
transgressions and levy penalties on both the media houses and the 
ineffectual ombudsman. State, media and industry representatives 
must be barred from appointment on the Council to prevent conflict of 
interest. Selection and appointment procedure of this Council can be 
along the lines of the many reforms suggested from bodies like the 

 
 
65 
 
Central Information Commission (CIC), Central Vigilance Commi ssion 
(CVC), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), etc.” 
1.187 Quoting the international scenario of Complaints on „Paid News‟                       
former Chief Election Commissioner, (Shri T.K Krishnamurthy), during evidence, 
submitted as under: 
“..xx..In Brazil they have a Constitution Bench in the Election 
Commission itself. So, there can be a separate Bench to deal with all 
media complaints. They can dispose of these things and take a quick 
decision on that. Maybe a two-member Bench or whatever it is...xx..” 
1.188 Prasar Bharati in its proposed draft has suggested for an independent 
investigation and an independent complaint office. The Ministry was asked to 
comment on the Prasar Bharati‟s suggestion, to which, they replied as under:- 
“The Broadcasting  and Cable services are regulated by the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) under the provisions of the TRAI 
Act, 1997.  The Ministry had formulated a draft Broadcasting Service 
Regulation Bill for ensuring orderly growth of Broadcasting Services  in 
2007. Concerns have been expressed by various sections in the media 
with respect to the need, scope, functional and financial autonomy and 
independent functioning of the proposed regulator.  The Ministry had 
constituted a Task Force in the Ministry in 2009 to evolve a consensus 
amongst stakeholders on the issue.  However, there was a spectrum of 
views and opinions which emerged during the consultation process.  
Meanwhile, the News Broadcasters Association (NBA) and Indian 
Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) have set up self regulatory mechanisms 
for regulating News and general entertainment channels through the 
News Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA) and Broadcasting 
Content Complaints Council (BCCC) respectively. The Ministry is 
exercising statutory powe rs conferred by the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 with regard to violation of content. ” 
 
1.189 The Ministry was also asked about the mechanism available to address the 
grievances and complaints against „Paid News‟ during election period . In reply, the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
“As per the Election Commission instructions issued consequent upon 
order of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India, there is a provision for 
constitution of a Committee for previewing, scrutinizing and verifying 
all advertisements by individual contesting candidates or political 
parties before the advertisements are inserted in the electronic media.  
The phenomenon of paid news bypasses the scrutiny of the expenses 
book of the candidate.  Chief electoral Officers have been instructed to 
strengthen these Committees so as to also scrutinize the news reports 
in electronic media, which bear the character of political 
advertisement, though without being declared so.  Notices to 
candidates/parties may be issued by the CEOs  on the basis of 
recommendation of such Committees.  The District Level Committees 
have been renamed as District Level Media Certification and Monitoring 
Committee (MCMC).  The Commission may also refer the cases of Paid 

 
 
66 
 
News for investigation to Press Cou ncil of India whenever it feels 
necessary to seek expert guidance from the Council.   
The election Commission has also directed the CEOs to constitute 
State Level Media Certification and Monitoring Committee to deal with 
applications by political parties and organizations for advertisement on 
television channel and cable network.   
..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx.. 
The State level MCMC is also to dispose of the cases related to appeals 
against orders of the District level MCMC on Paid News.  
In additio n to these, a national helpline was also introduced which 
worked in all 5 States/UTs during the recent assembly elections.  Any 
complaint by a citizen, voter, candidate or any person can be 
registered on this helpline.  Further, there are also district hel pline 
numbers functional in every district.  People can also register their 
complaints on the website of the Chief electoral Officer and District 
Election Officers of all States/UTs.    
In the Background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated 
that on June 8, 2010, the Election Commission of India issued detailed 
guidelines the Chief Electoral Officers of all States and Union territories 
on measures to check “paid news” before elections, that is, advertising 
in the garb of news.” 
(v) Penalty 
1.190 Most of the suggestions received by the Committee advocated for a strict law 
to be enacted to penalize all the party involved in paid news menace. When the 
Ministry was asked about the existing provision for penalizing all guilty 
found/established in „Pa id News‟, the Ministry outlined the PCI Act, Advertisement 
and Programme Code and the provision regarding offences and penalties under 
section 8 of the „Policy Guidelines for Uplinking of Television Channels‟. 
1.191 In addition, as narrated earlier, the Mi nistry stated that the Government is 
considering the recommendations of the Standing Committee on IT on „The Press 
and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011‟; PCI Report on Paid News 
during 2009 General election and amendment to the Representat ion of People (RP) 
Act, 1951.  
1.192 On the issue of penalty, former Chief Election Commissioner, during 
evidence, Shri T. K. Krishnamurthy submitted as under:- 
“Monetary penalty or some kind of a fine on them so that they would 
refrain themselves from indulging in this…xxx…… Well, in such cases, it 
is easier to enforce a monetary penalty than by any other method 
because you can certainly deny Government advertisements etc., but 
then, the impact of it; we really do not feel immediately.  The best 
thing is t o impose a definite quantitative monetary penalty…xxx…It is 
certainly not sufficient.  But I looked at it from the point of view of 
implementation.  Suppose, you say that you cannot go ahead with the 

 
 
67 
 
publication business, I am sure it is going to be challe nged.  It will go 
right up to the Supreme Court; and it would take 10 years to decide. 
The benefit of immediate monetary penalty that the impact is felt 
immediately.  But I do agree with you that the severity to penalty 
should be much more than the monetar y penalty……xxx….Perhaps.   
Depending upon the gravity of the offence, a cancellation of licence 
can also be done. 
1.193 On being asked about the appropriate authority to impose penalties i,e, the 
Election Commission of India or Press Council of India, he submitted as under:- 
“Though as a person who had been in the Election Commission, I 
would prefer it to be with the Election Commission.  But if the media 
world would not accept it, it can be given to the Press Council.  We 
have no objection to that.  But th ere is a need for quick enforcement 
of law within that period. It is because before the election is over, 
something must be felt.....” 
1.194 Highlighting the limitations of Election Commission of India in tackling paid 
news, he submitted:- 
“We should have a little more manpower to go into the investigation of 
these complaints and a quicker decision on that. At the moment we 
have a limited number of staff with us in the Election Commission. We 
depend upon the State or the district election authorities to giv e us 
information apart from the observers who have been sent there. It is a 
time consuming affair. It takes time. We may not be able to enforce 
that punishment before the conduct of the election itself. Even so, it is 
better to punish a person after the el ection if there is any need for it 
after proper enquiry. So, we need to strengthen the media cell within 
the Election Commission itself.” 
1.195 Some of the significant views/suggestions are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Experts/ 
Stakeholders/ 
Organisations 
Views/ Suggestions/ observations 
1. Prasar Bharati There is no provision of penalty in paid news cases.  
Penalty can be graded one in accordance with the 
gravity of violation and whether the media house is a 
first time violator or a habitual violator.  Penalty can 
range from censure to suspension or revocation of 
license to fine and jail term. 
 
2. Press Council of 
India 
At present the Council can only warn, admonish or 
censure the erring newspaper unless amendment as 
sought by way of suspension of govt. advertisem ents, 
Accreditation of journalists and registration of the 
newspapers seeking additional powers to the Press 
Council is met. 
xx            xx                xx                   xx 
Mere oral structure may not be adequate. Therefore the 
proposal of the Pres s Council report needs to be 
implemented. 
 
xx            xx                xx                   xx 
 
Besides, Press Council be given the power to pass 
directions to the government to make its 

 
 
68 
 
recommendations binding. 
 
3. Former PCI Member 
(Shri Paranjoy  G uha 
Thakurta) 
If a regulatory authority can take fast action, that 
would be a deterrent. If the Press Council theoretically 
could immediately impose a fine......xxx...., the 
publication first pays the fine and then appeals against 
the decision of the Press  Council in a court of law, that 
acts as a deterrent.  
 
It is a faster process than by saying that you have 
violated the Indecent Representation of Women Act, 
etc., etc. So, I would believe that this would act as a 
deterrent to media crossing that limit…… 
xx            xx                xx                   xx 
I will illustrate my point with an example. There was 
the very well-known case of Janet Jackson, the sister of 
Michael Jackson, of what she described as a wardrobe 
malfunction. There was an entertainment programme in 
between a sporting event in which she exposed much 
more of her anatomy than she should have. That was a 
live broadcast, not a pre -recorded one. And it was 
being shown during primetime when families watch 
television. Secondly, it was not af ter 12 o‟clock or 
11o‟clock at night. Thirdly, there was no prior 
intimation. What happened in this case was that the 
television channel said Janet Jackson can never appear 
on their programmes. Janet Jackson said it was a 
wardrobe malfunction. But most imp ortantly, the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) fined the 
channel $550,000. They had to first pay the fine and 
then appeal against the order of the FCC.  
 
 
1.196 Some other suggestions received were as follow:- 
 
 Self regulation would neither be adeq uate nor workable in view of huge 
profits involved. A strict law has to be enacted both for print and electronic 
media. 
 For the first violation, it should be a warning. For the second violation, it 
should be a penalty and for the third violation, there sho uld be the 
cancellation of licence without any further notice. 
 PCI should derecognize the Newspapers who indulge in „Paid News‟. 
 The first step is to ensure that those who have been found practising Paid 
News are named, shamed -  and punished Many of the p aid news acts 
constitute serious evasion and attract action under tax laws. These penalties 
must be enforced. We need a major, publicly transparent probe into the 
whole racket. 
 Strict action should be taken against the people‟s representatives who 
indulge in „Paid News‟. Those found guilty, their election should be declared 
null and void or alternatively they may be debarred from contesting election 
in future. 
 Empower the PCI for stringent actions against the journalists, editors, 
owners, publishers of News papers and other Media. Existing cases must be 
strictly dealt with by the Press Council of India.  
 Empower Police to register FIR against Paid News.  

 
 
69 
 
 Disqualify Elected Representatives (Politicians), Corporates, Businessmen 
and other vested interests who publish Paid News.  
 Cancel registration of Newspapers/other Media who publish Paid News.  
 Make Right to Information Act, 2005 directly applicable to Newspapers and 
other Media Houses/Agencies.  
 There should be a provision of punishment for both the media an d 
the beneficiary. 
(vi) Transparency regarding Revenue/Assets of Media Houses and Right 
to Information Act , 2005 (RTI) 
1.197 Various stakeholders, in their Memoranda submitted to the Committee, 
highlighted the urgency of protecting people‟s right to infor mation and urged for 
taking steps to have transparency in media especially regarding revenue assets of 
media houses. The Committee were informed that there are various 
guidelines/codes, viz. IBF Guideline, NBA Code, Working Journalists Act, PCI Act, 
Norms and Guidelines, the Press and Registration of Books and Publications Act, 
Doordarshan Code for commercial advertising, some sections of the Representation 
of People Act etc. which contain provisions for ensuring transparency in Media. 
However, according to  one of the stakeholder, inspite of having all the existing 
guidelines and norms, when the media is asked for disclosure of the source of the 
income of the newspapers or details of revenue from advertisements, some of them 
take an alibi that it is against their freedom of the Press and therefore they can not 
disclose it. Substantiating the problem being faced because of non -disclosure of 
information, former Chief Election Commissioner (Shri T. K. Krishnamurthy), during 
evidence, submitted as under:- 
“We hav e the difficulty in knowing the source of income and this is 
much more acute in the electronic media….xxxx…… therefore, some 
authority should be able to enquire into the source of funds. 
Even in the 2004 Parliament elections when I was the Chief Election 
Commissioner ...xxx.....  We came across a number of instances where 
magazines carried news items representing the achievements of the 
Party in power in various State Governments.  When we started asking 
them questions particularly when the model code of co nduct was in 
force, they were not willing to give us replies in time and so on.  In 
addition to that, we also came across advertisements in the Press, the 
print media.  When we started asking them questions as to who gave 
these advertisements, the newspape rs took umbrage that under the 
cover of the freedom expression they are not bound to disclose that 
information.  So we found ourselves at the dead end.  We could not 
proceed further.” 
1.198 Regarding disclosure of source of income from advertisements Presi dent, 
Editors Guild of India, stated during evidence: 
“Disclosure is not to upset the freedom. It is only disclosure. You are 
only asking for disclosure…xx…I am not sure that a publication can 
take the position that disclosing who has paid for an advertise ment is 
violating the freedom of the Press. That is out of position to sustain it. 

 
 
70 
 
I am surprised if somebody takes that position because any court can 
ask you to disclose the information. There should be no problem on 
that score.” 
1.199 When the Ministry was asked for suggestion to improve transparency in 
media houses, especially regarding revenue sources, they submitted as under:- 
“Compliance with the Press Council of India‟s and Securities Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI)‟s guidelines regarding mandatory d isclosure by the 
media company/group of its stake in the corporate sector alongwith the 
stringent audit of accounts of the media companies may improve 
transparency in media houses with regard to their revenue sources.” 
1.200 The Ministry also outlined the provisions of Securities Exchange Board of 
India (SEBI) regarding disclosure of shares/stake held by media companies in 
various companies, issued on 27th August 2010, and the same reads as under:- 
“1. Disclosures regarding stake held by the media company s hould 
be made in the news report/article/editorial in newspapers/television 
relating to the company in which the media group holds such stake. 
2. Disclosure on percentage of stake held by media groups in 
various companies under such „Private Treaties‟ on t he website of 
media groups should be made. 
3. Any other disclosure relating to such agreements such as any 
nominee of the media group on the Board of Directors of the company, 
any management control or other details which may be required to be 
disclosed and which may be a potential conflict of interest for media 
group, should also be mandatorily disclosed.” 
1.201 On the issue of having transparency, Shri N. Bhaskara Rao, Chairman of 
Centre for Media Studies, during evidence, suggested as under:- 
“First and foremost in the media you need is the monitoring 
mechanism. We just do not have monitoring mechanism. ...xx... We 
do not need new laws but it is a good idea to bring it under the Lokpal. 
But even better idea is, and more immediate idea is, because you 
cannot wait for the Lokpal, the urgency is that it needs to be brought 
under the RTI which is easier and quicker.  
Let me clarify the point..xx..When I say that the media need to be 
brought under RTI, for example, an individual journalist who have 
written about something, we are not talking about the source. 
..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx..  ..xx.. 
The issues that need to be brought under the RTI Act are confining and 
relating to these issues. For example, the revenue of a newspaper, the 
ownership part. For examp le, in the case of the print media, the 
annual under R&I, they have to declare that this is the ownership. In 
the case of television channels, what do you know? Do you know who 
is the owner of a television channel?” 

 
 
71 
 
1.202 Other significant suggestions for having transparency in Media houses  as 
provided by the experts/ stakeholders/organisations are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Experts/ 
Stakeholders/ 
Organisations 
Views/ Suggestions/ observations 
1. President, India 
Journalists Union and 
former PCI Membar 
(Shri S. N. Sinha) 
I personally feel if media can come under Lokpal 
or RTI, it does not matter.  They should come 
under them.  Why should they not come under 
them?  But I would add only one thing.  We have 
been given some immunity for some things like 
source of info rmation – the journalists have 
always been given this immunity.  We will not 
disclose our source of information.  That must be 
respected because if you put under them and ask 
where did we get this information from, it will 
create problem.  Sometimes, it cr osses that line.  
So, we have to keep some Lakshman Rekha.  
Otherwise, it is all right and media must be 
covered.  We should know where from they get 
money. 
2. Prasar Bharati There might be a danger of over regulation by 
auditing each and every media acco unt.  
However, there should be power to examine the 
accounts on receipt of complaints which are 
prima-facie correct.    
3. Editor, Medianama 
(Shri Nikhil Pahwa) 
 
The Media companies must maintain list of 
advertisers that have contributed more than a 
determined amount (say 5 per cent) of the 
companies‟ advertisement revenue.   
4. Shri Kondalarao Palaka Media houses should prominently reveal 
information regarding any possible conflict of 
interest in each News item to the public or to 
other media organizations. 
 
 
1.203 Feeling the need to have transparency about annual Statement of the 
publication/media houses, the Committee in their Forty -second Report on „The 
Press and Registration of Books and Publication Bill, 2011‟, had recommended the 
Ministry to re -examine the issue and a suitable provision for disclosure of annual 
income from advertisement may be incorporated, in the said Bill so as to check the 
menace of paid news. The Ministry informed that the Committee‟s recommendation, 
in this regard, is under consideration of the Government. 
1.204 After receiving suggestions from various experts/stakeholders/organisations, 
the Committee desired to know from the Ministry whether  Media can be brought 
under the Right to Information Act, 2005 and the proposed Lok Pal  Bill. The 
Ministry, in their written reply, submitted as under: 
 “The media should convey correct and true information to the people.  
However, when paid information is presented as news content, it could 
mislead the public and thereby hamper their judgme nt to form correct 
opinion.  There is no denying the fact that there is an urgent need to 
protect the right of public to correct and unbiased information.  The 

 
 
72 
 
applicability of RTI will go a long way in fulfilling this need.  However, 
at the same time, div ulging the source of information or of the report 
under the provisions of RTI act may affect the free functioning of the 
investigative journalism. A balance needs to be struck between the 
right of public to information under the provisions of RTI Act and t he 
occupational needs of journalism.” 
(vii) Awareness/Education/Training and need for a National helpline to 
curb ‘Paid News’ 
1.205 Considering the damaging impact of the menace and the subtle ways in 
which the „Paid News‟ is presented as „News‟ and „Adver torials‟ almost  all the 
individuals/ experts/ stakeholders/ organisations in their submission before the 
Committee stressed on the need for educating the masses and creating awareness 
amongst the citizens for identifying and tackling „Paid News‟. In this r egard, the 
PCI‟s Sub-Committee Report on paid news related to 2009 General Election inter-
alia states as under:- 
“Awareness-generating campaigns should be organized involving, the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, the Press Council of India, the 
Election Commission of India, representatives of editors, journalists 
associations and unions and political parties to deliberate on the issue 
and arrive at workable solutions to curb corruption in the media in 
general and the “paid news” phenomenon in particu lar. Awareness 
Campaign to educate the voters to differentiate between doctored 
reporting and the balanced and just reporting.” 
 
1.206 Other suggestions received are:- 
 Need to educate people on the drawbacks/maladies of Paid News and 
about their rights. 
 Educate citizens about Paid News and the methods to identify from the 
Newspapers and other media houses.  
 Common man should be vigilant – general awareness and mass 
awakening on the issue.  
 Media Houses should be encouraged to allot certain percentage of 
their space/air time to critical/social issues, educate viewers/readers 
to differentiate Paid News. 
1.207 When asked to provide comments on this issue, the Ministry stated that the 
matter is already under the consideration of the Government.  
1.208 Further, on being asked as to how the media can be made more accountable 
to people, the Ministry replied as under: 
“In order to make media more accountable to the public, it is 
suggested that the adjudication by the PCI in respect of the complaints 
of paid news in t he newspapers or decision by the Ministry/self -
regulatory bodies such as NBSA in cases of paid news on Satellite TV 
channels may be published in prominent newspapers or telecast on 
electronic media.” 

 
 
73 
 
1.209 In this context, Prasar Bharati, stated, as under: 
“The problem is not with the people. If something is open to public 
scrutiny, some or the other is bound to detect the mischief. Problem is 
the lack of a powerful body to whom a complaint is to be registered 
and which can take effective steps.  The real need is for a regulator.” 
1.210 For training being imparted to journalists and the steps taken to include 
ethics in the curriculum of all Institutes/Colleges/Universities providing 
Degree/Certificate Course in Mass Communication, the Ministry, in their writ ten 
reply, submitted as under: 
“The Ministry does not regulate the curriculum for the courses offered 
in journalism in various colleges/institutes/universities, however the 
courses in journalism offered by Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication (IIMC), an autonomous body of the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting have paper on „ethics‟ in their curriculum. 
The Press Council of India, a statutory autonomous body has been set 
up under the Press Council Act, 1978 with one of the objectives to 
maintain and improve the standards of newspapers and news agencies 
in India.  Accordingly, the PCI, under section 13 (2)b of the Act has 
built up „Norms of Journalistic Conduct‟. The principles articulated by 
the Council as compiled in the „Norms of Journalistic Conduct ‟ act as 
light that lead and guide the journalists along the path of ethical 
rectitude.   
The PCI is making an effort to bring together all stakeholders on a 
common platform to prepare a document on curriculum and 
infrastructure requirement of the journalism institutes/colleges.” 
 
1.211 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Annual Report                               
(2012-13), has highlighted that the Sectoral Innovation Council, constituted on 
28th July 2011, under the Chairpersonship of Smt. Asha Swarup and 10 other 
distinguished members from the field of media and entertainment, has submitted 
its Report to the then  Minister of Information and Broadcasting on 26 th July, 2012. 
The primary objective of the Council, was to design a policy ec osystem in which 
new ideas would be integrated into the mainstream and get converted into policy 
initiatives by the Government. 
1.212 Sectoral Innovation Council‟s Report which analysed the growth potential of 
the Media & Entertainment Industry contains 64  recommendations in 
seven critical areas viz.  Broadcasting, Print media, Films, Advertising, Media 
education, Animation, Gaming and VFX. Some of the key recommendations, inter -
alia include: 
“Film 
 
 There is a need for the Government to have a closer look at  its media 
units and their functioning. In fact, some of the media units have lost 

 
 
74 
 
their relevance in the present time, and market has taken up their jobs 
in a bigger and better manner. 
 
Print Media 
 
 The Council does not foresee any immediate threat to new spaper 
industry in India in the near future. The industry is likely to grow at 10 
per cent per annum, as predicted by the industry associations. The 
Council is of the opinion that there are some irritants and constraints 
to growth which need to be eradicated. 
 
 Certain degree of consolidation within print media spectrum is 
required, which could provide much viability in operation, and, in the 
process, could spur innovation in this sector. It could perhaps also lead 
to the development of a home grown news age ncy with a global 
presence, which is critically absent in Indian context. 
 
Advertising 
 
 The Government should, after interaction with all stakeholders, ensure 
that reliable single source data is available on all mediums of 
advertising so that the advertisers are able to take decision on reliable 
data. The Government is also likely to benefit as it is one of the major 
media buyers in the country. 
 
TV Advertising 
 
 The Government should interact with the various players within the 
industry (broadcasters, adver tising agencies, media buyers, 
distribution platform owners) and expedite a decision/consensus on 
developing an alternative to TAM so that an appropriate mechanism is 
developed with industry participation to study audience viewing and 
listening behavior and bring out regular reports on weekly basis which 
could guide advertising industry to act rationally on allocating 
advertising resources to different TV and radio channels. 
 
Government Advertising 
 
 At present there are reservations amongst the stake holders about the 
functioning of DAVP. An online, when it is fully operationalized,will 
bring greater transparency to the functioning of DAVP. The on -line 
project needs to be completed soon to infuse confidence amongst 
advertisers. 
 
 The creatives for Government advertisement should be left to be 
prepared by the private sector in a decentralized way with the full 
involvement of the concerned Department/Ministry. That will promote 
innovation in this sector.  
 
Media Education 
 
 The Government should regulate media education which will ensure an 
orderly growth of the discipline as part of higher education.  
 

 
 
75 
 
 Like medical education and technical education, Media Education be 
regulated by a new organisation known as Media Education Council, to 
be as a part of Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting. As and when 
the recommendation of the National Knowledge Commission for setting 
up an Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education is 
implemented, the Media Education Council could be merged with it. 
 
 The academic co urse for media education should be modeled on the 
lines of US/UK universities and the vocational courses as per the 
requirement of the industry. The Media Education Council should be 
assigned the task of setting up curriculum for all levels so that 
standardized curriculum, with national accreditation, becomes a 
possibility. 
 
 Within the existing research field on media education, absence of 
intellectual core is clearly visible. Most of the research pursued in India 
is heterogeneous and derivative in characte r. Further, there is no 
industry academia linkage for research and development. There is a 
strong case for building this linkage as well as involving the academia 
in discussions on media policy, which at present are taking place 
mostly between the Governme nt and the industry. In order to meet 
the paucity of good teachers, research needs to be given a focus and 
faculty development programmes have to be taken up for the teachers 
in various colleges, universities and institutes. 
 
 There is a need to make IIMC, FTII, SRFTI into real Centers of 
Excellence. To make it, in the process, the Government should revise 
some of the courses being run by these institutions at present; 
introduce new courses; and improve the faculty in terms of 
qualifications and pay scales. Subsequently, these institutions could 
either be separate universities or become part of one Central 
University, as has been recommended in paragraph 61 of the chapter 
on Films. The Council feels that there is a need to fast track this 
process. 
 
1.213 On being asked about the plan to conduct a study to assess to conformity of 
Journalistic ethics by the media houses, the Ministry stated that at present there is 
no such plan. 
1.214 The Committee also desired to know about the Ministry's suggestions on the 
role of civil society, research groups, etc., in contributing to curb the 'Paid News 
syndrome. To this, they submitted as under: 
“The civil society or research groups etc may conduct awareness 
campaigns to educate public to enable them to distinguish between 
paid news and authentic news.  The support of civil society is 
necessarily required for effective check on the practice of paid news as 
these groups may remain vigilant to the instances of paid news so that 
these may be brought to the notice of various adj udicatory and self -
regulatory bodies.” 
  

 
 
76 
 
Part –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Introductory 
2.1 Media plays a significant role in a democracy not only because it voices 
concern of the people but also it reflects the true picture of the cou ntry’s 
social, cultural, economic and political set up. It is therefore, considered as the 
fourth pillar of democracy which not only acts as a repository of public trust 
but also plays a significant role in influencing the human mind. The 
Committee, theref ore, feel that it is of paramount importance that various 
news/informative programmes delivered by the media through various modes 
like newspaper, radio, television, internet, mobile phone etc. are factual, 
neutral, fair and objective.  The Committee are, however, deeply concerned to 
note that certain sections of the media have started receiving  monetary or 
other benefits for publishing or broadcasting in favour of individuals/ 
organisations/ corporate entities, what is commonly being referred to as ‘Paid 
News’ and it has spread at remarkable pace in some sections of the media. The 
phenomenon has the effect of unduly influencing the financial/stock/real 
estate market, health, industry and influencing public opinion in election 
process. The Committee find it  disturbing that Paid News’ is not limited to 
corruption of individual journalists instead has become complex and 
‘organized’ involving multiple players like journalists, managers/owners of 
media companies, corporations, public relations firms/advertising agencies 
and some sections of the political class.  Feeling extremely concerned over the 
way the media has become compromised and the urgency required to curb the 
menace the Committee took up this subject for detailed examination.  
2.2 During the course of  examination of the subject  the Committee came 
across startling revelations that ‘Paid News’ is not only an election time 
phenomenon but happens everyday and is prolific as launching/marketing of 
products/organisations/individuals happens around the year and 
advertisement for these are disguised and presented as full pages of 
‘news’/’advertorials’. Even though the Committee note that the entire gamut 
of organisations/authorities like the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Press Council of India, Ele ction Commission of India, News Broadcasters 
Association, Editors Guild of India, Prasar Bharati as well as various eminent 
personalities have acknowledged the menace of ‘Paid News’ and have 
impressed upon the need to take remedial measures, yet, the Commi ttee find 
it astonishing that a large section of media is completely silent on this 

 
 
77 
 
malpractice. As detailed in succeeding paragraphs, the Government has not 
taken effective and conclusive action to deal with the menace.  
Role of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
2.3 The Committee note that it is the mandate of the Ministry to create 
enabling environment and set up policy framework for healthy development of 
various mass media like radio, television, films, press and print publications, 
advertising and traditional modes of communication.  Therefore, the Ministry 
has an important role to play in ensuring that news/information made 
available to the public is factual, neutral, fair and objective.  Even though the 
menace of ‘Paid News’ has been in practice and visible for long, the Committee 
find it disconcerting that the Ministry has not done anything substantial to 
check the menace as has been witnessed by the Committee during 
examination of this subject including interactions with the stakeholders across 
a wide spectrum. Inspite of upsurge of numerous instances of ‘Paid News’ 
since last decade, a suitable, concrete and enforceable mechanism is yet to be 
put in place by the Government. The Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry of Information and  Broadcasting with all policy framework/statutory 
resources at its disposal has failed to discharge its responsibility.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to act swiftly  on the 
issue of paid news on priority basis and come out with viable and enforceable 
mechanism so that this menace is curbed at the earliest. The Committee would 
await specific action taken by the Government in this regard within 6 months 
of presentation of this Report. 
 (Para No. 2.3, Recommendation Sl. NO. 1) 
Genesis and manifestation of ‘Paid News 
2.4 The Committee note that in post-independence era, the media developed 
in a healthy manner and continued the same way for a couple of decades and 
then started deteriorating after it became much powerful.  Everybody rea lised 
that the press is the important source of reaching to the people because its 
credibility was very high.  This is the background in which the candidates who 
were contesting the elections realised that influencing media by one way or 
the other would be  more productive than paying for other sources like 
advertisements and other means of publicity, thereby paving way for this 
malpractice.  The Committee note that although the Election Commission had 
started noticing the menace as early as 2004 General Ele ctions itself, the 
malpractice of ‘Paid News’ surfaced prominently during General Elections of 

 
 
78 
 
2009 and thereafter. The Committee also note during the last 2 decades apart 
from print media, television which is commonly known as electronic media has 
emerged strongly and has become increasingly corporatized and greater 
emphasis is on the business and other commercial aspects. Moreover, the 
traditional practice of having completely insulated offices of the Editor and the 
Publisher to preserve the autonomy and independence of the media also 
appears to have been compromised.  
2.5 As informed by the Press Council of India (PCI), the Committee note 
that over last six decades ‘Paid News’ have changed its form ranging from 
accepting gifts on various occasions, going on a sponsored foreign and 
domestic tour, to other benefits and direct payment of money. The Committee 
are highly perturbed to learn about another form of paid news i.e. that award 
ceremonies being sponsored by some media houses wherein 
industrialists/professionals/personalities who are the sponsors/regular 
advertisers for their media houses, are awarded. Sometimes, a kind of indirect 
blackmailing is resorted to by some sections of the media by not giving any 
kind of publicity to a contesting candidate unti l he pays or on some occasions 
giving more favourable publicity to someone on account of personal 
relationships. Other damaging manifestation of ‘Paid News’ that has emerged 
during the course of examination is the nexus between media and other 
corporate in the form of ‘Private Treaties’. While feeling seriously concerned 
over the ways the menace has manifested, the Committee apprehend that if it 
is not curtailed at this juncture it would assume gigantic proportions. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should meticulously 
formulate a mechanism to tackle paid news after taking into consideration all 
its forms, facets and dimensions.  
 (Para Nos. 2.4 & 2.5, Recommendation Sl. NO. 2) 
Distinction between ‘News’ and ‘Advertisements’ 
2.6 The Commi ttee note that primarily there is no difference between an 
advertisement and ‘Paid News’ except that in the case of latter it does not 
appear as if it is an advertisement.  Therefore, it becomes very difficult to 
understand whether a particular programme/review/ talk show/advertorial is 
a legitimate one or paid by someone to unduly influence public opinion. The 
Committee also note that even if paid content has been labelled as 
advertisements it is done in a very small font and that too with the 
abbreviation ‘Advt.’ in some corner of the paper/screen.  In print media most 

 
 
79 
 
of the times the type face and the font size are the same in print and in 
electronic media the scroll/ticker is too small to be noticed.  In case of radio it 
is disguised by not announcing about the programme being sponsored.  In this 
regard, the Committee note that for electronic media there is Rule 7(10) under 
Advertisement Code of Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Rules, 1994 
formulated under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation)  Act, 1995 
according to which all advertisements should be clearly distinguishable from 
the programme and should not in any manner interfere with the programmes. 
In addition, there is also Rule 6(1)(d) under Programme Code which states 
that ‘No programme s hould be carried in the cable service which contains 
anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and 
half truth’. The Committee, however, find that these guidelines are not being 
strictly enforced and the Ministry has also ackn owledged that Advertising and 
Programme Code is not being strictly followed by various 
publications/channels. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an 
imperative need for evolving a mechanism which would ensure a clear 
demarcation as to what is an advertisement and what is not an advertisement. 
2.7 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take necessary 
steps for strict enforcement of the existing provisions for demarcating 
between ‘advertisements’ and ‘news’ by the media houses. The Commi ttee 
would like the Government to ensure that in case of Print Media, the word 
‘ADVERTISEMENT’ should be in different letter and highlighted in such a way 
that it catches the eye of the reader instantly. Besides, there should be a 
disclaimer in this regard . In case of Electronic Media, the word ‘Advertorial’ 
must remain superimposed during entire transmission of such advertorial. 
Besides, there should be announcement of the sponsorship before and after 
each break of the programme, particularly for visually challenged audience. 
The Committee also endorse the suggestion from a stakeholder that the text 
‘This show is an advertisement’ along with the name of the sponsor should 
remain superimposed for the entire duration of the show at the top centre of 
the screen in a font size that is the same as the font size of the name of the 
News channel. In case of Radio, there should be an announcement that ‘this 
show is sponsored by so and so’ at a regular interval/break. The Committee 
are of strong opinion that an enforc eable guideline/code to demarcate 
between ‘advertisements’ and ‘news’ would not only save the common public 
from being cheated/misguided but would also act as the stepping stone in the 
direction of curbing the malpractice of ‘Paid News’. The Committee 

 
 
80 
 
recommend that these suggestions which do not require any policy decision or 
amendment in any legislation should be implemented in letter and spirit, 
without any further loss of time. 
(Para Nos. 2.6 &2.7, Recommendation Sl. NO. 3) 
Need for defining ‘Paid News’ 
2.8 Taking note of the increasing trend of presenting advertisements in the 
garb of news, the Committee firmly believe that there is an urgent need for 
having a comprehensive definition for ‘Paid News’ so that ‘News’ and 
‘Advertisement’ can be clearly demarcated.  However, with the complexities of 
‘Paid News’ syndrome and its changing forms and manifestations, the 
challenge continues to be in defining and determining what constitutes or 
qualifies as ‘Paid News’.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that th e 
Ministry, instead of blindly endorsing the definition provided by Press Council 
of India, should in consultation with various stakeholders formulate a 
comprehensive definition covering all its forms and manifestations which 
clearly segregate ‘news’ from ‘advertisement’ and giving the same a legal 
formulation so that it can be distinctly identified for appropriate action.   The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard accordingly.  
 
(Para No. 2.8, Recommendation Sl. NO. 4) 
Complexities involved in establishing ‘Paid News’ acts 
2.9 The Committee note that because of the clandestine financial 
transactions involved in ‘Paid News’ it becomes extremely difficult to establish 
the violation per se, and therefore it becomes difficult to prove th e menace 
particularly in case of visual media . The Committee also note that because of 
the complexities involved, ‘circumstantial evidence’ forms the basis of 
consideration for proving this malpractice. For instance, during elections  a 
channel may simply ignore a contesting candidate if he has not ‘paid’ and this 
is more difficult to pin down as a malpractice by the authorities namely, Press 
Council of India (PCI) or Election Commission of India (ECI). Further, as the 
visual media coverage is transitory in nature, malpractice indulged may 
escape detection.  The Committee also find that in case of Electronic media the 
main problem lies in retrieving the information/footage of the stored 
programme as currently there is no mechanism to classify/catalogue the 
programme which are stored thereby hindering the verification of the violation 
because it is difficult to prove the menace.  

 
 
81 
 
2.10 According to PCI’s sub-Committee Report (2010) on ‘Paid News’, though 
the phenomena of widespread practice of ‘Paid News’ has be en verbally 
confirmed and vindicated by politicians and campaign managers of political 
parties, there is no recorded documentation that could finally establish that 
there has been an exchange of money between media houses/advertisement 
agents/journalists and politicians/political parties. The Committee also note 
that as per the existing mechanism, on receipt of a complaint of ‘Paid News’ it 
would be looked into by the respective agency i.e. PCI in respect of complaints 
relating to Print Media and inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) in respect of 
content on satellite TV channels. 
2.11 Considering the fact that there is no straight jacket methodology for 
establishing this malpractice, the Committee urge the Ministry to brainstorm 
on this issue and put forward in novative solutions to consider and establish 
‘circumstantial evidence’ in proving the menace.  The Committee also desire 
the Ministry to consider the suggestion that there should be a team of experts 
specifically for analyzing the coverage pattern and if a ny unusualness is 
noticed in the coverage pattern, the concerned regulatory body should 
immediately swing into action. On the issue of retrieving the data/programme 
in electronic media for proving the case, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry, in coo rdination with Prasar Bharati and other experts in the field, 
should evolve a mechanism for taking appropriate action on the available 
circumstantial evidence to establish the act of ‘Paid News’ in electronic media.  
 (Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10 &2.11, Recommendation Sl. NO. 5) 
CAUSES OF ‘PAID NEWS’ 
 
Working conditions of Media personnel – contractual employment; wage 
scenario and Editorial Section v/s Management/Owners of Media Houses  
 
2.12 The Committee note that ‘Paid News’ is not only the outcome of the 
convergence of the editorial, advertising, public relations (PR), lobbying group 
and the ‘industry’ but is also due to the decline in independence of the 
journalists/reporters. In this regard, the Committee feel that the emergence 
of contract system of employme nt is the primary cause for erosion of the 
independence of journalists/reporters as the system has the affect of reducing 
their status to mere marketing agents. According to PCI, the journalists are 
often under pressure to show ‘results’ till the renewal o f contract which is 
often uncertain and they are under fear of an ‘abrupt transfer’ without having 
choice of freedom and there are numerous instances of exploitation of 

 
 
82 
 
journalists under the contractual system of employment.  The Committee also 
note that the decisive role of Editors of the Media have been dampened by the 
interference of the marketing departments and owners of the media houses.  
The Committee note from the Report of PCI’s Sub -Committee on ‘Election, 
Coverage, Monitoring in Gujarat’, accordin g to which, several Editors and 
Journalists have accepted that Paid News contract deals are signed at the top 
level and they get time to time ‘instructions’ to carry a particular news item or 
photograph which is contrary to the provision of Para 37 (A) of Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct by PCI relating to Management -Editor Relationship which 
in essence provides that the editor under no circumstance can be asked by the 
proprietor to serve his private interests.  
2.13 Another related issue that has plagued the working conditions of 
Journalists/Reporters, is that of wage/salary of the media personnel. The 
Committee find that journalists on contractual system, may be except in big 
cities, are paid very meagre wages which could be less than even the 
minimum wages p rescribed by the Government, or sometimes paid 
commission on given fixed targets for business/ advertisements.  In addition, 
some of the media houses even use stringers who are given the I -cards of the 
media house and are expected to earn for themselves an d for that particular 
media house by way of collecting advertisements.  
2.14 Taking a holistic view of the scenario, the Committee feel perturbed at 
the pathetic working conditions of the significant part of the media personnel 
while strongly disapproving the tendency of the media houses to hire and fire. 
The Committee strongly feel that contract employment should not be used as a 
tool for attraction/allurement.  Sharing the concerns about the mounting 
pressure on the Editorial/Journalists/Reporters compelling them to indulge in 
‘Paid News’ phenomenon, the Committee are inclined to conclude that inspite 
of having several guidelines for segregating Editor and Management/Owners, 
the same are not being enforced efficiently. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government/concerned regulatory bodies should take all 
necessary steps for improving the working conditions of the journalists/media 
personnel and also ensure that the autonomy of the editorial staff is upheld 
forth with. More importantly, the medi a houses will have to rise to the 
occasion and act. The Committee desire that all the employees of media 
houses should be covered under the Working Journalists Act and be given the 
protection under the various provisions of the Act.  The Committee also fee l 
that there is a need for constitution of Media Commission to review the 

 
 
83 
 
working conditions for media personnel i.e. covering print and electronic 
media. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry while taking 
into consideration all these facto rs sh ould formulate the regulatory 
mechanism and make provisions for periodic review of the working 
scenario/wage conditions of media personnel. The Committee would like the 
Government to apprise them about the specific action taken in the matter. 
 
(Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13 & 2.14, Recommendation Sl. NO. 6) 
Private Treaties 
 
2.15 The Committee note that ‘Private Treaties’ between the media 
companies and corporate entities is one of the most dangerous 
manifestation/precursor of ‘Paid News’. ‘Private Treaties’ is  referred to as an 
agreement between the media company and another non -media company in 
which the latter transfers certain shares of the company to the former in lieu 
of Advertisements, space and favourable coverage. The Committee note that 
the phenomenon blatantly violates the journalistic ethics and gives rise to the 
menace/malpractice of ‘Paid News’/’Advertorials’. Today, this phenomenon 
which was initially devised for marketing, has reached the level of giving 
favourable coverage/editorial and adverse c omments against the opponents. 
The Committee note that the gravity of the problem has been realised by all 
who have made their submissions to this Committee and everybody including 
self regulatory bodies and SEBI have advocated that every media house must 
mandatorily disclose to the public on its website about any shareholding, 
investment equity participation or financial interest/conflict of interest of any 
nature whatsoever including specifically ‘Private Treaties’. Considering the 
adverse impact of ‘Priv ate Treatise’ in independence of 
journalists/editors/media professionals  and giving rise to the menace of ‘Paid 
News’, directly and indirectly, the Committee strongly recommend the 
Ministry/regulatory bodies to strictly enforce all the existing guidelines /codes 
for bringing transparency in ‘Private Treaties’, thereby curbing paid news to a 
great extent. Shortcomings identified in the existing guidelines/legislations 
should be taken up for revision. 
 
(Para No. 2.15, Recommendation Sl. NO. 7) 
 
 

 
 
84 
 
Cross Media Holdings 
2.16 Another factor giving rise to ‘Paid News’ which was brought before the 
Committee is that of ‘Cross Media Holding/ownership’ having the effect of 
promoting monopolies in media and coming in the way of free flow of 
information. The Committee not e that so far as Cross Media 
Holdings/Ownerships across print, television and radio sectors of the media is 
concerned, there are no restrictions as of now and this has led to the problem 
of ‘surrogate entities’. The Committee note that the Ministry of Info rmation 
and Broadcasting in the year 2008 made a reference to TRAI on this issue 
seeking their recommendations for bringing out a policy for the restriction  in 
ownership of companies seeking licenses/permissions/registrations under 
various policy guidelin es. After following a exhaustive consultation process 
TRAI gave their recommendations in February, 2009 covering vertical and 
horizontal integration in media inter -alia recommending that for the time 
being necessary safeguard should be put in place to ensu re that plurality and 
diversity are maintained across the 3 media segment viz. Print, Television and 
Radio and this issue could be reviewed after 2 years. In this regard, the TRAI 
also recommended the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to carry out 
an analysis based on detailed market study. In pursuance of this, the Ministry 
sponsored a study though Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad of 
India. Subsequently, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in May 
2012 again requested the TRA I to re-examine the whole issue and to suggest 
measures with respect to cross media (holdings) ownership with an objective 
to ensure plurality of news and views to the consumers. The Committee have 
been apprised that TRAI has released a Consultation Paper on 15th February, 
2013 taking into consideration the Administrative Staff College of India’s  
Report and has sought views from various stakeholders on the need, nature 
and level of restriction and safeguards with respect to vertical integration in 
the broad casting and distribution sectors and cross holdings across various 
media sectors. In this regard, the Committee, in their Thirty -second Report on  
Demands for Grants (2012-13) and Fortieth Action Taken Report on  Demands 
for Grants (2012-13) had expressed an urgency to frame rules for cross media 
ownership to regulate both the vertical and horizontal integration so as to 
prevent monopolistic practice.  
2.17 Since it is already over 5 years when the matter was first referred to 
TRAI in 2008 and during this p eriod the cross holdings could have multiplied, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry and the TRAI to consider 

 
 
85 
 
this important issue having national ramifications on priority basis. Needless 
to emphasise that TRAI should come out with its recom mendations and the 
Ministry should promptly take conclusive action on it and apprise t he 
Committee within six months from the presentation of this Report. 
(Para Nos. 2.16 & 2.17 Recommendation Sl. NO. 8) 
Paid News and its implications on Electoral Process 
2.18 The Committee note that the increasing trend of presenting paid content 
as news/editorial/talkshow/review is not only a serious fraud on the innocent 
audiences/readers/viewers/public but is also a threat to the democratic 
process. The Committee find i t very disturbing that the malpractice of ‘Paid 
News’, which surfaced prominently during 2009 General Elections, is on the 
rise and has affected the entire country. The PCI’s Sub -Committee Report on 
2009 General Elections contains some shocking revelations  indicating that 
media, which is considered as the fourth pillar of democracy, has its nose 
dipped in various clandestine operations including ‘Paid News’. The Committee 
are startled with the revelation of PCI’s fact finding team on Gujarat Election 
(2012) wherein they have cited 126 confirmed cases of Paid News with 61 
candidates in the poll fray admitting to have paid for such news. The situation 
becomes more alarming in light of the District Level Media Certification and 
Monitoring Committee’s observation that during Gujarat election 414 cases of 
paid news were confirmed. The  Committee are alarmed to note that sections 
of media are deeply involved in the business of ‘Paid News’ and have started 
distributing rate cards/packages for not merely praising a particular candidate 
but also for criticizing their political opponents. Worse is the situation that if 
the candidates do not go along with such blackmailing/extortionist practice of 
the media they are denied coverage. The Committee note that there could be  
cases where there is no payment as such but still it may lead to 
negative/vindictive action for non -payment. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that this phenomenon has not only threatened our democratic set up but also 
added to the money power in politics in the Country.  
 
2.19 As regards the remedial measures to curb the menace, the Committee 
note that there has been suggestions from various quarters to amend the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 so as to make ‘Paid News’ a 
cognisable, punishable  and e lectoral offence. The Committee find that the 
Election Commission of India has also favoured necessary changes in the law 
for strict prevention of this malpractice and has made reference to the Law 

 
 
86 
 
Ministry in the year 2011 to include ‘Paid News’ in the ca tegory of corrupt 
practices under the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The Commission 
has also recommended to include publishing and abetting of publishing of 
‘Paid News’ for furthering the prospects of election of any candidate as an 
electoral offe nce under Chapter III of Part VII of the 1951 Act, with 
exemplary punishment of a minimum of two years imprisonment. The 
Committee are, however, concerned to note that the proposal is still pending 
with the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 
2.20 Other suggesti ons from various stakeholders to curb this malaise 
include -imposing ban on print media too for carrying election campaign 48 
hours before polling is scheduled as is applicable for television channels and 
radio stations;  increasing the ceiling/limit on electoral expense of candidates;  
having different ceilings for national parties and for State/ regional parties; 
Setting up a special cell by EC with nomination from media to receive 
complaints about ‘paid news’ in the run -up to elections with a time limit of 
action,  reviewing the possibility that a candidate can be trapped by other 
candidate by issuing notices and remedial provisions to take care of such 
mala-fide intention, etc. The Committee also note that PCI in its Sub -
Committee Report on 2009 General Elections had suggested for a mandatory 
disclosure, by all candidates/political parties, of equity stakes and/or financial 
interests in newspapers/television channels on which news about their 
candidates/parties as well as interviews with candidates and/or  
representatives of the political parties are published or broadcasted.  
 
 
2.21 Taking holistic view of the entire scenario the Committee note that the 
proposal made by the Election Commission is good one and merit urgent 
consideration of the Government fo r bringing appropriate amendment in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. The Committee are of the firm view 
that there is an urgent need to review the election code of conduct and the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 as well as guidelines/rule s framed 
thereunder so as to give more power to Election Commission to firmly deal 
with this menace. While considering the serious damage of ‘Paid News’ on 
electoral/democratic process, the Committee impress upon the Government to 
consider all their recomm endations so as to put in place a comprehensive 
mechanism to tackle the menace of ‘Paid News’ by making necessary 
provisions in the set Rules/Guidelines framed thereunder and making 

 
 
87 
 
necessary changes in model Code of Conduct for elections. The Com mittee 
also urge the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to coordinate with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice for taking an early action on the proposals made 
by the Election Commission of India. 
 
(Para Nos. 2.18, 2.19, 2.20 & 2.21, Recommendation Sl. NO. 9) 
Existing Regulatory Mechanism 
2.22 The Committee note that to deal with the Paid News malpractice, 
directly or indirectly, there are host of regulatory 
bodies/organisations/professional bodies viz. Press Council of India (PCI), 
News Broadcasters Association ( NBA), Indian Broadcasters Federation (IBF), 
Advertising Standards Council of India , Electronic Media Monitoring Centre 
(EMMC – established by Min istry of Information and Broadcasting), Editors 
Guild of India (EGI) and several other self formed unions, associations, civil 
society, etc. With respect to guidelines/norms/codes/Acts, there are Working 
Journalists Act, NBA Code, IBF Guidelines, Advertising Standards Council of 
India guidelines, PCI Act, DD Code for commercial advertising, the Press and 
Registration of Books and Publications Act, 1867, the Cable Television 
Network (Regulation) Act, 1995, the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, 
Income Tax Act, 1961, the Companies Act , 1956, etc. However, the 
Committee’s findings reveal that none of these have proved effective enough 
to curb the menace of Paid News. The Press Council of India and Editors Guild 
of India have been candid in their admission that with their existing powers 
and mandate they can only exert moral pressure and cannot penalize media/ 
are not authorised to do so. They have rep eatedly expressed their 
helplessness of being a body/organisation without teeth. Similarly, the 
Ministry themselves were frank enough to accept that the existing Advertising 
and Programme Code is not being followed strictly and there is no mechanism 
to enforce the Code to private channels/newspapers even during the election 
time. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Electronic Media Monitoring 
Centre created by the Ministry to tackle violations of the Advertisement and 
Programme Code is only recommendatory in nature and has no power to take 
action. The Committee also note that District Level and State Level Monitoring 
Committee set up by the Election Commission, existing in 276 Districts and 16 
States, handle the  ‘Paid News’ instances during election periods only and do 
not have power to take action against the media. Not only this, media 
themselves have come up with a body of their own viz. NBA for news and 

 
 
88 
 
current affairs channels, IBF for non -news and general entertainment 
channels, ASCI for advertising.  
 
2.23 While agreeing to the basic principle that Media should be free from 
State control, the Committee at the same time strongly feel that self 
regulatory bodies have proved merely an eye wash. This feeling of the 
Committee gets firmed/strengthened in light of NBA’s submission that out of 
198 complaints they have received since 2008, there are no complaints 
reported against ‘Paid News’. The specious plea of self regulatory bodies and 
the contention of the Ministry that the Self regulatory mechanisms  alone can 
curb the menace is elusive and totally untenable. The Committee strongly feel 
that inspite of so many provisions to deal with the violations, the existing self 
regulatory bodies have abysmally failed to invoke the provisions and take 
appropriate deterrent action. The Committee , therefore, recommend that 
there is an urgent need to review the efficacy of the existing self regulatory 
bodies/code/Act etc. governing the media. The Committee also urge upon the 
Ministry to urgently chalk out a comprehen sive action plan on this crucial 
matter and also recommend the Ministry to ensure that till such time a 
structured mechanism is put in place, all the existing relevant provisions/ 
guidelines/ Acts/ Rules/ Codes are strictly enforced and followed by the 
concerned authorities.  
 
(Para Nos. 2.22 & 2.23, Recommendation Sl. NO. 10) 
 
The case of M/s Jindal Steel Power Limited and M/s Zee Ltd – highlighting 
loophole in the existing guidelines/code/ mechanism 
 
2.24 The Committee came across the live case of M/s Jin dal Steel and Power 
Limited (JSPL) v/s M/s Zee News wherein M/s JSPL had alleged that M/s Zee 
News has aired considerable number of programmes containing wrong, 
manipulated, untrue and per-se defamatory contents against JSPL in violation 
of the provisions of Code of Ethics and Broadcasting Standards of the News 
Broadcasters Association and Rules framed under the Cable Television 
Networks (regulation) Act, 1995. During the course of evidence, M/s JSPL 
submitted before the Committee that no action has been taken by the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting despite repeated complaints presumably on 
the pretext that the matter is sub -judice. M/s JSPL had also stated that since 
the license  is granted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, it can 
be revoked  only by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and not by 
any other authority. 

 
 
89 
 
2.25 The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting that the matter has been referred to the Inter Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) t o look into the violations of Programme and Advertising 
codes by private satellite TV networks which has already heard both the 
parties and has sought further clarifications from them so as to ensure that 
any decision taken by IMC withstands the legal scru tiny. The Committee note 
that the instant case is not only a reflection of severity of malpractices that 
take place in media for earning revenue but also highlights the helplessness of 
regulatory bodies in proceeding ahead/taking action in the absence of a ny 
statutory/legal powers conferred upon them. The Committee deplore the 
indecisiveness on the part of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
which is highlighted by the fact that the Ministry lacks clarity as to how to 
proceed when the matter being sub-judice and in deciding whether a dispute 
between two entities is a matter of public interest or national security. Even 
the self -regulatory body like NBSA has pleaded its helplessness in taking 
cognizance of the matter on the plea that the matter is su b-judice. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to complete 
examination of the case at the earliest and take appropriate action on the 
Inter-Ministerial Committee’s recommendations which is presently seized of 
the matter. The Ministry s hould also ensure that henceforth such cases are 
decided in shortest possible time frame. The Committee are of the view that 
administrative machinery should not come to halt if any of the parties 
approach the Court unless there is specific stay orders gran ted by the 
judiciary. The Committee may be apprised of the follow-up action taken in this 
regard.  
(Para Nos. 2.24 & 2.25, Recommendation Sl. NO. 11) 
International practices 
 
2.26 To have a better understanding of the international practice with regard 
to ‘Paid News’, effectiveness of self regulation and the oversight mechanism, 
the Committee asked the Ministry about the international position. The 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry that India’s Self regulatory 
initiative is in line with the inter national best practices seen in developed 
countries such as USA, UK and Germany where they are known as SROs (Self 
Regulatory Organisations). The Committee are however, concerned to note 
that neither the Ministry nor any Self regulatory body viz. PCI/NBA, etc, has 
conducted any study to evaluate the mechanism adopted by other countries to 
tackle the menace of ‘Paid News’. Even with regard to the existing mechanism 

 
 
90 
 
to regulate media, they did not provide any information. However, the 
Committee note that the issue of culture, ethics malpractice in media has 
engaged serious attention worldwide. Very recently, an  enquiry Commission 
under Lord Justice Leveson was set up by the UK Government. Hon’ble Justice 
Leveson conducted an enquiry into the culture, practices  and ethics of the 
press and submitted his Report in November, 2012. In this Report various 
issues viz. regulatory models for future, protecting journalists, access to 
information, media employment, press and politics, plurality and media 
ownership, etc. h ave been dealt with. The Committee note from the 
implementation status of the Justice Leveson Report that after the publication 
of the Report there were mixed reactions and there were cross -party 
discussions on how to implement the proposals of the Report.  Reportedly the 
Government of UK will go ahead with the establishment of a body which will 
approve press regulators and the Leveson proposals will be pu t before the 
privy council which would meet on 8 th May, 2013 for approval and then move 
on to the Queen for the final seal. Considering the post presentation 
developments of Leveson Report and in view of the ills, including ‘Paid News’, 
afflicting the Indian media, the Committee expect the Ministry to consider the 
recommendations and the developments associated with Leveson Report while 
dealing with the issue. 
(Para No. 2.26, Recommendation Sl. NO. 12) 
Role of Press Council of India (PCI) in tackling Paid News  
2.27 While assessing the PCI’s role in handling ‘Paid News’ cases, since 
2009-10 upto 2012-13, the Committee find that of the 40 complaints received 
more than a quarter of them were closed due to non pursuance and in only            
17 cases the papers were warned/censured for having indulged in ‘Paid News’ 
cases. The Committee are given to understand by the Ministry that Press 
Council of India has been fulfilling its objective of preserving the freedom of 
press and maintaining and improving the standa rds of the newspapers in the 
country and safeguarding the interest of public at large. However, the 
Committee are extremely unhappy to note from the Press Council of India’s 
submission that the Council is vested only with authority of oral observations 
which carry ethical and moral force and in the absence of an express authority 
it is difficult to enforce compliance of its directions. PCI has, therefore, sought 
amendment in the Press Council Act seeking more powers. To the utter 
surprise of the Committee, almost all the submissions made to them on the 
subject have insisted that the composition of PCI need to be re -examined and 

 
 
91 
 
its mandate be expanded to give it more powers. The Committee are also 
startled at the Ministry’s silence on this issue thus giving an impression that 
the Ministry is apathetic about the empowerment/revamp of PCI. The 
Committee are shocked to learn about the underlying pressure within PCI 
because of its composition, as revealed by one of the former PCI member, who 
was also the head of the two member Sub -Committee constituted by PCI on 
Paid News during 2009 General Elections, wherein he had stated that due to 
the pressure from media owners who were part of PCI, the original report of 
the Sub-Committee on ‘Paid News’ could not be annexed with the final Report 
of PCI. Worse is the revelation that the Report of the Sub -Committee was 
voted out by a very thin majority with show of hands and even the dissenting 
notes by the Sub -Committee Members were not allowed. In the light of 
disturbing revelation the Committee are sceptical about the Secretary, PCI’s 
submission that though the composition of PCI needs revaluation but it is not 
on the count that the Members tend to protect each other, which has not 
happened in PCI during the last 40 years. The Committee, therefore, note that 
in its existing composition there could be tendency of members coming 
together to protect their interest within the PCI. 
2.28 The Committee note that about 35 years back  when the PCI was set up 
under the provisions of the PCI Act, 1978, the media was basically dominated 
by the print section and the presence of electronic media was the 
Governmental one. At that time the PCI was mandated with the task of 
governing only Print media. The Committee are unhappy to note that thoug h 
over last two decades the electronic media has emerged very strongly yet 
neither the mandate of the PCI has been expanded to include electronic media 
nor any specific statutory regulatory body has been put in place for regulating 
it and ensuring complian ce of provisions of the Cable TV Network Regulation 
Act, 1995 and various rules/guidelines framed thereunder.  
(Para Nos. 2.27 & 2.28, Recommendation Sl. NO. 13) 
PCI’s Sub-Committee Report on paid news during 2009 General Election titled 
‘Paid News: How corruption in the Indian media undermines democracy’ 
2.29 Realising the dangers of ‘Paid News’ to democracy as well as the right 
to freedom of expression enshrined in Article 19 of the Constitution of India, 
Press Council of India (PCI) appointed a Committee to examine the menace of 
paid news observed during the General Elections, 2009 and after deliberating 
on the issue it released the final Report on Paid News on 30th July, 2010 and 
submitted to the Ministry. However, to the dismay of the Committee the 

 
 
92 
 
Ministry is still considering the Report. When asked to spell out the status of 
the Report, the Committee have been informed that a GoM was constituted by 
the Government to examine the Report, to give views on a comprehensive 
policy and institutional mechanism to address the phenomenon of paid news.  
The Committee express their strong displeasure that though the issues were 
deliberated upon by the GoM, yet the recommendations of the GoM could not 
be finalized. Not only this, it was also  decided that the GoM on  Paid News 
would not be re -constituted and the issue as and when considered necessary  
may be placed before appropriate Cabinet Committee/Cabinet. The Committee 
are also given to understand that since the issue is sensitive and requires 
Inter-Ministerial co nsultations, the Ministry has requested the Cabinet 
Secretariat to re-constitute the GoM on Paid News. In the considered opinion 
of the Committee,  the Government is dithering on this important policy 
initiative  on one pretext or the other as the same is revealed by the failure of 
the Government in taking a decision on the recommendations of the PCI 
appointed Committee made in July, 2010 on the shortcomings noticed in 2009 
General Elections. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry 
to take expeditious action on the Report of PCI and apprise the Committee of 
the Government’ stand. 
(Para No. 2.29, Recommendation Sl. NO. 14) 
Regulation of Advertisements by DAVP 
2.30 The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal 
multimedia advertising central agency of the Government under the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting to execute publicity campaigns through 
advertisements etc., on behalf of various Ministries/ Departments of 
Government of India, autonomous Bodies and Publ ic Sector Undertakings. 
However, it has been brought to the notice of the Committee by various 
stakeholders that advertisements are used by the Government to arm -twist 
media companies to have favourable coverage and even stopping 
advertisements to the medi a houses who are critical about the Government. 
In view of the serious irregularities advanced by numerous editors/media 
personnel/media houses, the Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry’s 
contention that there is an established advertisement polic y of the 
Government and the advertisement spending of the Government is always in 
accordance with this established Advertisement policy.  
 
 

 
 
93 
 
2.31 The Committee feel that the advertisement policy of the Government is 
a matter of great public concern. In a de mocratic set up like India there is a 
need for having transparency in providing advertisements by Government 
body like DAVP. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for a more 
transparent and unbiased policy for allocation of advertisements by the 
Central Government/State Government Departments which is open to 
scrutiny.  Besides, there should be disclosure about disbursement of 
advertisements expenditure from DAVP for advertisements on its website. 
Similarly, it should be made mandatory for all media houses to disclose details 
of all forms of concessions granted to them and about the advertising revenue 
from Government and private parties, on their websites. In view of allegations 
by many stakeholders/experts that the issue of circulation of 
paper/viewership of channels is being manipulated to get more 
TRP’s/benefits from the Government to influence the public in believing 
wrong information, it is imperative that the Ministry examine and take 
appropriate action in the matter in consultation with concern ed organisations 
and Government bodies and inform the Committee in detail about the action 
taken in this regard.  
(Para Nos. 2.30 & 2.31, Recommendation Sl. NO. 15) 
Penalty 
2.32 So far as the penalty for ‘Paid News’ menace is concerned, the 
Committee note that under the existing set up, for print media the penalty can 
be administered only in the form of warning/ admonishing/censuring the 
erring newspaper under the PCI Act and for the electronic media there is a 
provision for cancelling the licence for offen ces or inconsistencies in the 
programme under section 8 of the Policy Guidelines for Uplinking of Television 
Channels from India.  
 
2.33 Examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed that existing 
penal provisions have not been proved effective at all. Various stakeholder 
have advocated for a strict law to penalise all the guilty parties involved in the 
menace. Going by the submissions of stakeholders, the Committee agree that 
there is a need for imposing strict penalty provisions for all the par ties 
involved in ‘Paid News’. In the opinion of the Committee, the penalty may 
range from warning, censure, fine and even cancellation/revocation of licence 
of the media house, imprisonment, depending upon the gravity of the violation 
as well as the repeti tion of violations. The Committee also feel that the 

 
 
94 
 
decision of imposition of penalty should be prompt and swift if it has to serve 
as a strong deterrent.   
 
2.34 Another aspect related to penalty is that of the designated authority to 
take action/impose penalty. The Committee note that with existence of 
multiple bodies like Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, PCI, Election 
Commission of India, various self regulatory bodies, etc., there is lack of 
clarity  in regard to specific authority who would b e final authority in deciding 
a case of irregularity in this regard. The Committee are of the opinion that in 
the envisaged oversight regulatory mechanism there should also be a cell for 
complaint redressal with the authority/legal backing to implement its  verdict 
for penalty and the decision of that cell should be binding on all parties 
involved including the media. The Committee find that, based on PCI’s 
findings on ‘Paid News’ in a case relating to the 2009 UP Assembly Elections, 
the Election Commission of India disqualified a candidate  using its power 
under Section 10(A) of the Representation of People Act, 1951, whereas, in 
another similar case relating to the 2009 Election of Maharashtra Assembly   
where a candidate was alleged to have indulge in ‘Pai d News’ the Election 
Commission was prevented to exercise the same power on ground of its 
jurisdiction to exercise such power under the Representation of People Act, 
1951 and the issue is pending in the Supreme Court. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that the ambiguity on such issues needs to be done away with 
and the power of imposing penalties of the nature of disqualification of 
contesting candidates/ sitting MPs/MLAs on account of paid news should 
remain with the Election Commission of India. Further, loo king at the poor 
disposal status of ‘Paid News’ complaints by PCI wherein 11 cases out of 40 
have been closed because of lack of pursuance, the Committee feel that PCI in 
its existing form is not fulfilling the role expected to be performed by it. The 
Committee, therefore, stress upon the need for revamping the PCI so that it 
functions like a Regulatory authority and strengthening PCI so that it can 
adjudicate the paid news cases and award penalties to the guilty individuals 
and organisations. The Committee  would like to be apprised about the action 
taken in this regard.  
 
(Para Nos. 2.32, 2.33 & 2.34, Recommendation Sl. NO. 16) 
 
 
 

 
 
95 
 
Transparency regarding Revenue/Assets of Media Houses and Right to 
Information Act , 2005 (RTI) 
2.35 The Committee note that due  to clandestine nature of financial 
transactions involved in ‘Paid News’ there is no transparency with regard to 
accounts of media houses as well as on the part of the parties providing 
favour/money. The Committee are concerned to note that when the media is 
asked for disclosure of the source of income or details of revenue generated 
through advertisements, some section of them take the plea that it is against 
freedom of the Press. The most worrisome piece of evidence is submission of 
a former Chief Electio n Commissioner that the Election Commission faces 
difficulty in knowing the source of income for the suspected case of ‘Paid 
News/advertorial/advertisement’ and they find themselves at the dead end. 
The Committee can not but express their displeasure to no te that despite 
SEBI’s guideline for disclosure of shares/stakes held by media companies 
there are media houses/group who avoid/evade the guideline. In this regard, 
the Committee take note of the suggestions in many submissions that media 
should be subjected to Right to Information Act, 2005 and brought under the 
ambit of Lok Pal Bill particularly the media’s source of income/revenue. 
Considering the fact that people’s right to unbiased information weighs more 
than the individual’s/companies right, the Comm ittee are of considered view 
that there is an urgent need to protect public from misguided and 
camouflaged paid content. The Committee also opine that the media houses 
should be open and transparent about the sources of their revenue, shares, 
stakes and mo re importantly about the sponsored 
programme/review/editorial, etc. Further, disagreeing with the media’s plea 
that seeking accountability and transparency with regard to source of revenue 
tantamount to infringement of Right to Freedom of Press, the Commit tee 
strongly feel that media is accountable to the public and disclosure of source 
of revenue is not only their duty under the Companies Act, 1956, the Income 
Tax Act, 1961, etc. Nevertheless, taking cognizance of Prasar Bharati’s 
submission that there mig ht be a danger of over regulation by audit of each 
and every account of media, the Committee opine that there should be some 
provision to hold media accountable to the public and their accounts should be 
subject to examination. Media should not hide the re venue source/detail for 
the suspected article/programme/review/talk show. Here, the Committee 
would also like to reemphasize and reiterate their recommendation made in 
their Forty Second Report on ‘The Press and Registration of Books and 
Publication Bill, 2011’ wherein it was recommended to incorporate a suitable 
provision in the Bill for disclosure of annual income from advertisements so as 

 
 
96 
 
to check the menace of paid news. The Ministry may apprise the Committee 
about the action taken in this regard. 
 
(Para No. 2.35, Recommendation Sl. NO. 17) 
Need for Awareness/Education/Training programmes  
2.36 The Committee note that due to the ‘camouflage’ nature and subtle way 
in which paid content is presented as advertorial/news, it becomes difficult 
not only for co mmon man but also for the experts in the field to distinguish 
between genuine and paid content. The Committee, therefore, feel that there 
is a definite need for creating awareness amongst the masses about this 
malaise of ‘Paid News’ by educating the people  on this aspect. Though the 
Ministry has suggested that the adjudication of paid news case by 
PCI/Ministry/self regulatory bodies may be published in prominent 
newspapers or telecast in electronic media for public awareness, the 
Committee are concerned to note that no concrete action has yet been taken 
in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend for a coordinated effort 
from the Ministry, PCI, Self Regulatory Bodies, Election Commission, etc. for 
organizing awareness campaigns on the issue and educa te common 
masses/voters to distinguish between ‘paid reporting’ and 
‘balanced/unbiased reporting’. The Committee also recommend for taking the 
civil society/research groups in the loop while conducting awareness 
campaigns. The Committee also feel that enha ncement of training in media 
ethics for media personnel will also add to this measure. On this aspect, the 
Committee would also recommend the Ministry to plan a National Help Line 
number for addressing the citizen’s concerns in this regard. 
 
2.37 The Committee also observe that the Sectoral Innovation Council of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, constituted under the 
Chairpersonship of Smt. Asha Swarup has submitted its Report. The Report 
contains 64 recommendations in seven key areas concerning  the media and 
entertainment sector such as Broadcasting, Films, Print Media, Advertising, 
Media Education, Animation, Gaming and VFX. The Committee are of the firm 
view that some of the recommendations viz. availability of reliable single 
source data on a ll medium of advertising, comprehensive media policy 
integrating all existing media segments, comprehensive National Media Policy, 
regulating media education to ensure orderly growth of the discipline, making 
DAVP’s functioning online so as to bring greate r transparency, etc, if 

 
 
97 
 
implemented, in true spirit would go a long way in curbing the menace of paid 
news. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while taking policy 
decisions in regard to control the menace of paid news the Ministry should 
consider the  recommendations of the Council, especially those relating to 
Broadcasting, Print Media, Advertising and Media Education and apprise them 
about the action taken accordingly. 
 
(Para Nos. 2.36 & 2.37, Recommendation Sl. NO. 18) 
SUMMING Up  
 
While taking note  of the fact that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, Press Council of India, Election Commission of India, Editors 
Guild of India, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India, self regulatory bodies, research bodies, other stakeholders, 
etc. have acknowledged the gravity of the menace and the fact that the 
Election Commission of India has also taken several initiatives, the Committee 
find that the Ministry has miserably failed to match up its efforts in taking th e 
required measures and therefore recommend as under: 
 
(i) There should be statutory body viz. Media Council having eminent 
persons as its members to look into all media contents both from print 
media and electronic media  (TV as well as radio) with powers  to take 
strong action against the defaulters. Under this process PCI shall be 
wound up. 
 
OR 
 
(ii) PCI should be re -vamped/re-cast with powers to take care of print 
media and a similar statutory body is set up for electronic media.  
 
In both the situation,  as expressed in (i) and (ii) the Committee 
recommend that the media owners/interested parties should not be a part of 
the proposed Media Council/body including revamped PCI. 
 
(iii) Election laws/rules should be reviewed and strengthened to curb the 
‘Paid News’ menace in election process . While reviewing the Election 
laws/rules, the Election Commission should be empowered with not 
only dealing with the cases relating to suppression of expenditure in 
the election on account of ‘Paid News’ but for also taking  action 

 
 
98 
 
against the defaulting candidate as also the concerned Media entity 
found indulged in ‘Paid News’.  
 
 
Incidentally in a judgement by the Delhi High Court delivered as recent 
as 9 th April, 2013 while considering the contents of a TV programme have 
brought out that existing self -regulatory mechanism has not proved effective 
enough. The High Court in the Judgement has brought out that ‘as we find 
pertaining to cinema and print media, there is no reason why the legislature 
does not put in place a statut ory, regulatory body, and taking cue from The 
Cinematograph Act 1952 and The Press Council Act 1978 legislate to have a 
statutory Board comprising men and women of eminence in the field of Law, 
Science, Art and Culture, Literature, History and Social Sciences.’ 
 
 
 
(iv) Considering that it is more than five years since the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting had referred the issue of Cross Media 
Holdings/Ownership to TRAI in 2008 and again in May 2012 the 
Ministry has requested TRAI to examine the matter, the Committee 
strongly recommend the Ministry and TRAI to consider this issue on 
priority basis and act promptly upon it so as to prevent monopolistic 
trend in the media.  
 
The Committee expect a concerted, comprehensive and swift action 
from the Ministry on this crucial matter without any further delay, in any case 
before the onset of next General Elections to prevent resurfacing of the hydr a 
head of ‘Paid News’. 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
29 April, 2013 Standing Committee on  
09 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Information Technology 
  

 
 
99 
 
Annexure-I 
  
(Vide para 1.103 of the Report) 
 
Conclusions of the PCI’s Sub -Committee Report on Paid News relating to 2009 
General election titled ‘ Paid News: How corruption in the Indian media 
undermines democracy’ 
 
 Though the phenomenon of widespread practice of “paid news” has been verbally 
confirmed and vindicated by politicians and campaign managers of political parties, 
there is no recorded documentation that would firmly establish that there has been 
exchange of money between media houses/advertisement agents/journalists and 
politicians/political parties. The problem in establishing the practice of “paid news” is 
simply one of obtaining hard proof or conclusive evidence. With one notable 
exception (Shri Parcha Kodanda Rama Rao of the Loksatta Party in Andhra Pradesh), 
no complainant has been able to provide the Press Council of India with documents 
as proof of money having been paid to carry positive news. Even the rate cards that 
had been formulated by media houses and had been passing around during elections 
were just typed sheets of paper which carried nothing on it to attribute it to a 
newspaper/television news channel that had put it together nor anything that could 
be attributed to a journalist/advertisement agent.  
 
 However, the huge amount of circumstantial evidence that has been painstakingly 
gathered by a few well -meaning journalists, unions of journalists, other individuals 
and organizations together with the testimonies of the politicians and journa lists who 
have deposed before the Press Council of India, goes a very long way in establishing 
the fact that the pernicious practice of “paid news” has become widespread across 
media (both print and electronic, English and non -English languages) in differe nt 
parts of the country. Interestingly, this phenomenon appears to be less pervasive in 
states (such as Kerala and Tamil Nadu) where the media is clearly divided along 
political lines. 
 
 The guidelines of the Press Council of India that news should be clear ly demarcated 
from advertisements by printing disclaimers, should be strictly enforced by all 
publications. As far as news is concerned, it must always carry a credit line and 
should be set in a typeface that would distinguish it from advertisements. 
 
 It s hould be mandatory for all candidates/political parties to fully disclose their 
equity stakes and/or financial interests in newspapers/television channels on which 
news about their candidates/parties as well as interviews with candidates and/or 
representatives of the political parties are published or broadcast. If a candidate is 
being interviewed or given positive publicity on a particular newspaper/television 
channel, the association (financial or otherwise) of the candidate with the 
newspaper/television channel if any must be disclosed to the reader/viewer. 
 
 Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, should be amended by 
Parliament to make the practice of paying for news coverage in newspapers and 
television channels an “electoral malpract ice” or an act of corruption and made a 
punishable offence. 
 
 The Election Commission of India should set up a special cell to receive complaints 
about “paid news” in the run -up to elections and initiate a process through which 
expeditious action could be t aken on the basis of such complaints. In order to place 
a check on frivolous complaints being made a time limit of, say, one month from the 
date of publication or broadcast of the report should be imposed. The Election 
Commission of India should nominate i ndependent journalists and/or public figures 
as observers in consultation with the Press Council of India who would accompany 
the election observers deputed by the Election Commission of India to various states 
and districts. Just as the deputed election o bservers are expected to report and keep 

 
 
100 
 
a check on any malpractices in election campaign and the conduct of elections, these 
nominated journalists could report on instances of activities of practice of paid news 
to the Press Council of India and the Election Commission of India.  
 
 The Press Council of India should constitute a body of media professionals with wide 
representation at the national/state/district levels to investigate (either suo moto or 
on receipt of complaints of) instances of “paid news” an d the recommendations of 
such a body – after going through an appellate mechanism -- should be binding on 
the Election Commission of India and other government authorities.  
 
 The Press Council of India should be open to entertaining complaints about “paid 
news” from journalists while assuring them of secrecy if they act as whistle-blowers. 
 
 Media organizations should refrain from the practice of engaging stringers and 
correspondents who double up as agents collecting advertisements for their 
organizations a nd receiving a commission on the revenue that accrues from 
advertisements instead of receiving stipends or retainers, if not, regular salaries.  
 
 If working conditions and conditions of job security for journalists are improved and 
the autonomy of the edit orial staff upheld in media companies, this would to an 
extent curb the phenomenon of “paid news”.  
 
 Despite its quasi -judicial status, the Press Council of India has limited powers. The 
Council has the power to admonish, reprimand and pass strictures but cannot 
penalize the errant or those found guilty of malpractices. Besides, the Council‟s 
mandate does not extend beyond the print medium. In the absence of an alternative 
body, the Press Council of India‟s mandate should be widened to receive complaints 
and grievances against and about the working of television channels, radio stations 
and internet websites. The Press Council should be given legal powers to not merely 
admonish or pass strictures but also impose penalties against errant individuals and 
organizations.  
 
 A proposal to amend Section 15(4) of the Press Council Act, 1978, to make the 
directions of the Council binding on government authorities, has been pending for a 
long time and should be amended to provide the Council more “teeth”.  
 
 The Electio n Commission of India should actively identify instances of “paid news” 
and if a prima facie case is established, the Commission should initiate action on its 
own against the errant and, if necessary, seek the assistance of those government 
authorities res ponsible for enforcing the provisions of the Indian Penal Code and 
other laws. 
 
 The editor or editor -in-chief of a publication should print a declaration in his or her 
newspaper stating that the news that is published has not been paid for by any 
political party or individual. Such disclaimers should be issued when the model code 
of conduct for elections comes into force and may morally bind the staffers of a 
media company to adhere to professional ethical standards while discouraging the 
management from pu shing a particular political agenda. However, self -regulation 
only offers partial solutions to the problem since there would always be offenders 
who would refuse to abide by voluntary codes of conduct and ethical norms that are 
not legally mandated. The ow ners of media companies need to realize that in the 
long term, such malpractices undermine not just democracy in the country but the 
credibility of the media as well. Civil society oversight can also deal with the 
problem, but only to an extent.  
 
 There should be a debate among all concerned stakeholders on whether a directive 
of the Supreme Court of India that enjoins television channels to stop broadcasting 
campaign-related information on candidates and political parties 48 hours before 

 
 
101 
 
elections take pla ce can and should be extended to the print medium since such a 
restriction does not apply to this section of the media at present.  
 
 It can be effectively argued that the existing laws of the land (including the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the Representation of the People Act) have 
the potential to check the malpractice of “paid news” provided the concerned 
authorities, including the Election Commission of India, are not just proactive but 
also act in an expeditious manner to apprehend those ind ulging in practices that are 
tantamount to committing a fraud on the public.  
 
 Conferences, workshops, seminars and awareness -generating campaigns should be 
organized involving, among others, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, the 
Press Council of  India, the Election Commission of India, representatives of editors, 
journalists associations and unions and political parties to deliberate on the issue 
and arrive at workable solutions to curb corruption in the media in general and the 
“paid news” phenomenon in particular. 
 
All these initiatives, if sincerely implemented, may not entirely stop such 
malpractices in the Indian media  but could reduce their incidence to a considerable 
extent. 
 
  

 
 
102 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
(Vide para 1.103 of the Report) 
 
Brief of the reco mmendations of PCI’s Report on Paid News relating to 2009 
General election as provided by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
 
 Representation of the People Act, 1951 be amended to make incidence of paid news 
a punishable electoral malpractice, 
 
 The Press Council of India must be fully empowered to adjudicate the complaints of 
"paid news" and give final judgment in the matter. 
 
 Press Council Act be amended to make its recommendations binding and electronic 
media be brought under its purview, and  
 
 Press Council of India should be reconstituted to include representatives from 
electronic and other media. 
 
  

 
 
103 
 
Annexure III 
(Vide para 1.104 of the Report) 
 
Information furnished by Election Commission of India on the issue of paid news  
As per the Press Coun cil of India, Paid News is defined, “as any news or analysis appearing 
in any media (print and electronic) for a price in cash or kind as consideration”. The Commission 
has accepted the definition of Paid News given by Press Council of India. The Commissio n considers 
that „Paid News‟ disturbs level playing field in election and adversely affects free and fair poll by 
circumventing election expenditure laws and also causing undue influence on voters. The 
Commission has received requests from political partie s, media representatives and Press Council 
of India to take appropriate regulatory action. To stop this electoral malpractice the Commission 
has issued various guidelines starting from June 2010. The Commission issued a set of 
comprehensive guideline on 27 th August 2012 regarding formation of district level & state level 
Media Certification and Monitoring Committees (MCMCs) and mechanism to check the Paid News 
cases during elections. Chief Electoral Officers of all the States/UTs have been directed to 
constitute MCMCs, which also should include one expert being an officer to be requisitioned from 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. Strict timelines were introduced in these guidelines 
ahead of Gujarat & Himachal Pradesh election. After a case of Paid News is established is the MCMC 
in relation to print media, the same is also conveyed to Press Council of India. In case of electronic 
media, due to absence of any regulatory body like in case of print media, the Commission is in the 
process to coordinate with News Broadcaster Association to develop a mechanism to keep a check 
on Paid News in electronic media. 
In the recently held general elections to the State legislative assemblies of Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura, the MCMCs , constituted by the Commission, 
examined the newspapers, print media, electronic media, cable network, and other modes of mass 
communication and kept records of the advertisements, advertorials, messages, discussions and 
interviews relating to the candida tes and parties. The Returning Officers concerned, issued notices 
to the candidates with regard to suspected cases of Paid News. After disposal of all the appeals in a 
time-bound manner the accounting Teams calculated the expenditure involved in the confir med 
cases of Paid News at the DAVP/DPIR rate, whichever is lower, and asks the candidates to include 
the expenditure involved in their account, mentioned it in the Shadow Observation Register, 
maintained by them. The commission takes care to brief politica l parties and media at State and 
district levels about the Paid News related enforcement measures before implementing them.  
The Election Commission of India is of the view that for the strict prevention of this electoral 
malpractice, necessary changes in law should also be made. For this, the Commission vide its letter 
dated 03.02.2011, to Ministry of Law & Justice, has recommended to add „Paid News‟ in category of 
corrupt practices under the RP Act, 1951. The Commission had also recommended that the 
provision should be made in the Representation of the people Act, 1951 to include publishing and 
abetting of publishing of „Paid News‟ for furthering the prospects of election of any candidate as an 
electoral offence under Chapter III of Part VII of the 1951 Act , with exemplary punishment of a 
minimum of two years imprisonment. The proposal is still pending with the Government. The 
Commission would like to see early action on this. The Commission   has also requested Press 
Council for nomination of members to MCM Cs and also to provide for clear criteria to adjudge Paid 
News 
In Commission‟s new self -regulation by media and Political Parties would provide the final 
solution to the problem of Paid News. It also expects more initiations from Government of India 
and the Press Council of India to address the issue.      

 
 
104 
 
 
  


 
 
105 
 
 
  


 
 
106 
 
 
  


 
 
107 
 
 
  


 
 
108 
 
 
  


 
 
109 
 
 
  


 
 
110 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
(Vide para 1.181 of the Report) 
 
 
  


 
 
111 
 
 
 
  


 
 
112 
 
  


 
 
113 
 
  


 
 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
115 
 
Complaints received by the Press Council of India on Paid News during 2012-13 
 
S. No. File No. Complainant  Respondent Subject  Action 
Taken/Status 
1 14/119/12-13 Shri Brajmani Singh, 
Ex-State Spokesman,  
All India Hindu Maha 
Sabha, Gorakhpur 
Dainik Jagran Publication of 
Paid News 
during 
elections 
Closed on 
29.10.2012 
behind time 
barred. 
 
2-3 14/136-137/12-13 Shri Parvinder Singh 
Tyagi, New Delhi 
1. Dainik Jagran 
2. Punjab Kesari 
 
Paid News Under 
consideration. 
4-7 14/243-246/12-13 
Through MIB 
Shri Prem Prakash 
Thapliyal, 
Central member, 
Uttrakhan Parivartan 
Party,  
Dehradun 
 
1. Amar Ujala 
2. Dainik Jagran 
3. Hindustan 
4. Sandhya Prabhat 
Paid news 
during 
elections 
Under 
consideration. 
8-9 14/292-293/12-13 Shri Cliffton De Souza, 
Zaino Velim, Salcete, 
Goa-403723 
1. The Navhind        
Times 
2. O Heraldo 
 
Paid News 
published 
Under 
consideration. 
 
  

 
 
116 
 
Appendix-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 20 th December, 2010 from 1600 hours to 1730 
hours in Committee Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh -- Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
1. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Dr. Charles Dias 
4. Smt. Dardshana Vikram Jardosh 
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
6. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
8. Shri Abdul Rahman 
9. Shri Prem Das Rai 
10. Shri Tufani Saroj 
11. Dr. Bhola Singh 
12. Shri C. Sivasami 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra -- Director 
2. Shri H.R.Kamboj -- Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
  
13. Shri M.P.Achuthan 
14. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
15. Shri Salim Ansari 

 
 
117 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF  INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
1. Shri Raghu Menon  Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Joint Secretary (B) 
3. Shri V.B.Pyarelal Joint Secretary (P&A) 
    
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for the purpose of briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Issues Related to Paid 
News’.    
  
(The representatives of the Ministry were then called in.) 
 
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, regard ing  the confidentiality of the 
deliberation  till the Report on the subject is presented to the House. 
  
4. The Secretary of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, thereafter, briefed 
the Committee about the various aspects related to ‘Paid News’. He also explained the role 
of the Press Council of India which acts as a watchdog of the Press. During the course of 
deliberations, the Members sought clarifications on various issues related to the subject 
and the representatives of the Ministry responded to the same.  
 
 The copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
 
118 
 
Appendix-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 24 th October, 2011 from 1100 hours to 1340 hours 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –  Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri Charles Dias 
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
10. Shri Tapas Paul 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12.... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
14. Shri Salim Ansari 
15. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
16. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
17. Shri P. Rajeeve 
18. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj  
 
- Additional Director 
 

 
 
119 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the experts/organizations/stakeholders, on the subject 
‘Issues related to Paid News’.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts/organisations/stakeholders 
as per the time indicated below:-  
Sl. No. Experts/organisations/stakeholders From To 
1. Mr. Sanjay Rathi 
National Secretary, National Commission of Journalists and 
President, Haryana Commission of Journalists, Haryana 
 
1100 
hrs. 
1200 
hrs. 
2. Mr. N. Bhaskara Rao  
Chairman, Centre for Media Studies (CMS) 
 
1200 
hrs. 
1235 
hrs. 
3. Mr. K.K. Swamy  
Vice President, Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat, Delhi 
and Mr. B.S. Sachdeva 
 
1235 
hrs. 
1300 
hrs. 
4. News Broadcasters Association  (NBA), New Delhi 1300 
hrs. 
1340 
hrs. 
 
 Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee, the Chairman 
welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the witnesses to the provisions of Direction 
55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations 
till the report on the subject is presented to the House. 
 
4. The experts/organisations/stakeholders then deposed before the Committee and made 
their viewpoints/sugg estions on various issues related to the subject ‘Issues related to Paid 
News’ and responded to the queries of the Members. The Committee requested the witnesses 
to give written replies to various issues enumerated in the detailed list of points which form ed 
the basis of deliberations at the sitting of the Committee. The copy of the list of points in this 
regard was given to each of the witnesses. 
 
5. Since, the witnesses who appeared before the Committee took more time than the 
scheduled, the Committee dec ided that one of the witnesses, Shri Nikhil Pahwa, Editor, 
Medianama, Co-organizer TEDx may be requested to depose before the Committee on a later 
date which would be indicated to him in due course. Shri Nikhil Pahwa was then called in and 
the Hon’ble Chairman apprised him of the position to which the witness readily agreed.  
 
6. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing valuable information in connection with the examination of the aforesaid subject.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

 
 
120 
 
Appendix-III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11 th January, 2012 from 1500 hours to                    
1740 hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12.... Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
14. Shri Salim Ansari 
15. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
16. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
17. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18. Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
121 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the experts, who are also former Members of Press 
Council of India, on the subject ‘Issues related to Paid News’.  
 
3. xxxxx                xxxxx              xxxxx               xxxxx                xxxxx. 
4. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts, who are also former 
Members of Press Council of India, as per the time indicated below:-  
 
Sl. No. Experts 
 
From 
i. Shri Paranjoy Guha Thakurta 1515 to 1615 hrs. 
ii. Shri S. N. Sinha 1615 to 1655 hrs. 
iii. Shri Kundan Ramal Lal Vyas  
 
1655 to 1710 hrs. 
iv. Shri Yogesh Chandra Halan 1710 to 1730 hrs. 
 
 Before the witnesses deposed before the Committee, the Chairman w elcomed each 
of them and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations till the report on the 
subject is presented to the House. 
 
5. The experts then pre sented their viewpoints/suggestions on various issues related 
to the subject ‘Issues related to Paid News’ which inter -alia included genesis and various 
facets of the phenomenon of ‘Paid News’; existing laws and mechanisms to curb the 
menace of ‘Paid News’ ; changes to be brought out in various existing Legislations/Acts; 
effectiveness of Press Council of India and measures to strengthen PCI; etc., and they also 
responded to the queries of the Members.  
 
6. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appeari ng before the Committee and 
furnishing valuable information in connection with the examination of the aforesaid 
subject.  
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx  Matters not related to the Report. 

 
 
122 
 
Appendix-IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31 st January, 2012 from 1500 hours to                    
1630 hours in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Ganeshamurthi 
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
8. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
11. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
12. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
13. Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. T.K.Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

 
 
123 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the former Chief Election Commissioner a nd President, 
Editors’ Guild in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Issues related to Paid 
News’.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the following witnesses, as per the time 
indicated below:-  
Sl. No Experts 
 
From 
i. Shri T. S. Krishna Murthy 
Former Chief Election Commissioner of India. 
 
1510 to 1555 hrs. 
ii. Shri T. N. Ninan 
President of Editors Guild of India 
1600 to 1630 hrs. 
  
Before the witnesses deposed before the Committee, the Chairman welcomed each 
of them and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the 
subject is presented to the House. 
 
4. The experts then presented their viewpoints/suggestions on various issues related 
to the subject which inter -alia included genesis and various facets of the phenomenon of 
‘Paid News’; effectiveness and need for strengthening of existing 
laws/organizations/mechanisms so as to curb the menace of ‘Paid News’; changes to be 
brought out in various existing Legislations/Acts/Codes viz. Representation of the People’s 
Act, 1951, Press Council of India Act, Income Tax Act, Code of conduct, Advertisement code, 
etc. The witnesses also shared their experience s with respect to Paid News and the role 
played by the respective organizations viz. Election Commission of India and Editors ’ Guild 
of India. The Members raised various pertinent issues re lating to the subject and the 
witnesses responded to the same.  
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing valuable information that the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the aforesaid subject.  
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 

 
 
124 
 
Appendix-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13th December, 2012 from 1500 hours to 
1630 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agarwal – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
9. Shri Joy Abraham 
10. Shri Salim Ansari 
11. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
  

 
 
125 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of the Prasar Bharati 
 
1. Shri Jawhar Sircar Chief Executive Officer, PB 
 
2. Shri VAM Hussain Member (Personnel), PB 
 
3. Shri S.M. Khan DG (News), Doordashan 
 
4. Shri G.Mohanty DG (News), AIR 
 
 
2. At the outset, i n the abse nce of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri 
Rajendra Agarwal, a Member of the Committee , to act as the Chairman for the 
sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
 
(The witnesses were then called in) 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the  Prasar Bharati and drew 
their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Di rections by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is 
presented to the House.  
 
5. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the representatives of Prasar 
Bharati elaborated on the various issues related to Paid News . The Committee 
sought clarifications on important issues like genesis/facets of Paid News, 
Guidelines/ Codes/ Acts/ Organizations/ Professional bodies/ Legislations related to 
Paid News, issue of self regulation, Impediments in leg islating the cases of Paid 
News, measures to curb the menace of Paid news, etc.   These were replied to by the 
witnesses. The representatives of Prasar Bharati also clarified on other  related 
aspects and assured to furnish additional information desired by  the Committee in 
connection with the subject. 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
xxxx Matters not related to the Report. 
  

 
 
126 
 
Appendix-VI 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16th January, 2013 from 1500 hours to 
1815 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS   
LokSabha 
 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
14. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
15. Shri Khagen Das 
16. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
17. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
18. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
19. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patsani 
20. Shri Tapas Paul 
21. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
22. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
RajyaSabha 
  
23. Shri Joy Abraham 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot 
26. Shri BharatsinhPrabhatsinhParmar 
 
Secretariat 
 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
5. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Witnesses 

 
 
127 
 
 
Representatives of the Jindal Steel and Power Limited 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri AnandGoel 
 
Jt. Managing Director 
2. Shri Rajeev Bhadauria 
 
Director Group, HR 
3. Shri Jayant Bhushan 
 
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri Uday Kumar Varma 
 
Secretary, I&B 
2. Shri Jitendra Shankar Mathur 
 
Additional Secretary, I&B 
3. Shri Anurag Srivastava 
 
Joint Secretary (P&A) 
4. Smt. Supriya Sahu 
 
Joint Secretary (B-I) 
5. Smt. Vibha Bhargava 
 
Secretary, PCI 
   
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear M/s Jindal Steel and Power Limited in connection with the 
case of M/s Zee News Limited v/s M/s Jinda l Steel and Power Limited with regard to  
paid news aspects and to take evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting in connection with the examination of subject ‘Issues 
related to Paid News’. 
 
[The representatives of M/s Jindal Steel and Power Limited were then called in] 
3. The Chairman, then, welcomed the representatives of M/s Jindal Steel and 
Power Limited and drew their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  
 
4. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the representatives of                  
M/s Jindal Steel and Power Limited  with the help of power point presentation  
elaborated on various issues related to the case of M/s Zee Ne ws Limited v/s M/s Jindal 
Steel and Power Limited. The Committee sought  certain clarifications on the situational 
aspect of the alleged unethical malpractices against M/s Zee News Limited  and the 
same were clarified by the representatives of the Jindal Group. 
 
[The representatives of M/s Jindal Steel and Power Limited then withdrew.] 
 
[The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting were then called in.] 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry and drew their 
attention to the provisions of Direction 5 5(1) of the Directions by the Speaker,  Lok 
Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee  till the Report on 

 
 
128 
 
the subject is presented to the House  and Direction 58 regarding evidence liable to be 
treated as public. 
  
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , thereafter explained 
various issues related to Paid News with the help of  power point presentation , which 
inter-alia included myriad facets of the phenomenon of ‘Paid News’; compl exities and 
Impediments involved in the Issue; existing mechanism to check the menace ; 
effectiveness of  existing laws/organizations/mechanisms , changes needed to be 
brought out in them and the measures to curb the menace .  The representatives also 
clarified on various issues relating to M/s Zee News Limited v /s M/s Jindal Steel and 
Power Limited  which emerged during the course of deliberations . The detailed 
information with regard to the role of Election Commission of India, self -regulatory 
organisations, P ress Council of India and the desirability of implementation of its 
recommendations; etc., were also highlighted in the power point presentation. 
 
7. The Members raised various pertinent issues relating to the subject and the 
representatives responded to t he queries raised by the Members during the course of 
evidence. 
 
8. The information on some of the points which was not readily available with the 
representatives was promised to be furnished to the Committee later on. 
 
 
(The representatives of Ministry then withdrew). 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
129 
 
Appendix-VII 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26th April, 2013 from 1000 hours to 1100 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman  
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
27. Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
28. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
29. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
30. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
31. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
32. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
33. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
34. Shri Salim Ansari 
35. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
6. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
7. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
8. Shri A.K. Garg - Additional Director 
9. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

 
 
130 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt draft Forty -seventh Report on the subj ect 
‘Issues related to Paid News’ relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the draft Forty -seventh Report for consideration 
and adoption. After discussing the contents of the Draft Report in detail, the Committee 
adopted the same with minor modifications. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman t o finalize and present the 
Report to the House in the current Session of Parliament. 
 
5. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 