 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Modernisation of Post Offices’] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
  
 
26 


 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Modernisation of Post Offices’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
28 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been ac cepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
29 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
36 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology (2011 -12) held on 18 November, 
2011……………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
39 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth  Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
41 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
14. Shri  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -sixth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Modernisation of Post 
Offices’ of the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Fifteenth Rep ort was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  
23 November, 2010. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes contained in 
the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 4 March, 2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
18 November, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/Ob servations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at              
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
  RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi;                     Chairman, 
12  December, 2011                                                                               Standing Committee on 
 21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Modernisation of Post Offices’ 
relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology ( Department of 
Posts). 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
23 November, 2010. It contained 23 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 9, 10,12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 & 23  
 Total 14 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:-3, 4, 6, 7, 8 & 13  
 Total 06 
 Chapter IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which the repl ies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Para Nos.:-  5, 11 & 21  
 Total 03 
 Chapter V 

 
4. The Committee had examined the subject ‘Modernisation of Post Offices’ and 
made 23 Recommendations/Observations in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha). 
The recommendations primarily emphasized on spreading and strengthening of IT 
infrastructure, modernizing the mail transmission, improving service delivery levels, 
training of manpower, increasing awareness of the people regarding the services 
provided by Post Offices and giving the right ambience t o customers. The Committee , 
however, regret to note from the Action Taken Notes that in as many as nine 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized under ‘Not Accepted’            
/‘Interim’, the Department has not been able to take conclusive  action. The analysis of 
the Action Taken Notes indicates that the Department is not progressing satisfactorily in 
fulfilling its vision of having technology enabled Post Offices . Even though the 
Department has embarked upon the plan for modernization of Post Offices since the 
Eighth Five Year Plan, it has underperformed over the years in achieving both its financial 
and physical targets . The dismal performance of the Department has been extensively 
dealt with and critically commented  by the Committee in their Reports on Demands for 
Grants, the most recent being the Twenty -fourth Report, wherein, the Committee have 
pointed out that with the existing pace, it will take considerable time for the Department 
to computerize all the Post Off ices in the country . The Committee are of the opinion that 
a lot needs to be done by the Department in its missio n to modernize its Post Offices and  
therefore re-emphasize that all their energy should be channelized to identify the 
loopholes in their plans so as to overcome various challenges afflicting the process of 
modernization of Post Offices. This has been amply corroborated in comments made by 
the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report  
 
5. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation of 
the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is 
not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee wi th reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to 
the Recommendations /Observations contained in Chapter -V of this Report shou ld be 
furnished to them at an early date. 

 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
 
I. Status of Computerisation of Post Offices and Broadband Connectivity  
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 3, 4 & 6) 
 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The process of computerisation or transformation from physical to digital 
network of Post Offices was initiated in Eighth Five Year Plan and as per the 
Department the ambit of computerisation has i ncreased in each of the 
successive Plans and as on 31st March, 2010, there are a total of 12,604 
Departmental Post Offices which have been computerized out of the total 
25,538 Departmental Post Offices, the percentage of achievement being only 
49.35 per ce nt.  Most of the work of Post Offices is carried out by the Extra 
Departmental Post Offices and at present out of total 1,55,035 Post Offices 
1,29,497 are Extra Departmental Post Offices.  If the number of Extra 
Departmental Post Offices is also taken into  consideration, the percentage of 
computerization of Post Offices comes to just 8.13 per cent.  The Committee 
note that the Department has big plans with regard to enlarging their savings 
and insurance activities.  The Department proposes to set up Post Ba nk of 
India.  The Committee note that the aforesaid ambitious plans of the 
Department cannot be achieved without networking of the Post Offices.  The 
Department claims to achieve the 100 per cent computerization of Post 
Offices by September, 2012.  With th e existing status of computerization the 
details of which have been given above, the Committee have doubts about 
the achievement of the targets by the stipulated timeframe i. e. by 
September, 2012.  The aforesaid apprehension of the Committee is further 
reinforced by the fact that the Department cannot computerize even a single 
Post Office during the financial year 2009 -10 as status of computerization of 
Post Offices remained static during the aforesaid period.  The Committee 
cannot but express their unhapp iness over the status of computerization of 
Post Offices.  The Committee exhort the Department to take the desired 
initiatives at least now so as to step up the pace of computerization of Post 
Offices in the country.   
(Recommendation No. 3) 
Broadband Connectivity 
 
From the information provided by the Department, the Committee note that 
out of 12,604 Departmental Post Offices computerized so far, the 
broadband/dial-up connectivity could be provided to just 9483 Post Offices 
i.e. 75.23 per cent.  The detailed information provided by the Department 
further indicates that 1305 locations have been connected through 2 Mbps 
leased line and another 8177 computerized Post Offices are using dial -up 
connectivity.  The Committee observe that the purpose of computerization is 

 
achieved only when the broadband connectivity is provided.  Moreover, the 
availability of adequate and efficient broadband service is the prerequisite to 
achieve the objective of networking of Post Offices.  The coverage of on ly 
75.23 per cent of the Departmental Post Offices in the country having 
broadband connectivity is not a satisfactory position.  Moreover, the 
aforesaid position does not cover the Extra Departmental Post Offices which 
are handling the major work of the Posts as indicated in the earlier part of the 
Report.  The Committee again emphasize that the challenges before the 
Department are going to increase  manifold with the rapidly evolving 
technology and to face this, the Department has to put in place an effect ive 
networking system by having electronic linkages of all the Post Offices in the 
country and this can only be achieved by providing the broadband 
connectivity to all the Post Offices.  Otherwise, the vision of the Department 
such as ‘Anywhere, Anytime Ba nking’, Speed -Net Service, Upgradation of 
Customer Call Centres, Project Arrow etc. would always remain a mission yet 
to see their successful and complete implementation.  In view of this, the 
Committee strongly recommend to take all the initiatives so tha t the 
broadband connectivity is provided to all the computerized Post Offices. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The analysis of Circle -wise data with regard to computerization as well as 
broadband connectivity of Post Offices as furnished by the Department 
indicates that achievement with regard to computerization is outstanding in 
Assam, North-East and Kerala.   In Assam, the achievement is 100 per cent, in 
North-East and Kerala the achievement is 90.45 and 71.19 per cent 
respectively.  The national average in this regard is 49.35 per cent.  The 
under-performing Circles where the achievement is lesser than the average 
are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  With 
regard to broadband connectivity, the data furnished by the Department 
indicates that connectivity is maximum in Delhi i.e. 70.83 per cent followed 
by Kerala, Haryana, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu which have 54.42, 51.33, 50.99 
and 51.06 per cent connectivity respectively.  In all the remaining Circles, the 
connectivity is less than 50  per cent.  It is surprising to note that in Delhi 
which has very good broadband penetration, 30 per cent of Post Offices 
computerized so far could not be provided broadband connectivity.  More 
disturbing is the fact that Assam and North -East which have achieved 100 per 
cent and 90.45 per cent of the computerization have only 41.09 per cent and 
31.34 per cent of the broadband connectivity respectively.  As such, the 
purpose of providing 100 per cent computerisation to such Circles is 
defeated.  From the afo resaid position, the Committee conclude that the 
adequate measures have not been taken by the Department to provide 
broadband connectivity to the computers already installed in various Post 
Offices.  The Committee exhort the Department to take all the desi red 
initiatives which include taking up the issue with BSNL i.e. the Government 
telecommunication service provider for providing broadband connectivity to 
the computers in all the Circles.   
(Recommendation No. 6) 

 
Replies of the Government 
 
8. The Department of Posts has stated as under:- 
 
“12604 Departmental Post Offices –have been computerized up to 
31.03.2010, out of the 25,538 Departmental Post Offices as detailed below: 
Status of Computerization of Post Offices up-to 31.03.2010 
 
S.No. Category of Post Offices Number 
1 Head Post Offices 839 
2 Above double handed Sub Post Offices 6671 
3 Double handed Sub Post Offices 4498 
4 Single handed Sub Post Offices 596 
 Total 12604 
 
Action has been taken for computerization of 1720 Post Offices during the 
current financial year under Plan Scheme of Computerization of Class B 
(Double handed) Sub Post Offices under XI Plan – Project for computerization 
and networking of Post Offices.  
 
All operations of PLI and RPLI have been computerised. After the 
procurement of proposals from customers, the same are  entered and data is 
uploaded in the National Data Centre being maintained by NIC. Further, all 
premium collection is also uploaded to th e National Data Centre. All claims 
are sanctioned through National Data Centre itself.  
      
The National Data Centre is repository of all information on PLI/RPLI. It 
is connected to all the Circles, Regional Offices , Divisional Offices and Head 
Post Off ices and data transfer is done through Broadband connectivity 
amongst  these offices. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 3) 
 
(i) Broadband connectivity has been provided in 10530 -computrized Post 
Offices out of total 12604 computerized Post offices up -to  31 -03-
2010.  
 
(ii)  Department is in the process of issuing RFP for a Network Integrator 
for providing network connectivity to the Departmental Post Offices to 
be completed by September, 2012.  The connectivity will be given 
through various modes like MPLs, Broadband, leased line etc.   
 
(Reply to Recommendation Nos. 4 & 6) 
  

 
 
9. While observing the absence of a comprehensive IT network covering all the Post 
Offices which would entail non -fulfillment of automation plan  of Posts , the Committee  
had recommended that the Department should ensure speedy electronic linkages of all 
the Post Offices by providing broadband connectivity to the computerized Post Offices.  
The Committee are surprised to note from the Action Taken Note that i nstead of taking 
concrete action, the Department has merely informed the Committee about the issuance  
of Request for Proposal (R FP) for network integrator for providing network connectivity 
to all Departmental Post Offices by September 2012  through various modes like M ulti 
Protocol Label Switching (M PLS), Broadband, lease lines etc. without giving the details of 
their plans and the wa ys to achieve the set target within a stipulated timeframe. 
Moreover, the Committee note that the computerization of Departmental Post Office has  
remained static i.e. 12,604 out of 25,538 Departmental Post Offices (49.35 per cent) since 
2009. This clearly indicates slippage on the part of the Department in the achievement of 
physical target. The Committee cannot understand as to why the Department could not 
computerize even a single Departmental Post Office since 2009 especially when it has 
been emphatically highlighted by the Committee in their Original Report that to cater the 
growing needs and demands of the people, it is inevitable on the part of the Department 
to improve the various services offered to the clienteles by modernizing them . The 
Committee, therefore, re-emphasize the Department to take all possible steps to pace up 
the process of computerization Post Offices in the Country. 
Regarding the electronic linkages of all the Post Offices, t he Committee note that 
as on 31st March, 2010 , broadband connectivity has been provided to 10,530 
Computerized Post Offices i.e. 83.54 per cent . However, the Department is conspicuously 

 
silent on the issue raised by the Committee regarding the mismatches between the status 
of computerisation and the p rovision for broadband connectivity  to the computerized 
Post Offices in the various States/UTs . For instance, the Committee had pointed out that 
in Delhi only 70 per cent of Post Offices computerized so far could be provided with 
broadband connectivity. In  Assam and North -East which have achieved 100 per cent and 
90.45 per cent of computerisation , the percentage of broadband connectivity was  only 
41.09 and 31.34 per cent respectively. The Committee while deploring the inaction on the 
part of the Department to provide broadband connectivity to already computerized Post 
Offices reiterate that the Department should have a thorough review/assessment to 
identify the drawbacks so that corrective measures can be taken to ensure that the status 
of computerisation and the provision of broadband connectivity complement each other. 
II. IT Induction – Postal Operations during Eleventh Plan 
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para Nos. 7 & 8) 
10. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
The Committee find that the Department has ambitious plans with regard to 
upgradation of various services viz. Communications Services, Transport 
Services, Financial Services and Value Added Services.  To achieve the 
objective, Rs.  2700 crore was allocate d by the Ministry of Finance during the 
Eleventh Plan.  The aforesaid allocation was reduced to Rs.  2572.60 crore 
while framing EFC Memo.  Out of Rs.  2572.60 crore, the Cabinet Committee’s 
approval could be obtained for only Rs.  978.52 crore and that to o in 
February, 2009 whereas Eleventh Plan commenced on 1 April, 2007.  Out of 
this, Rs.  628.66 crore was for IT Project Phase -I, Rs.  210.86 crore was for 
Automatic Mail Processing Centres and the remaining 139 crore was for 
Project Arrow.  Due to late ap provals of the schemes, there were huge gaps 
between the projected outlay, allocation made at BE Stage, RE Stage and the 
actual expenditure during each of the year.  Out of total allocation of                     
Rs.  2572.60 crore Rs.  446.47 could only b e utilized during first three years of 
the Eleventh Plan, the percentage utilization being just Rs.  17.35 per cent.  
The Committee have consistently been raising serious concern over the 
whole planning process in the Reports on Demands for Grants of the l ast 
three years.  In spite of that the approval of the various programmes is being 
badly delayed resulting into huge shortfall s in the financial as well as physical 

 
achievements, particularly the IT Induction Programme of the Department.  
The Committee dis approve the way the schemes are being proposed and 
approvals made whereby almost full three years of the Plan were lost in 
getting approvals.  Even when the fourth year of the Plan is going to expire 
approvals for the substantial allocation for Phase -II ar e still awaited.  The 
Committee again emphasize that the Department need to relook its 
procedure for getting approvals for the different schemes and a specific time 
limit for getting approval at each of the stage should be fixed.  Since the 
approvals for P hase-I are now in place, the Committee exhort the 
Department to take all the initiatives so that the allocations provided are 
meaningfully utilized. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Financial and physical achievements under IT Project Phase-I  
 
 From the data made available by the Department, the Committee note that 
there are huge shortfall in financial and physical achievements during each 
year of the Eleventh Plan under different programmes of IT Induction.  The 
major part of the allocation is made for computeriza tion and networking at 
BE stage.  During the year 2008 -09, Rs.  240  crore were allocated for the 
aforesaid programme.  The allocation was reduced to Rs.  142.50 crore at RE 
stage.  The Department could not ensure full utilization of even the reduced 
outlay and there was shortfall of Rs.  4.77 crore.  Similarly, during the year 
2009-10 even when the major approvals were in place, the allocation at BE 
stage was Rs.  255 crore which was reduced to Rs.  118.01 crore at RE stage.  
The actual expenditure during t he year 2009 -10 has been indicated as                  
Rs. 152.70 crore.  Similarly, huge reduction at RE Stage under the other 
Programmes of IT Induction like Upgradation and Modernization of Software 
Centre at Postal Training Centre, Annual Maintenance C ontract, Consultancy 
for Comprehensive Technology Plan and Strategy, Upgradation and 
Modernization of Postal Accounts Offices, Computerisation of Administrative 
Offices and Project Management Unit was made.  With regard to physical 
achievements, the Commit tee again note the huge shortfalls.  Out of the 
target of computerisation of 5,143 Double -handed Post Offices, the 
achievement was 2920 Post Offices.  In case of Single -handed Post Offices the 
achievement was further worse.  Out of the target of 11497 Post  Offices, the 
achievement was just 554 Post Offices.  So far as supply of computers to 
Divisional Sub-Post Offices is concerned, the achievement was just 156 out of 
the target of 305.  Even where the computerisation had been done, the 
electronic linkages c ould not be completed.  The reasons in this regard as 
indicated by the Department are that the computerization which has been 
implemented till date focused on supply of hardware to bigger Post Offices in 
a LAN (Local Area Network).  The major software for postal operations 
(Meghdoot) and for Banking operations (Sanchay Post) were of standalone 
mode working within the Post Offices in a LAN connectivity.    The Committee 
conclude from the aforesaid scenario that there are serious problems in 
implementation of  various IT Projects.  The Department has tried to justify 

 
the shortfalls by stating that approvals were in place only in the year 2009 i.e. 
after passing of almost three years of the Eleventh Plan.  On one hand, it has 
been stated that due to inadequate a llocation during Eleventh Plan, there 
were shortfall in achievement of targets.  On the other hand, the allocation 
made are being reduced at RE stage and there is still under spending during 
each of the year as explained above.  With the present pace of IT  Induction 
Programme, the Committee feel that it would take more decades to get the 
100 per cent Post Offices computerized.  While expressing serious concern 
over this, the Committee exhort the Department to take all the initiatives so 
that at least now pr ogress are made in various activities related to IT 
Induction in Postal Operations.   
 (Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Replies of the Government 
11. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
(i)     Initially  Rs. 2700 crore were  allocated for Technology Upgradation of 
Post Offices   for the entire Eleventh Plan.  However, while framing the EFC 
memo, the requirement of funds was restricted at Rs. 2505.86 crore and 
further EFC on Project Arrow was approved for Rs. 225 crore. 
 
(ii) The scheme relating to setting up of Automated Mail Processing 
Centres (AMPCs) was approved by Hon’ble Minister of Finance on 19 -1-2010.  
The delay in implementati on of the spill over (from the Ten th Plan) 
component of the scheme occurred due to the decisi on of the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) to re -process the case.  Orders have been placed to 
the vendor concerned for supply, installation and commissioning of sorting 
machines in Delhi and Kolkata.  The process for finalization of the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for the proposal to set up AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, 
Bangalore and Hyderabad has also been initiated.   
 
( Reply to Recommendation No. 7) 
 
(i) IT Project Phase-I 
 
An outlay of Rs. 628.66 crore was made for the Department for covering 5143 
double handed Post Offices during the Phase I covering the period from 2008-
09 and 2009 -10.  On receipt of the approval of Expenditure Finance 
Committee for the Phase –I in the month of January 2009, the Cabinet 
Committee’s approval was obtained in the month of February 2009 and the 
schemes could be implemented in full swing from 2009-10. 
 
 (ii)  Status of computerization of Post Offices up-to 31-03-2010     
 

 
12604 Post Offices computerized up -to March 2010 (839 -HPOs, 6671-Above-
double handed Sub Post Offices,4498 -Double handed Sub Post Offices and 
596-Single  handed Sub Post Offices)  
  
Ministry of Finance has clarified that during the current Financial Year 2010 -
11,expenditure up-to Rs. 150 Crore can be made by the Department of Posts 
from the Plan funds allotted to it  for the activities approved by CCEA as per 
the recommendations EFC I. A total expenditure of Rs. 149.62 crore has been 
incurred on this account till December, 2010. 
 
(iii) The plan  schemes relating to mail operations are at various stages of 
implementation at this stage.  All efforts are being made to achieve the 
physical and financial targets set for these schemes.   
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8) 
 
12. While observing that due to late approvals of the schemes, the re was huge 
shortfall between the projected outlay, allocations made at BE, RE stage and the actual 
expenditure during each of the first three years of Eleventh Plan, t he Committee had 
emphasized that the Department should streamline its procedures for approvals for the 
different schemes and a specific time line be fixed for seeking approvals so that  the 
allocations provided are meaningfully utilized.  However, the Committee are dismayed to 
find that the Department has not ad dressed the issue  raised by the Committee . The 
Action Taken Note has only mentioned about the restrictions of requirement of funds for 
‘Project Arrow’ and the initiati ve taken by the Department for finalization of Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) at Mumbai, 
Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad without furnishing detail of status of utilization of the 
provided outlay. The Committee are also not convinced with the justification given by the 
Department that the  delay in implementation of the spillover (from the Tenth Plan) 
component of the scheme occurred due to the decision of the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) to re -process the case.  The Committee are of the opinion that the 
Department should have expedited the reprocessing of the case and should have pursued 

 
the matter more vigorously with the Expenditure Finance Committee. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation and exhort the Department to address the 
issue more seriously and ensure that projects/schemes are cleared in a time bound 
manner followed by optimal utilisation of outlay provided and achievement of the 
stipulated physical targets. 
 
III. Project Arrow 
 
Recommendation of the Committee (Para No. 13) 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Department of Posts had 
appointed TUV India Posts Limited to conduct audit/customers’ and staff 
satisfaction survey in 50 Project Arrow Phase -I Post Offices to evaluate 
performance of Post Offices in 18 p arameters.  As per the findings of the 
aforesaid survey, there is remarkable improvement in the services offered by 
the Post Offices.  Besides, the average customer satisfaction as well as 
employees’ satisfaction is also good in the aforesaid Post Offices.   The 
Committee have further been informed that the Department has decided to 
conduct external audit for Post Offices under Phase -II and Phase -III as well 
and the Request for Proposal for external audit is under preparation.  The 
Committee appreciate the e fforts being made by the Department to monitor 
the performance of the Post Offices covered under Project Arrow.  The 
Committee emphasize that external audit for Post Offices covered under 
Phase-II and Phase-III should be expedited and the findings communic ated to 
them.  Besides, the Committee also emphasize that the findings of the survey 
which indicate great improvement in the various services should be 
publicized by the Department so that the public at large is aware of the 
efficient services being provid ed by these Post Offices.  This would certainly 
help the Department in increasing their customer base and enhance revenue 
generation of the Post Offices.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
14. The Department in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
 
The proposal for undertaking an external audit by an external agency initially 
was included in EFC Project Arrow Phase -III, but had to be dropped when the 
outlay was restricted from Rs.  887 crore to Rs. 65 crore.  Even during 2010 -
11 it was proposed in the EFC of Project Arrow Phase IV to undertake external 

 
audit. However due to reduction of BE outlay by Ministry of Finance from Rs. 
660 crores  to Rs. 480 crores, no funds could be earmarked for audit hence 
the same could not be taken up during the current financial year. 
 
 
15. The Committee are concerned to note that the Department had to drop their 
proposal to conduct external audit for Post Offices under Phase-I, II and III of project 
‘ARROW’ due to restriction of outlay by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee strongly 
are of the view that there is an urgent need to review the various projects being 
undertaken with the Government funding through various mechanism s like External 
Audit/Surveys by external agencies etc.  In view of this, the Committee strongly 
emphasize to convey their concerns to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission 
and the external audit for the project should be carried out expeditiously.   
 
 The Committee in the earlier recommendation had desired that the findings of  the 
survey done by TUV India Post s Limited  which indicate d remarkable improvement in 
various services offered by Posts should be publicized by the Department so that the 
public at large  is aware of  the efficient services being provided by the Post Offices.  The 
Department in the action taken note has chosen not to respond to such an important 
issue which could have definitely help ed the Department in increasing their customer 
base and enhanc ing revenue generation.  The Committee again emphasize that the 
Department should take action on the recommendation of the Committee and the  
Committee be informed accordingly.  
   
 
  

 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
India Posts is in the process of modernisation to keep pace with the emergence of 
several significant changes that have been brought by liberalization and globalization as 
well as by the demographic shift towards urbanization. As per the Department, 
modernisation of Post Offices means  spreading and strengthening of IT infrastructure, 
modernizing the mail transmission, improving service delivery levels, training of manpower, 
increasing awareness of the people regar ding the services provided by the Post Offices and 
giving  the right ambience to customers . A number of steps have been initiated by India 
Posts since the Eighth Five Year Plan and the Department is quite optimistic that by 
September, 2012, it would be ab le to create a platform for automated delivery of Postal 
Transportation, Financial, and Premium Value Added Services to all the Post Offices in the 
Country.  The  Committee are of the opinion that to achieve   the mission  of modernization 
of Post Offices, technology has to play a vital role by building the last mile infrastructure in 
the rural areas.  In addition to this, India Posts needs to unlock the various obstacles in the 
urban areas. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt at length h ow far 
India Posts has been able to achieve the objectives of being a technology -enabled service 
covering urban, rural and remote areas, increased market share and revenue, improved 
service delivery as well as motivating and improving the skills of the workforce. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
(i) The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  approved on 26.08.2010  the proposal 
of the Department for the IT modernization project (Phase -II) for computersation and 
networking of all the departmental post offices and all branch post offices, establishment of 
data centre and disaster recovery centre and development of integrated scalable modular 
software enabling  the Department of Posts to achieve the mission of modernization of Post 
Offices by induction of technolog y  and  to achieve the objectives of being a technology 
enabled service covering urban, rural and remote areas increased market share and 
revenue, improved service delivery as well as motivating and improving the skills of the 
workforce.  The Project is expected to be completed by September 2012. 
 
(ii) Under this project there is a proposal to provide an appropriate rural ICT device to 
each Branch Post Office through which the Branch Postmaster can access MGNREGS muster 
roll to be paid through Branch Post O ffices to the MGNREGS wage earners. Postal Life 
Insurance/Rural Postal Life Insurance operations will also be computerised to ensure better 
after sales service to customers. 
 
(iii)  The Department of Posts has undertaken new initiatives as part of the 11 th Plan to 
improve the quality of mail operations, which include a proposal to set up automated mail 
processing centres, restructuring of the existing mail network, carriage of mail through a 

 
dedicated freighter aircraft in the NE Region, creation of a Natio nal Address Data Base 
Management System, mechanization of mail delivery etc. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
Overview of Modernisation of Post Offices from Eighth to Eleventh Five Year Plan (upto 
2009-10) 
 
 The Modernisation of Post Offices took its root during the Eighth Five Year Plan with 
the initiation of computerisation in the Post Offices in a limited way and continued in the 
Ninth Fiv e Year Plan with the induction of ‘Meghdoot’ and ‘Sanchay Post’ software for 
postal and banking operations. With the induction of IT in its modernisation vision, the 
Department has intensified its efforts during the Tenth and Eleventh Plan. However, the 
analysis of the progress made by India Posts with regard to its vision of having technology 
enabled Post Offices reveals several areas of concern. The Committee note that over the 
years, India Posts has not been able to optimally achieve its financial and ph ysical targets. 
This observation can be substantiated by the fact that during Eighth and Ninth Plans the 
financial achievement was 68.70 and 75.14 per cent respectively. The trend of 
underutilization of Outlay continued during the Tenth Plan too, as it was  again 68.01 per 
cent and during the Eleventh Plan (upto 2009 -10) it was 61.70 per cent. In terms of physical 
achievement too, the Department under -performed.  During Eighth Plan, the Department 
could not supply 2340 MPCMs. Similarly under achievement has been witnessed in case of 
computerisation of accounting and inventory function –MIS (at Circles).  In case of 
procurement of Mail Motor Service Vans, the achievement was only 13 out of the target of 
procuring 19 vans. Underachievement of the physical target s continued during Ninth Plan 
also as out of 1730  targeted ESMOs, only 282 ESMOs could be installed. In Tenth Plan, 
underachievement is seen under -performance relating to  providing computerisation 
facilities to 100 Divisional Offices. The trend of undera chievement of physical targets 
persisted even in Eleventh Plan (upto 2009 -10) as the Department could not extend the 
instant money order service in the targeted 3621 Post Offices. In case of IT induction, the 
achievement could be made only in 6233 Post Off ices out of a physical target of 11670 Post 
Offices. From the foregoing, the Committee cannot but conclude that a lot needs to be 
done by the Department in its mission to modernize its Post Offices. In this regard, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the  Department besides fulfilling its Universal Service 
Obligation to provide basic facilities throughout the country at an affordable price, the 
foremost task before them is to have inter -connectivity of its Post Offices and this can only 
be achieved if all the Post offices in the country are computerized. However, with the trend 
of under performance of the Department both financially and physically over the years, 
there are big challenges for the Department especially taking into account the increasing 
penetration by private sectors into logistic and parcel delivery as well as reduction in the 
dependence of the people on communication services of India Posts with the emerging 
technological changes brought by e -mail, mobile telephony etc. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should conduct a SWOT (Strength, 
Weaknesses, Opportunity and Threats) analysis to identify the  Department’s internal 

 
strength and weaknesses and explore the opportunities and threats facing the Department 
externally an d take corrective measures accordingly. The Committee feel that the 
Department should use its advantage of having a wider outreach to capture the market 
throughout the country. The Committee feel that the absence of a comprehensive IT 
network covering all the Post Offices would entail non -fulfillment of its automation plan 
which in turn would affect the service delivery system. Therefore, the Committee 
emphasize that the speedy electronic linkages of all the Post Offices should be taken up by 
the Department at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
(i) Department is in the process of issuing an RFP for Network Integrator for providing 
network connectivity to all the Departmental Post Offices.  The connectivity will be given 
through various modals lik e MPLS, Broadband, leased line etc. In case of the approximately 
1,30,000 Extra Departmental Post Offices, Department has decided to provide Rural 
Handheld Devices which will have connectivity through Broadband, GPRS, WIFI etc 
depending on the availability . The Rural ICT solution will also be capable of offline 
transaction where on -line connectivity is not possible with facility for uploading data from 
nearest Departmental Post office having connectivity. The networking is expected to be 
completed by September 2012. 
 
(ii) The department could procure only 13 out of the target of 19 mail motor service 
vans during the 8 th Five Year Plan due to the ban imposed on procurement of new vehicles 
by the Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The Department had to approach Ministry of 
Finance every time for relaxation in this regard.  However, the Department has augmented 
its fleet of MMS vehicles during the subsequent Plans after obtaining necessary approvals 
from Ministry of Finance and has procured 50 vehicles during the current Plan upto 2009 -
10. 
 
(iii) With a view to overcome the challenges posed by the private players in the  mail 
market, the Department has undertaken new initiatives to improve the quality of mail 
related services.  It has also initiated a project wherein the existing mail network is being 
optimized, processes in mail operations are being standardized and an e ffective 
performance monitoring mechanism is being developed.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated  4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
IT Project Phase II 
 
 The Committee note that the Department has ambitious plans under IT project 
Phase II which envisages building up of a comprehensive IT solution for all the operations 
viz postal banking insurance and retail operations.  The project objectives as informed t o 
the Committee are Robust IT solution including infrastructure and applications, multiple 
channels of access – POS ICT Call centres, web mobile, Integrated customer support, High 

 
service delivery standards, Technology platform for inducting new services a nd products.  In 
this connection, the Department has proposed an overall outlay of Rs.  1877.20 crore to be 
incurred in the financial years 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 2012 -13 (upto September, 2010). As 
regards the status of approval of EFC phase II,  the Committ ee have been informed that the 
proposal for IT project phase II was recommended by EFC on 28 June, 2010 and is under 
process for obtaining approval of the competent authority.  The detailed information 
provided by the Department further indicates that Department of Expenditure and Planning 
Commission recommended for scaling down the proposal to the extent of availability of 
funds and the Department was advised to opt for the outsourced model for some of the 
components.  As such the total outlay has been sca led down to Rs.  187720 crore and the 
project has been phased to be rolled out in the financial year 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 2012 -
13. The year  2010 -11 is the fourth year of the Eleventh Plan and half of the year has 
already passed and the Department is still  to obtain the approvals for the Phase II.  Further 
Phase II is in continuation of the phase I and envisages computerization of all the Post 
Offices in the country.  Various modernized services like mobile banking integrated 
customer support ATM facility e tc. can only be provided when there is complete 
networking of the Post Offices.  In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that 
earnest action should be taken to complete the computerization process and make the 
computers broad band enabled so that  the modernized facility could be provided to the 
customers as envisaged under phase II of the project.  All the procedural difficulties should 
be sorted out with the various Ministries so that the approval of phase II are in place and 
the programme is implemented with full swing. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  has on 26.08.2010 approved the 
proposal of the Department for the IT modernization project (Phase -II) for computerisation 
and networking of the remaining departmental post offices and all branch post offices, 
establishment of data centre and disaster recovery centre and development of integrated 
scalable modular software.  Hardware has been supplied to the Departmental Post offices 
up to double handed level . It is proposed to computerize the Departmental Single handed 
Post Offices during the current financial year. 3 RFPs namely for Rural ICT SI, Financial 
Services SI and Change management Vendor have been since issued.  The vendors will be 
responsible for implementation of the Project by September 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated  4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
Establishment of Project Management Unit 
 
 The Committee  have been informed that a Project Management Unit (PMU) has 
been established. The PMU would ensure availability of skills for strategic planning to 

 
conceptualize the mission, project development, project management, project finance etc. 
Besides, three Com mittee viz. Steering Committee, Working Committee and Functional 
Teams have been formed to monitor the project. The Committee have also been informed 
that the Steering Committee meets once in a month while the Working Committee meets 
once in a week. The Fu nctional Teams meet at least once in a week. While appreciating the 
aforesaid mechanisms to monitor the implementation of Phase -II of the project, the 
Committee strongly emphasize that various procedural hurdles should be addressed so that 
clearance for IT  Project Phase -II are obtained and project is implemented under the 
supervision of various monitoring mechanisms. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  has on 26.08.2010 approved the 
proposal of the Department for the IT modernization project (Phase -II) for computerisation 
and networking of the remaining departmental post offices and all branch post offices, 
establishment of data centre and disaster recovery centre and development of integrated 
scalable modular soft ware.  Hardware has been supplied to the Departmental Post offices 
up to double handed level. It is proposed to computerize the Departmental Single handed 
Post Offices during the current financial year. 3 RFPs namely for Rural ICT SI, Financial 
Services SI and Change management Vendor have been since issued.  The vendors will be 
responsible for implementation of the Project by September 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
Project Arrow 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts has launched a scheme ‘Project 
Arrow’ in April, 2008 with the objective of providing a new outlook to Post Offices by 
modernizing exterior and interior designs of the Post Offices, upgrading the infrastructur e 
and enhancing core operations including IT enabled services and processes.  No separate 
allocation was made for Project Arrow.  The Department spent  Rs.  151 crore on 1000 Post 
Offices i.e. 50 Post Offices in Phase -I, 450 Post Offices in Phase -II and 50 0 Post Offices in 
Phase-III.  During the year 2010 -11 another 500 Post Offices were identified to be covered 
under Project Arrow for which Rs.  86 crore were approved.  However, Rs.  60 crore were 
allocated and as such funds have been released for moderniz ing only 371 Post Offices in 
Phase-IV.  The Department has also informed that funds to the tune of Rs.  24 crore have 
been sought for first batch of Supplementary Grants and on the receipt of the same, the 
remaining 129 Post Offices would be covered.  As r egards, the plans of the Department 
during Eleventh Plan, the Committee have been informed that a total of 4,500 Post Offices 
were to be covered during Eleventh Plan with the outlay of Rs.  887 crore.  The Department 
was able to spend Rs.  325 crore and for the remaining 562 crore, the Department has taken 
up the matter with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for further 
allocation of outlay.  Further, the Committee have been informed that the Project Arrow 
has a big impact and revenue has actually gone up in 1,500 Post Offices covered by the 
Project Arrow.  The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for not allocating 

 
outlay for the ‘Project Arrow’ particularly when the Finance Minister in the Budget Speech 
(2009-10) has assured tha t the ‘Project Arrow’ would receive full Government support. 
Moreover, there has been huge shortfall in expenditure earmarked for IT -Induction projects 
of the Department due to late approval of the programme. As such, the outlay approved for 
the Eleventh P lan could have been earmarked for ‘Project Arrow’ which according to the 
Department has been a success.  As such, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
initial plan of extending facilities by Project Arrow to 4,500 Post Offices should be 
maintained and the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission should be pursued to give 
the desired allocation for the Programme. The concerns of the Committee in this regard 
should be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.   
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Department with the intention to cover 4500 post offices under Project Arrow 
during XI Plan had taken up the matter with the Planning Commission and also Ministry of 
Finance for providing additional funds to the extent of    562 crores over and above the XI 
Plan outlay   vide D.O. letter  No. 4 -8/2008-CP dated 31st October, 2008 addressed by  
Secretary (Posts) to Secretary, Planning Commission. In response Planning Commission had 
intimated that efforts will be made to provide the additionality at the RE stage of the 
Annual Plan 2009 -10 vide letter No. M -13040/2008-C&A/DCH/11/08/CD-650 dated 26th 
December, 2008 received from Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, New Delhi 
addressed to the Hon’ble MOS(C&IT).   
 
The  issue was als o taken up with the Ministry of Finance requesting for providing 
additional funds of   562 crores under the plan activity Project Arrow Phase III over and 
above the existing plan fund allocation vide letter No. 4 -8/2008-CP dated 30th October, 
2008 address ed to Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance by Secretary (Posts) 
(Annexure – III).  In response Ministry of Finance has intimated that due to fiscal situation 
and  increased expenditure under salaries and pensions and  due to revision of pay 
consequent on implementation of S ixth Pay Commission has added to physical burden 
hence it will not be possible to provide any additional allocation in the current financial year 
vide D.O letter No. 12/9/PF.II/2008 dated 10th November, 2008 received from Secretar y, 
Ministry of Finance  addressed to Secretary (Posts). 
 
Apart from this additional funds to the extent of   512 crore was also sought for 
covering 4500 post offices during the Mid Term Appraisal of Eleventh Plan from Planning 
Commission.  However, Planning Commission in its Mid Term Appraisal memo has not indicated 
anything about providing additional funds for this activity.  Due to all above constraints 
Department had to scale down the proposal to cover 4500 post offices under Project Arrow and 
restrict it to the extent of funds available.   Thus only 500 and 530 post offices could be covered 
in 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively.  Further due to restriction of BE outlay at   800 crores for 
2011-12 and priority being given to the Induction of Technology in Post offices in 2011 -12  no 
funds could be earmarked for this activity.    However, the concern of the Committee has been 
taken note of and the matter is being taken up wit h Ministry of Finance and Planning 
Commission. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 


 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
Mail Operation 
Automatic Mail Processing Centres 
 
 The Committee note that the Department as an initiative to modernize mail 
operations proposes to set up Automatic Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) during the 
Eleventh Plan.  While it is possible to sort only 100 articles per hour manually, the AMPCs 
can sort 36,000 articles per hour.  In this direction, the Department has initiated the process 
for setting up of AMPCs in Delhi and Kolkata and orders have been placed to the selected 
vendors for supply, installation and commissioning of the AMPCs in these citie s.  Further 
action has also been initiated for preparation of Request for Proposals with respect to 
setting up of AMPCs in four other metro cities.  The Committee observe that setting up of 
AMPCs would help in quicker delivery of mail articles in the count ry.  Moreover, setting up 
of these Processing Centres is urgently required keeping in view the fact that private sector 
has entered into the domain of mail services in the country and the Department has to 
provide competitive service to the customers  As s uch, the Committee strongly recommend 
that all the efforts should be made to set up these Centres expeditiously in various metro 
cities.     
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The department has expedited the activities relating to setting up of AMPCs in the  
metro cities.  The site preparation at Delhi and Kolkata for the installation of sorting 
machines  is likely to be completed in the next 3 to 4 months and the machines are 
expected to be commissioned in the first quarter of financial year 2011 -12.   The process for 
finalization of the RFP for setting up of AMPCs at four other metro cities has also been 
initiated.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
Redesigning of Pin Code 
 
 The Department had introduced six digit numeric code way back in 15 th August, 
1972. The first three digits denote the sorting unit, while the last three digits denote the 
delivery Post Office.  Now, it has been decided that Pin Code should be redesigned to be 
able to take care of present and future requirements of digits ad dressing, taking advantage 
of the current and evolving technologies. As such it has been decided to re -design the Pin 
code and introduce Pin Plus, a numeric code combining 6 digits of the current Pin Code with 
an additional 5 digit – the first 2 digits wou ld denote the Postman beat and the other 3 
digits would denote delivery point on the beat. The Committee have further been informed 
that the Postman Beat Code has already been implemented in mails being posted by certain 
large mailers like telephones. A further improvement on this 6+2 digit Pin Code is the 6+2+3 
Pin Code. The last 3 digits is the Delivery Point Identification (DPI). This scheme has not yet 
been implemented since it is felt that at this stage it should be implemented only after the 

 
6+2 pin plus gets accepted. The Committee find that it has been mentioned in the Outcome 
Budget 2010 -11 that the Department has embarked upon a comprehensive plan for 
popularization of Pin Codes through various media during the Eleventh Plan period to 
improve delivery efficiency by redesigning the PIN Code for specific delivery beats. In this 
regard, the Committee would like to be apprised about the initiatives taken by the 
Department for popularization of the redesigned Pin Code. The Committee would also like 
to be apprised about the feedback of implementation of the Postman Beat Code based on 
which 8 digit Pin Code would be fully operational by the Department. The Committee hope 
that the aforesaid initiatives would certainly improve the delivery of mails.  
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 In order to popularize the usage of Pin codes, the Department had launched an 
awareness campaign through the print and electronic media across the country during the 
current Plan about the advantages and critical role of Pin code s in faster processing and 
delivery of mail.  The Department has also published an All India Pin Code Directory and has 
released the Compact Disk (CD) version of the same as well.  The directory is available for 
sale to the public at selected post offices across the country.  The postman beat codes (6 + 
2) have been incorporated in the address data base that has been developed for use by the 
automated sorting machines at Delhi & Kolkata.  Using the beat code data, the sorting 
machines would be able to sort mail upto the beat level at mail processing centres, which in 
turn, would expedite mail delivery.  The use of postman beat code is also being popularized 
through advertisements. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
Mail Business Centres 
 
 The Committee note that the initiative taken by the Department to provide efficient 
mail business services under one roof was the setting up of Mail Business C entres. At 
present 142 Mail Business Centres are functioning in the country. During Eleventh Plan, the 
Department proposed to implement a plan scheme relating to Setting up of Mail Business 
Centres that involved redesign of the existing Mail Business Centr es/Mail Offices and 
optimizing the countrywide mail network of the Department which includes 412 mail 
offices. Under the aforesaid scheme the existing MBCs as well as new MBCs are envisaged 
to be restructured with a view to streamline core mail operations and develop them as 
integrated mail business entities. During the year 2009 -10, the physical target for setting up 
of 150 MBCs was reduced to 50 only. The Department in this regard has informed the 
Committee that now the process for selection of consultant  for the project has been 
completed and the roadmap for implementation of the project is being prepared with the 
help of the consultant. The Committee express serious concern over the way important 
schemes are  being implemented by the Department. Even whe n the scheme related to 
Mail Business Centre is operational and the three and a half precious year of Eleventh Plan 
have already been over, the Department now has decided for selection of the consultant 

 
for the project. The Committee are of the firm view t hat the process of consultation should 
be undertaken before the project is started and not in the middle of the implementation of 
the project. Since personal communication is fast being replaced by B2B and B2C segment 
of mail, and where parcel and logistic s are new areas of growth, the Committee emphasize 
that all the initiatives should be taken  for the targeted setting up of Mail Business Centres 
as well as restructuring of the existing MBCs. The concrete action taken in this regard 
should be communicated to the Committee. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The proposal relating to the plan scheme on “Setting up of Mail Business Centres” 
had a component pertaining to selection of a Consultant for the proposed restructuring of 
the existing mail network.  After approval of the scheme, the process for selection of the 
Consultant was initiated and the same was completed in March 2010.  Accordingly, the Mail 
Network Optimization Project for restructuring of the existing mail network was launched in 
the six metro cities during March – May 2010.  The project was late r extended to seven 
more cities.  As part of the project, the processes relating to Speed Post operations have 
been examined afresh, streamlined and standardized and the transit time (between 
booking and delivery) between cities currently covered under the  project is being regularly 
monitored. Subsequent to restructuring of the erstwhile operational network of Speed 
Post, 89 hubs have been made operational. A performance management mechanism has 
also been developed to monitor the performance of the cities.  The Track and Trace system 
for Speed Post has also been improved.  The project is being extended to all major cities 
across the country for the purpose of operational monitoring relating to Speed Post.  A plan 
has also been drawn for optimization of the m ail network relating to the first class mail 
(unregistered and registered) and streamlining of the processes therein.   
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
Modernisation of Financial Services 
 
 The Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) with 206 million savings account (as on 
31.03.2009) and having 100 years of experience in handling savings bank work is the oldest 
and largest banking institution in the country. Inspite of un -paralelled reach of Post Bank as 
compared to any other banking agency in the country, the preference of the customer 
today particularly in urban areas is commercial banks as acknowledged by the Department. 
Better connectivity, ne twork for ATM, liquidity, dematerialization, market determined 
interest rates and availability of credit are the main factors for choice of commercial banks 
as compared to posts. Inspite of the various initiatives taken by the Department with the 
huge allo cations made out of government funding the IT -Induction programme has not 
been to the desired level. The detailed analysis of which have been given in the previous 
part of the Report. While the Department has the network of 1.5 lakh Post Offices only 
12571 Post Offices have the computerized banking system using ‘Sanchay Post Software’ 

 
and are working in local area network based technology. The scheme Core Banking Solution 
CBS) i.e. ‘Anytime Anywhere Banking’ for post office small savings have been included in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. Technology consultant have submitted the Feasibility Report for 
implementation of Core Banking Solutions. As per the Report, India Posts require an 
integrated Core Banking Solution which would enable real time processing cap ability, multi 
channel integration, flexibility to launch  new products and services, interface with internal 
and external applications, strong MIS capability and superior data management and 
security functionalities. The Department propose to provide Core  Banking Solution initially 
in 4000 identified branches which would gradually extend to cover the entire network 
through various technology led solutions -offline capabilities, multiple channels, mobile 
hand held devices (rural ICT), cards, and centralized data centre. The Department is having 
detailed discussions and interactions with various commercial banks and technology 
providers such as Infosys Technology, Oracle and Tata Communications for implementation 
of Core Banking Solution. The Committee conclud e from the aforesaid position that now 
when more than three and a half years of the Plan period have already been passed, there 
is no headway on the scheme. The Committee again emphasize that computerization and 
networking of Post Offices is the prerequisi te for providing Core Banking Solutions which 
would provide the customer various modern facilities as at present are available to the 
customer from the commercial banks and other private sector banks and organizations. As 
such, the Department has to work on a mission mode to ensure the computerization of Post 
Offices followed by implementation of Core Banking Solution. The consultations with the 
various commercial banks and other technology providers should follow the concrete action 
on the part of the Depa rtment so that the Core Banking Solutions become reality in the 
Eleventh Plan. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Department of Posts in consultation with Technology consultants proposes to 
implement Anywhere Anytime banking in all Departmental offices. Towards implementing 
Core Banking Solutions, the Department has issued a RFP on 21.12.2010 for selection of 
Financial Services System Integrator.  The Financial Services System Integrator will provide 
trunkey solution for implementation of Core Banking Sol utions in all Departmental offices 
by September, 2012. The RFP for Financial Services System Integrator includes in its scope 
of work deployment of CBS software with alternate delivery channels, deploying ATM 
switch, setting up ATMs, setting up Circle Proc essing Centers, data migration to CBS and 
training. The scope of work includes installation of 1000 ATMs covering all Head Post 
Offices and some major SOs. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
  

 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
Accrual Accounting System 
 
 As informed by the Department, the Twelfth Finance Commission had 
recommended an operational framework and a detailed roadmap for its implementation.  
Accordingly, the Department of Posts has signed an MoU on 25 th June, 2009 with ICAI -ARF 
in two identified Head Post Offices in New Delhi viz. New Delhi Head Office and Naraina 
Industrial Estate Head Office.  The Committee have also been informed that Comprehensive 
Scope Ev aluation Report (CSER) submitted by the ICAI -ARF on Pilot Study is under 
consideration with the Department.  The Committee feel that the introduction of Accrual 
Accounting System is one of the basic requirements for the introduction of Core Banking 
Solution and since the Department has an ambitious plan of introducing it in 4000 identified 
Post Offices in the Eleventh Plan, the Committee expect that the Comprehensive Scope 
Evaluation Report (CSER) submitted by the ICAI -ARF on Pilot Study are examined 
expeditiously so that Accrual Accounting System could be introduced in the various Post 
Offices in the country at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Comprehensive Scope Evaluation Report (CSER) submitted by ICAI-ARF on Pilot Study 
on implementation of Accrual Accounting System has since been approved by the 
Department of Posts. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
Modernization in Service Delivery Levels with regard to financial services  
 
 The Committee observe that various initiatives have been taken by the Department 
to facilitate expeditious remittance of money. Such initiatives include introduction of i -MO 
facility in 6361 Post Offices under which a person can send money from  Rs.  1000 to Rs.  
50,000 in one transaction, introduction of e -MO which has been introduced w.e.f. 
10.10.2008 and it facilitates remittance of MOs electronically. The limitation of this fa cility 
that Post Offices should have connectivity by WAN/Broadband. Another facility is 
introduction of MO -Videsh in Eurogiro network is used by India Posts under the name MO 
Videsh for outward and inwards international money remittance. Operation of International 
Money Transfer Service is another service provided by Posts in association with a 
multinational  company – Western Union Financial Services International which provide the 
customer the facility of receiving remittances from 205 countries and terri tories on a real 
time basis. The Committee note that all these initiatives are steps in the right direction. 
However, these facilities need to be expanded to more number of Post Offices so that these 
facilities are available in every nook and corner of the  country. The Department should 
prepare the concrete proposals in this regard.  
 
 

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
  The number of iMO sites has been expanded to over 9000 post offices. 
 
 Expansion of IMTS depends on the assessment of business by Western Un ion in 
consultation with India Post. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
Electronic Clearance Service 
 
The Committee find that Electronic Clearance Service is in operation at 15 centres 
where Reserve Bank of India manages clearing Houses and 50 other centres where State 
Bank of India, Punjab National bank etc. are managing Electronic Clearance Service on 
behalf of Reserve bank of India. Elec tronic Clearing Service is being offered in the 
Department of Posts at all the 15 locations of Reserve Bank of India and 21 locations of 
State Bank of India in connection with payment of monthly interest under ‘Monthly Income 
Scheme’ (MIS). The Committee f urther note that the aforesaid facility is available to only 5 
lakh depositors whereas the customer base is 22 crore accounts. The Committee exhort the 
Department to take the desired action so that the Electronic Clearance Service is available 
to every depositor of Posts in the country. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Department of Posts is working on introduction of Core Banking Solution in Post 
Office Saving Bank to facilitate all POSB account holders. The project is at advanced stage 
and once the CBS i s introduced, ECS facility will be made available to all POSB account 
holders at all locations identified by RBI and other Nationalized Banks. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
Technological initiatives to make the disbursement of wages under MNREGA effective -
financial inclusion for the unbanked rural masses 
 
 The Committee observed that disbursement of wages to laborers under Mahatama 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA) is being made by Post Offices 
and commercial banks. State Government have been given the option to either use Post 
Offices or the banks for the aforesaid purpose. The Committee find that whereas the 
number of bank branches in the country are 72156 as compared to 1.55 lakh branches of 
Post Offices, the share of banks in this regard is more than the Post Offices. With regard to 
the amount of wages disbursed during the year 2009 -10, the Committee have bee n 

 
informed that out of total amount of Rs. 21625.18 crore, an amount of Rs.  8864.98 crore 
was disbursed through Post Offices and Rs.  1276.02 crore was disbursed through bank 
accounts. The detailed deliberations with the representatives of the Department of Rural 
Department has indicated that there are certain bottlenecks regarding disbursement of 
wages by Posts which include delay in submission of wage list to Post Offices by State 
Government, mistakes in preparation of wage list, problems relating to cle arance of 
cheques, non -availability of rolling funds in every districts, lack of proper security to keep 
wages money, bulk submission of wage list/pay orders at one go etc. Moreover, a study 
done by Dreze and Khera has revealed that payment by banks is bet ter than Post Offices. 
The Secretary, Posts, during the course of deliberations have acknowledged that many 
labourers preferred to use banks rather than Post Offices. Keeping in view the various 
problems being faced in the disbursement of wages under MNREG A, the Committee have 
decided to undertake detailed examination by selecting the subject in this regard. In the 
context of use of technology for the effective disbursement of wages under MNREGA, the 
Committee would like to emphasize that the preference of banks over Post Offices even in 
disbursement of wages under MNREGA is obviously due to effective and fast services 
provided by banks. The detailed analysis of the various aspects related to disbursement of 
wages under MNREGA would be done separately by the  Committee as stated above. Here 
the Committee would like to strongly recommend that the Department should take all the 
initiatives, particularly with the use of latest technology and networking of Post Offices to 
address to the various problems being face d in the disbursement of wages under MNREGA. 
With the reach of Post in every nook and corner of the country, great opportunities are 
being provided by the Government. The Department has to act professionally and use this 
opportunity by opening Post account s of BPL persons. Besides, technological intervention, 
better services can be provided by helping the customers in rural areas in opening the 
accounts like filling of various forms, completing the formalities of surety etc. Moreover, 
coordination with State Governments and local bodies particularly in rural areas will further 
help Posts in addressing the various bottlenecks being faced in disbursement of wages. The 
Department has to take all the initiatives for effective disbursement of wages under 
MNREGA s o that the State Government opt for Posts for disbursement of wages under 
MNREGA. The desired initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 Under the IT project of Department of Posts, it is proposed to provide an 
appropriate rural ICT device to each Branch Post Office through which the Branch 
Postmaster can access MGNREGS muster roll to be paid through Branch Post Offices to the 
wage earners. 
 
 The Department has issued a RFP for  Rural Service System Integrator (RSI) and an 
EOI for Rural Handheld Devices (RH). 
 
 The RSI will develop a solution for MGNREGS enrolment and wage payment. The 
application will have enablement to connect to the database of Ministry of Rural 
Development/ t he State Government on MGNREGS. The Devices to be supplied to EDBOs 
will have networking through available connectivity like GPRS, Broadband etc. The solution 
will also have enablement for working in offline mode when online is not available with 

 
facility for uploading data from nearest Departmental Post office having connectivity. The 
solution will be fully implemented by September 2012. 
 
 As far as co -ordination with State Government and local bodies is concerned, it is 
submitted that periodical co -ordination meetings are held with State Government 
authorities and remedial measure are taken whenever any inefficiency is noticed in the 
system. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated  4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
Training of Manpower 
 
 With the growth and development of Information Technology, skill based training 
has become a pre -requisite for the success of any organisation.   The Committee note that 
the Department of Posts in o rder to hone the skills of its employees has prepared a 
comprehensive scheme for the Eleventh Plan with an Outlay of Rs.  130.66 crore. The 
scheme include imparting of institutional in service training, technology training, business 
orientation programmes,  capacity building and development of infrastructure. From the 
information provided by the Department, it is understood that the Department has set up 
training centres for officials belonging to Group ‘A’ and other officials such as Group ‘B’ 
Inspectors, P ostal Assistants, Sorting Assistants, Postmasters, Assistant Superintendent of 
Post Offices, Accounts Personnel, etc,.  However, the Committee are constraint to note that 
nothing seem to have been done regarding the training of the Extra Departmental 
Employees or Grameen Dak Sewaks.  The Committee feel that since the Department of 
Posts is embarking on the ambitious project of networking of all its Post Offices in rural 
areas through introduction of Rural ICT, the training of this category of employees is 
inevitable.  
 
The Committee also feel that the Department has a monumental task of providing 
suitable training to its employees to complement with its automation plan for financial 
services viz. proposals of setting up of Core Banking Solution, introduction  of Accrual 
Accounting System, etc.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department needs 
to take all the necessary steps to equip all its employees with the skills necessary for 
matching with the modernisation of its Post Offices. The Committee fe el that enhancing 
and transforming the human resources through training would make the Department more 
customer friendly and techno-savvy.  
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 IT & Modernization program in addition to IT induction will lead to change in 
processes. Almost all categories of staff will be impacted by IT induction. As a part of the IT 
& Modernization program necessary training on the new hardware, software and revised 
processes will be provided. It is also proposed to provide user guides, operating manuals etc 
with actual screen shots for each operation (step by step) for easy understanding by 
trainees and also make it available in regional language and English. Provision for re-training 

 
of employees based on their feedback and level of comfort w ith the system is also 
proposed. 
 
(ii) As a part of the Rural ICT component of IT induction and modernization the Branch 
Post Masters in the country will be trained in usage of devices and the accompanying 
software. This training will adopt “train the trainer” approach wherein officers of the 
Department will be trained to impart training to Branch Post Masters. Technicians are 
proposed to be located at Divisional Head Quarters for a specific duration to support the 
Branch Post Masters after training. Su itable trainings are proposed for various levels on the 
software and process in Core Banking Solutions and the new accounting systems as a part 
of the IT Modernization project. 
 
(iii) As changes will impact a large number of employees Change Management will be an 
integral part of the program to bring all the staff on board so that the new way of working is 
adopted. 
  
(iv) In 2010 -11, 40,000 Branch Post Masters and GDS were covered by training 
programmes to sensitize them to the new developments in the De partment as a part of the 
XI Plan Scheme for HRD. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
  

 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Status of Computerisation of Post Offices 
 
 The process of computerisation or transformation from physical to digital network of 
Post Offices was initiated in Eighth Five Year Plan and as per the Department the ambit of 
computerisation has increased in each of the successive Plans and as on 31 st March, 2010, 
there are a total of 12,604 Departmental Post Offices which have been computerized out of 
the total 25,538 Departmental Post Offices, the percentage of achievement being only 
49.35 per cent.  Most  of the work of Post Offices is carried out by the Extra Departmental 
Post Offices and at present out of total 1,55,035 Post Offices 1,29,497 are Extra 
Departmental Post Offices.  If the number of Extra Departmental Post Offices is also taken 
into consideration, the percentage of computerization of Post Offices comes to just 8.13 per 
cent.  The Committee note that the Department has big plans with regard to enlarging their 
savings and insurance activities.  The Department proposes to set up Post Bank of Ind ia.  
The Committee note that the aforesaid ambitious plans of the Department cannot be 
achieved without networking of the Post Offices.  The Department claims to achieve the 
100 per cent computerization of Post Offices by September, 2012.  With the existin g status 
of computerization the details of which have been given above, the Committee have doubts 
about the achievement of the targets by the stipulated timeframe i. e. by September, 2012.  
The aforesaid apprehension of the Committee is further reinforced by the fact that the 
Department cannot computerize even a single Post Office during the financial year 2009 -10 
as status of computerization of Post Offices remained static during the aforesaid period.  
The Committee cannot but express their unhappiness ove r the status of computerization of 
Post Offices.  The Committee exhort the Department to take the desired initiatives at least 
now so as to step up the pace of computerization of Post Offices in the country.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
   12604 Departmental Post Offices –have been computerized up to 31.03.2010, out of 
the 25,538 Departmental Post Offices as detailed below: 
 
Status of Computerization of Post Offices up-to  31.03.2010 
 
S.No. Category of Post Offices Number 
1 Head Post Offices 839 
2 Above double handed Sub Post Offices 6671 
3 Double handed Sub Post Offices 4498 
4 Single handed Sub Post Offices 596 
 Total 12604 

 
 
Action has been taken for computerization of 1720 Post Offices during the current 
financial year under Plan Scheme of Computerization of Class B (Double handed) Sub Post 
Offices under XI Plan – Project for computerization and networking of Post Offices.  
 
All operations of PLI and RPLI have been computerised. After the procurement of 
proposals from customers, the same are  entered and data is uploaded in the National Data 
Centre being maintained by NIC. Further, all premium collection is also uploaded to th e 
National Data Centre. All claims are sanctioned through National Data Centre itself.  
      
The National Data Centre is repository of all information on PLI/RPLI. It is connected 
to all the Circles, Regional Offices , Divisional Offices and Head Post Off ices and data 
transfer is done through Broadband connectivity amongst  these offices. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
Broadband Connectivity 
 
 From the information provided by the Department, the Committee note that out of 
12,604 Departmental Post Offices computerized so far, the broadband/dial -up connectivity 
could be provided to just 9483 Post Offices i.e. 37.13 per cent.  The detailed information 
provided by the Department further indicates that 1305 locations have been connected 
through 2 Mbps leased line and another 8177 computerized Post Offices are using dial -up 
connectivity.  The Committee observe that the purpose of computerization is achieved only 
when the broadband connectivity is provided.  Moreover, the availability of adequate and 
efficient broadband service is the prerequisite to achieve the objective of networking of 
Post Offices.  The coverage of only 37.13 per cent of the Departmental Post Offices in the 
country having broadband connectivity is not a satisfactory position.  Moreover, the 
aforesaid position does not cover the Extra Departmental Post Offices which a re handling 
the major work of the Posts as indicated in the earlier part of the Report.  The Committee 
again emphasize that the challenges before the Department are going to increase  manifold 
with the rapidly evolving technology and to face this, the Depa rtment has to put in place an 
effective networking system by having electronic linkages of all the Post Offices in the 
country and this can only be achieved by providing the broadband connectivity to all the 
Post Offices.  Otherwise, the vision of the Depa rtment such as ‘Anywhere, Anytime 
Banking’, Speed -Net Service, Upgradation of Customer Call Centres, Project Arrow etc. 
would always remain a mission yet to see their successful and complete implementation.  In 
view of this, the Committee strongly recommen d to take all the initiatives so that the 
broadband connectivity is provided to all the computerized Post Offices. 
 
 

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 (i) Broad band connectivity has been provided in 10530-computrized Post Offices out of 
total 12604 computerized Post offices up-to  31-03-2010.  
 
(ii) Department is in the process of issuing RFP for a Network Integrator for providing 
network connectivity to the Departmental Post Offices to be completed by  September, 
2012.  The connectivity will be given throu gh various modes like MPLs, Broadband, leased 
line etc.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated  4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The analysis of Circle-wise data with regard to computerization as well as broadband 
connectivity of Post Offices as furnished by the Department indicates that achievement 
with regard to computerization is outstanding in Assam, North -East and Kerala.   In Assam, 
the achievement is 100 per cent, in North -East and Kerala the achievement is 90.45 and 
71.19 per cent respectively.  The national average in this regard is 49.35 per cent.  The 
under-performing Circles where the achievement is lesser than the averag e are Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  With regard to broadband 
connectivity, the data furnished by the Department indicates that connectivity is maximum 
in Delhi i.e. 70.83 per cent followed by Kerala, Haryana, Gujarat an d Tamil Nadu which have 
54.42, 51.33, 50.99 and 51.06 per cent connectivity respectively.  In all the remaining 
Circles, the connectivity is less than 50 per cent.  It is surprising to note that in Delhi which 
has very good broadband penetration, 30 per cent of Post Offices computerized so far could 
not be provided broadband connectivity.  More disturbing is the fact that Assam and North -
East which have achieved 100 per cent and 90.45 per cent of the computerization have only 
41.09 per cent and 31.34 per ce nt of the broadband connectivity respectively.  As such, the 
purpose of providing 100 per cent computerisation to such Circles is defeated.  From the 
aforesaid position, the Committee conclude that the adequate measures have not been 
taken by the Departmen t to provide broadband connectivity to the computers already 
installed in various Post Offices.  The Committee exhort the Department to take all the 
desired initiatives which include taking up the issue with BSNL i.e. the Government 
telecommunication service provider for providing broadband connectivity to the computers 
in all the Circles.   
Action Taken by the Government 
 
(i) Department is in the process of issuing RFP for a Network Integrator for providing 
network connectivity to the Departmental Post Offices to be completed by  September, 
2012.  The connectivity will be given through various modes like MPLs, Broadband, lease d 
line etc.   

 
 
(ii) Broad band connectivity has been provided in 10530-computrized Post Offices out of 
total 12604 computerized Post offices up-to  31-03-2010. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
IT Induction – Postal Operations during Eleventh Plan 
 
The Committee find that the Department has ambitious plans with regard to 
upgradation of various services viz. Communications Services, Transport Services, Financial 
Services and Value Added Services.  To achieve the objective, Rs.  2700 crore was allocated 
by the Ministry of Finance during the Eleventh Plan.  The aforesaid allo cation was reduced 
to Rs.  2572.60 crore while framing EFC Memo.  Out of Rs.  2572.60 crore, the Cabinet 
Committee’s approval could be obtained for only Rs.  978.52 crore and that too in February, 
2009 whereas Eleventh Plan commenced on 1 April, 2007.  Out of this, Rs.  628.66 crore was 
for IT Project Phase -I, Rs.  210.86 crore was for Automatic Mail Processing Centres and the 
remaining 139.00 crore was for Project Arrow.  Due to late approvals of the schemes, there 
were huge gaps between the projected outl ay, allocation made at BE Stage, RE Stage and 
the actual expenditure during each of the year.  Out of total allocation of Rs.  2572.60 crore 
Rs.  446.47 could only be utilized during first three years of the Eleventh Plan, the 
percentage utilization being just Rs.  17.35 per cent.  The Committee have consistently been 
raising serious concern over the whole planning process in the Reports on Demands for 
Grants of the last three years.  In spite of that the approval of the various programmes is 
being badly de layed resulting into huge shortfall in the financial as well as physical 
achievements, particularly the IT Induction Programme of the Department.  The Committee 
disapprove the way the schemes are being proposed and approvals made whereby almost 
full three years of the Plan were lost in getting approvals.  Even when the fourth year of the 
Plan is going to expire approvals for the substantial allocation for Phase -II are still awaited.  
The Committee again emphasize that the Department need to relook its proce dure for 
getting approvals for the different schemes and a specific time limit for getting approval at 
each of the stage should be fixed.  Since the approvals for Phase -I are now in place, the 
Committee exhort the Department to take all the initiatives so that the allocations provided 
are meaningfully utilized. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
(i)  2700 crore was allocated for Technology Upgradation of Post Offices   for the 
entire eleventh plan.  However, while framing the EFC memo, the requirement of funds was 
restricted at   2505.86 crore and further EFC on Project Arrow was approved for     225 
crore. 
 


 
(ii) The scheme relating to setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) 
was approved by Hon’ble Minister of Finance on 19 -1-2010.  The delay  in implementation 
of the spillover (from the 10 th Plan) component of the scheme occurred due to the decision 
of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to re -process the case.  Orders have been 
placed to the vendor concerned for supply, installation and commissioning of sorting 
machines in Delhi and Kolk ata.  The process for finalization of the Request for Proposal 
(RFP) for the proposal to set up AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad has 
also been initiated.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
Financial and physical achievements under IT Project Phase-I  
 
 From the data made available by the Department, the Committee note that there 
are huge shortfall in financial and physical achievements during each year of the Eleventh 
Plan under different programmes of IT Induction.  The major part of the allocation is m ade 
for computerization and networking at BE stage.  During the year 2008 -09, Rs.  240 were 
allocated for the aforesaid programme.  The allocation was reduced to Rs.  142.50 crore at 
RE stage.  The Department could not ensure full utilization of even the r educed outlay and 
there was shortfall of Rs.  4.77 crore.  Similarly, during the year 2009 -10 even when the 
major approvals were in place, the allocation at BE stage was Rs.  255 crore which was 
reduced to Rs.  118.01 crore at RE stage.  The actual expendi ture during the year 2009 -10 
has been indicated as Rs.  152.70 crore.  Similarly, huge reduction at RE Stage under the 
other Programmes of IT Induction like Upgradation and Modernization of Software Centre 
at Postal Training Centre, Annual Maintenance Cont ract, Consultancy for Comprehensive 
Technology Plan and Strategy, Upgradation and Modernization of Postal Accounts Offices, 
Computerisation of Administrative Offices and Project Management Unit was made.  With 
regard to physical achievements, the Committee  again note the huge shortfalls.  Out of the 
target of computerisation of 5,143 Double -handed Post Offices, the achievement was 2920 
Post Offices.  In case of Single-handed Post Offices the achievement was further worse.  Out 
of the target of 11497 Post Of fices, the achievement was just 554 Post Offices.  So far as 
supply of computers to Divisional Sub -Post Offices is concerned, the achievement was just 
156 out of the target of 305.  Even where the computerisation had been done, the 
electronic linkages coul d not be completed.  The reasons in this regard as indicated by the 
Department are that the computerization which has been implemented till date focused on 
supply of hardware to bigger Post Offices in a LAN (Local Area Network).  The major 
software for postal operations (Meghdoot) and for Banking operations (Sanchay Post) were 
of standalone mode working within the Post Offices in a LAN connectivity.    The Committee 
conclude from the aforesaid scenario that there are serious problems in implementation of 
various IT Projects.  The Department has tried to justify the shortfalls by stating that 
approvals were in place only in the year 2009 i.e. after passing of almost three years of the 

 
Eleventh Plan.  On one hand, it has been stated that due to inadequate allo cation during 
Eleventh Plan, there were shortfall in achievement of targets.  On the other hand, the 
allocation made are being reduced at RE stage and there is still under spending during each 
of the year as explained above.  With the present pace of IT In duction Programme, the 
Committee feel that it would take more decades to get the 100 per cent Post Offices 
computerized.  While expressing serious concern over this, the Committee exhort the 
Department to take all the initiatives so that at least now progr ess are made in various 
activities related to IT Induction in Postal Operations.   
Action Taken by the Government 
(i) IT Project Phase-I 
 
An outlay of  628.66 crore was made for the Department for covering 5143 double 
handed Post Offices during the phase I covering the period from 2008 -09 and 2009-10.  On 
receipt of the approval of Expenditure Finance Committee for the Phase –I in the month of 
January 2009, the Cabinet Committee’s approval was obtained in the month of February 
2009 and the schemes could be implemented in full swing from 2009-10. 
 
 (ii)  Status of computerization of Post Offices up-to 31-03-2010  
    
        12604 Post Offices computerized up -to March 2010 (839 -HPOs,6671-Above-double 
handed Sub Post Offices,4498 -Double handed Sub Post Offices and 596 -Single  handed Sub 
Post Offices)  
  
Ministry of Finance has clarified that during the current Financial  Year 2010 -
11,expenditure up-to  150 Crore can be made by the Department of Posts from the Plan 
funds allotted to it the activities approved by CCEA as per the recommendations EFC I. A 
total expenditure of  149.6225 crore has been incurred on this account till December, 
2010. 
 
 (iii) The plan schemes relating to mail operations are at various stages of implementation at 
this stage.  All efforts are being made to achieve the physical and financial targets set for 
these schemes.   
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Department of Posts had appointed 
TUV India Posts Limited to conduct audit/customers’ and staff satisfaction survey in 50 
Project Arrow Phase -I Post Offices to evaluate performance of Post Offices in 18 
parameters.  As per the findings of the aforesaid survey, there is remarkable improvement 
in the services offered by the Post Offices.  Besides, the average customer satisfaction as 


 
well as employees’ satisfaction is also good in the aforesaid Post Offices.  The Comm ittee 
have further been informed that the Department has decided to conduct external audit for 
Post Offices under Phase -II and Phase -III as well and the Request for Proposal for external 
audit is under preparation.  The Committee appreciate the efforts bei ng made by the 
Department to monitor the performance of the Post Offices covered under Project Arrow.  
The Committee emphasize that external audit for Post Offices covered under Phase -II and 
Phase-III should be expedited and the findings communicated to th em.  Besides, the 
Committee also emphasize that the findings of the survey which indicate great 
improvement in the various services should be publicized by the Department so that the 
public at large is aware of the efficient services being provided by thes e Post Offices.  This 
would certainly help the Department in increasing their customer base and enhance 
revenue generation of the Post Offices.    
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The proposal for undertaking an external audit by an external agency initi ally was 
included in EFC Project Arrow Phase -III, but had to be dropped when the outlay was 
restricted from   887 crore to  65 crore.  Even during 2010 -11 it was proposed in the EFC 
of Project Arrow Phase IV to undertake external audit. However due to re duction of BE 
outlay by Ministry of Finance from   660 crores  to  480 crores, no funds could be 
earmarked for audit hence the same could not be taken up during the current financial 
year. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department  of Posts O.M. No. 5 -
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
  


 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Post Offices are located in every nook and corner of the country.  As such 
providing broadband connectivity to far -flung and difficult areas is the biggest challenge 
before the Posts so far as the issue of broadband connectivity is concerned.  The 
Department has informed that the steps have been taken to ensure that the system can 
work in offline manner and the encrypted data can be uplinked from the nearest Post Office 
having appropriate connectivity.  The Committee have also been informed that the 
Department is exploring of having the connectivity through VSAT in North -East and 
Andaman and Nicobar Island.  The Committee note that all the steps are in the right 
direction and need to be continued.  Besides, the Committee also emphasize that the 
Department should take up the issue of providing broadband connectivity in the far -flung 
and difficult areas with BSNL.  Proper coordination with BSNL would help the Department in 
finding solution to the problem of connectivity in such difficult areas.  The desired  initiatives 
on the suggested lines should be taken by the Department and the Committee informed 
accordingly.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 In case of the approximately 1,30,000 Extra Departmental Post Offices, Department  
will issue an RFP for Rural ICT Hardware  who will have responsibility  for  providing Rural 
Handheld Devices which will have connectivity through Broadband, GPRS, WIFI etc  
depending on the availability. The Rural ICT solution will also be capable of offline 
transaction where on -line connectivity is not possible with facility for uploading data from 
nearest Departmental Post office having connectivity. VSAT option for Post O ffices in 
different terrain will be explored by the Network Integrator also. The Rural ICT Solution is 
expected to be fully implemented by September 2012.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
Consultancy service from M/s Accenture Service Private Limited 
 
 The Committee have been informed that M/s Accenture Services Pvt. Ltd., the 
consultant engaged for IT modernisation of the Department to accomplish its aggressive 
growth and profit targets has submitted 16 Reports. Out of which, 10 Reports have been 
accepted by the Department and the remaining are in the process for acceptance. The 
Committee note that the Current State Assessment Report has highlighted that in six  areas 
of operations, namely Mails, Banking, Postal Life Insurance, Finance and Accounts, Huma n 
Resource and Technology carried out by the Department, the majority of the work are 
being carried out manually.  Besides, there are multiple siloed application deployed which 

 
do not integrate resulting in duplication of work efforts carried out by the De partment. 
Further, the Report has highlighted that the network, IT security and Data Centre 
infrastructure are insufficient. The Committee feel that each of the observations made by 
the M/s Accenture Services Pvt. Ltd. are very significant and the Departme nt needs to 
address each of the issue at the earliest. The concrete action in this regard should be taken 
and the Committee informed accordingly. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 (i)  M/s Accenture Services Pvt Ltd, the IT consultant, had submitted 16 reports. Out of 
which 14 had been accepted by the Department. The other two reports are under process 
of Acceptance. 
Following action is taken on the observations made by the IT Consultant: 
Based on the DPR and other reports, proposal for the IT modernisation project 
(Phase-II) for computerisation and networking of all the post offices, establishment of data 
center and disaster recovery center and development of integrated scalable modular  
software etc was submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs and was got 
approved. The project is expected to be completed by September, 2012. The Department is 
in the process of issuing RFPs to implement the project. 
  
(ii) The bench marking r eport and Advanced Financial System (AFS) feasibility and DPR 
reports  received from by M/S Accenture relating to Insurance Division  has been approved 
with a few  suggested changes. 
 
(iii) The report submitted by the Consultant regarding mail operations h as been 
examined in detail.  The Division is regularly working with the Consultant in this regard and 
necessary inputs with respect to “the to be processes” for mail operations under the 
integrated IT platform have already been provided.  Assessment of the  hardware 
requirement for the mail processing centres has also been worked out. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
Rural ICT Devices  
 
 Most of the work of Post Offices is carried by the extra Departmental Post offices 
and at present out of total 155035 Post Offices 129497 are extra Departmental Post Offices. 
The Committee have been informed that for modernization and computerization of Ex tra 
Departmental Post Offices, Rural Information and Communication Technology solution 
(Rural ICT) has been designed in consultation with the IT consultant and has been 
incorporated in the draft EFC which has been circulated. The proposed solution envisage s 
that each of the rural office will have a mobile hand held device which will have the ability 
to perform all the transactions of the Post Offices. A data centre is also proposed to be set 
up with which these devices can exchange data based on available c onnectivity options 
such as GPRS, Encrypted SMS, broadband etc. The device will be able to connect with 
central server and perform synchronously or asynchronously depending upon the available 

 
connectivity. The Department propose to roll out first pilot in the seventh month after the 
approval of the project followed by roll out of first phase in six selected circles. The final roll 
out would commence after fourteen months and would cover all the remaining circles to be 
completed by September, 2012. The detai led examination has further revealed that one of 
the query made by the Department of Expenditure and Planning Commission on the draft 
EFC was that the Department of Posts should test the robustness of Rural ICT devices 
before induction in the Post Offices.  Not only that the availability of power, internet 
connectivity and training of the ‘Grameen Dak Sewaks’ who would be using such devices 
are the big challenges before the Department. In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommend the concerns of the Dep artment of Expenditure and Planning Commission 
should be properly addressed before the roll out of the project. Besides, there is an urgent 
need to take advance action for the training of Grameen Dak Sewaks who will use the 
device so that the system become s functional after the roll out. The Committee again 
reemphasize that unless the extra Departmental Post Offices are covered by the 
modernization programme, complete IT solution for the different services cannot be found. 
As such, the Department should add ress to the procedural issues with regard to clearance 
of the project and take all the desired initiatives for the successful implementation of the 
project.  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
    As stated in para 9 & 10, the procedural issues have already b een sorted out and 
CCEA has approved the IT Modernization Project on 26.08.2010. 
 
 The Department has issued a RFP for Change Management Vendor who will evaluate 
the training requirements, co -ordinate the training of the employees including GDS 
employees and also assess the impact of training on the officials. The Change Management 
process will continue till the completion of the Project by September 2012. 
 
 The Department has issued an Expression of Interest for the Rural Handheld Devices 
to be supplied to  EDBOs. A field trial of the shortlisted devices is under progress in   5(five) 
pilot circles in which the GDS are using the device and evaluating the same. The technical 
specifications in the RFP will be based on the field trials. The solution will be ful ly 
implemented by September 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of Posts O.M. No. 5-
15/2010-CP dated 4th March, 2011) 
 
 
 
New Delhi RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
12 December, 2011________ Chairman, 
21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology. 
 
  

 
APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18 th November, 2011 from 1100 hours to 1300 hours in 
Committee Room ‘53’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
7. Shri Tapas Paul 
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
9. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
  
Rajya Sabha 
  
10.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
11.  Shri Salim Ansari  
12.  Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  -  Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
*****                               *****                          *****                               *****                            ***** 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt one draft Action Taken Report  *****.  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration and adoption of the draft Action 
Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report on the 
subject ‘Modernisation of Post Offices’ and adopted the same without any modification.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the above mentioned Report in 
the light of factual verification made by the Department of Posts and present the same to the 
House on a date convenient to him. 
 
 
5.  *****                               *****                          *****                               *****                 . 
 
 
(The representatives of the Department of Telecommunications were then called in) 
 
 
 
6.  *****                               *****                          *****                               *****                 . 
. 
 
 
7.  *****                               *****                          *****                               *****                 . 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***** Matter not related to the Report. 
 

 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTEENTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 & 23  
 Total 14 
 Percentage 60.90 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:- 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 & 13  
 Total 06 
 Percentage 26.09 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 Para Nos.:-  5, 11 & 21  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 13.01 
 
 