 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)  
 
 
NORMS FOR THE SETTING UP OF TELECOM TOWERS, ITS HARMFUL EFFECTS AND 
SETTING UP OF SECURITY STANDARDS IN EXPANSION OF TELECOM FACILITIES 
 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
53 


 
 
 
FIFTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)  
 
NORMS FOR THE SETTING UP OF TELECOM TOWERS, ITS HARMFUL EFFECTS AND 
SETTING UP OF SECURITY STANDARDS IN EXPANSION OF TELECOM FACILITIES 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12th February, 2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12th February, 2014 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS  
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
 REPORT  
 PART – I  
Chapter I Introduction 1 
A. Need for a clear defined role for setting up of telecom towers  4 
B. Need for an enforceable national guidelines for setting up of telecom towers 7 
C. Structural Safety of Telecom Towers  11 
D. Sharing of Telecom Towers 13 
Chapter II Issues relating to health hazards from EMF emission of Telecom towers and mobile 
handsets 
15 
A. Need to follow precautionary approach before finding conclusive proof 15 
B. Restrictions for setting up of towers in residential areas 25 
C. Restrictions for setting up towers in schools, colleges and hospitals 28 
D. Need for undertaking Long Term Research 30 
E. International Practices and countries having lower emission standards  35 
Chapter III Need for exploring new technological innovations 37 
A. Introduction of low power radiating antennae like Micro, Pico and Femto 37 
B. Installation of LED based EMR Meters 38 
Chapter IV Supply of substandard mobile handsets to India by reputed global manufacturers 41 
Chapter V Issues relating to Increasing Public Awareness and Grievance Redressal Mechanisms 43 
A. Need for effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism 43 
B. Setting up of State/District Telecom Committees 44 
Chapter VI Issues relating to TERM Cells 46 
A. Shortage of manpower 46 
B. Non-availability of test equipment 48 
C. Issues relating to ‘Self-Certificate’ 48 
D. Effective implementation of prescribed Spec ified Absorption Rate (SAR) value for 
mobile handsets 
51 
Chapter VII Introduction of Green Energy in telecom sector 54 
Chapter VIII Security related concerns due to import of telecom equipment 57 
A. Setting up of Telecom Testing and Security Certification Centre 59 
B. Growth of telecom equipment manufacturing sector including R&D facilities in 
India 
60 
   Part-II  
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
61-93 
Annexures  
I Advisory guidelines for State Government for issue of clearance for installation of mobile 
towers (effective from 1st August, 2013) 
94 
II Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on  18 November, 2011 98 
III Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee (2012-13) held on  5 March, 2013 101 
IV Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2012 -13) held on                                     
24 July, 2013 
104 
V Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee (2012 -13) held on                                     
13 August, 2013 
108 
 
VI Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee (2013 -14) held on                                     
10 February, 2014 
111 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2010-11) 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
*4. VACANT 
5. Dr.  Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikaram Jardosh 
8. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
9. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
  11. Shri Abdul Rahman 
12. Shri Prem Das Rai 
13. Shri  Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
15. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19. Shri C. Sivasami 
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
 *25. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
  29. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
** Shri Milind Deora ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent on his appointment as  
Minister of State for Communications and Information Technology on 12th July, 2011. 
(ii) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2011-12) 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Dr.  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
#14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
@22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
24. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
**27. Dr.  Bhushan Lal Jangde 
28. Shri Prabhat Jha 
  29. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
@ 31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice  Shri P. Rajeeve, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
#   Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17th May, 2012   
@     Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11th July, 2012 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar and Shri Ravi Shankar 
Prasad, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
(iii) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2012-13) 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   - Chairman  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri RajendraAgrawal 
4. Shri Raj Babbar 
5. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
* 6. Shri Khagen Das 
  7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri RajenGohain 
9. Smt. DarshanaJardosh 
10. Shri H. D. Kumaraswamy 
11. Shri BaidyaNath Prasad Mahato 
12. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
13. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
** 14. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
15. Shri Tapas Paul 
16. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
17. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
# 27. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
28. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
@ 30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.12.2012 vide Shri Ramsinh Rathwa, vide  Lok Sabha Bulletin Part –
II dated 13.12.2012. 
**    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 09.01.2013 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II dated 09.01.2013. 
#      Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.03. 2013 vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II dated 01.04.2013 
@ Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P. Rajya Sabha resigned on 11.02.2013 from Committee. 
 
(iv) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman   
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
9. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
10. Shri Sadashivrao D. Mandlik 
11. Dr. (Prof.) Thokchom Meinya 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
14. Shri Abdul Rahman 
15. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
16. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Javed Akhtar 
25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad  
27. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
28. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
30. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
31.  Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Director  
 3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Executive Officer 
(v) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2013-14), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present the Fifty -third 
Report on ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and setting up of security 
standards in expansion of telecom facil ities’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) selected this subject for 
detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The examination of the subject could not be 
completed during the term of the Committee (2010-11). In view of the wide ramifications of the 
subject and considering the need for wider consultation,  the Standing Committee on 
Information Technology (2011 -12) reselected the subject for further examin ation. However, 
since the examination remained inconclusive during the term of the Committee (2011 -12) and 
(2012-13), the present Committee again selected the subject to complete the unfinished task.  
 
3. To elicit wide opinion on the subject, a Press Communiqué was issued through print and 
electronic media on 1 8th February, 2013 seeking views/suggestions from experts/stakeholders/ 
organizations/public at large.  
 
4. The Committee also took evidence of the experts, organizations, such as, Association of 
Unified Telecom Services Providers of India (AUSPI), Cellular Operators Association of India 
(COAI), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), Citizens Group of 
Mumbai and the nodal Department i.e. the Depar tment of Telecommunications (Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology).  
 
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 10th February, 2014 considered and adopted the 
Report. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the  Department 
of Telecommunications ( Ministry of Communications and Information Technology) who 
tendered their evidence before the Committee. The Committee also wish to express their 
sincere thanks to the State Governments/UT Administrations and organizations/individuals who 
furnished written information/views as well as those who appeared before the Committee and 
made available necessary information for consideration of the Committee, which was of great 
help to the Committee in arriving at conclusions. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance 
rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
10  February, 2014 Standing Committee on  
 21 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Information Technology 
(vi)

 
REPORT 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
CHAPTER-I 
Introduction 
 
Telecommunications has evolved as a basic infrastructure like electricity, roads, 
water etc. and has also emerged as one of the critical components of economic growth 
required for overall socio economic development of the country. The Indian telecom 
sector has registered a phenomenal growth during the past few years and has become 
second largest telephone network in the world, only after China. A series of reform 
measures by the Government, for the development of the wireless technology and 
active participation by private sector has played an important role in the exponential 
growth of telecom sector in the country. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications) has informed the Committee that there is a strong t wo-way co -
relation between telecom development and overall economic development of a region. 
Telecom services are important drivers for development, delivery of public services such 
as education, health, etc. and integration of rural areas with the rest of  the country. The 
National Telecom Policy, 2012 recognized the role of such services in furthering the 
national development agenda while enhancing equity and inclusiveness.  
 
1.3 Highlighting the innumerable social and economic benefits of mobile telephony , 
in a memorandum submitted to the Committee, Resident Director, Regulatory Affairs 
and Government Relations, Vodafone India Limited ( Shri T.V. Ramachandran) stated as 
under:- 
“It is a well -established fact that telecom penetration has a multiplier 
effect on economic growth. In fact, a World Bank study has estimated that 
every 1% increase in tele -density results in a 3% increase in the rate of 
growth of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The multiplier effect will be 
further enhanced with the increased prolifera tion of mobile broadband. In 
a recent (2009) study, the World Bank has estimated that in low and 
middle income countries every 10% increase in broadband penetration 
accelerates economic growth by 1.38%.” 
 

2 
 
 
1.4 While elaborating the impact of telecommunica tions in the context of the 
country, he further stated:- 
“An India -specific study on the socio -economic impact of 
telecommunications by Indian Council for Research on International 
Economic Relations (ICRIER) in January 2009 concluded that there is  
significant positive correlation between increase in mobile penetration 
and growth in State Domestic Product (SDP) – with 10% increase in mobile 
penetration, SDP rises by 1.2% .” 
  
1.5 With regard to teledensity, the Department informed the Committee that the 
Indian telecom network with 895.51 million telephone connections, including 864.72 
million wireless telephone connections, at the end of December, 2012 is second largest 
network in the world after China. Out of this, 338.59 million telephone connections are 
in rural areas and 556.92 million are in urban areas of the country. 
1.6 On the share of Private and Public Sector, the Department also stated that the 
share of private sector, in terms of numbers of subscribers, increased from 86.31 per 
cent to 86.64 per cent during the period from April to June 2012 and thereafter declined 
to 85.51 per cent by the end of December, 2012. On the other hand, share of public 
sector declined from 13.69 per cent to 13.36 per cent during the period April to June 
2012 and then increased to 14.49 per cent by the end of December, 2012. 
1.7 Elaborating on the roadmap for future expansion, the Department informed the 
Committee that the Government approved National Telecom Policy -2012                   
(NTP-2012) on 31st May 2012 which  addresses the Vision, Strategic direction and the 
various medium term and long term issues related to telecom sector. The primary 
objective of NTP-2012 is maximizing public good by making available affordable, reliable 
and secure telecommunication and bro adband services across the entire country. The 
main thrust of the Policy is on the multiplier effect and transformational impact of such 
services on the overall economy. It recognizes the role of such services in furthering the 
national development agenda while enhancing equity and inclusiveness. Availability of 
affordable and effective communications for the citizens is at the core of the vision and 
goal of the NTP-2012. 
 
1.8 However, the advancements made in the field of telecommunications and its 
concomitant benefits had come with certain concerns. Elaborating on the issue, Director 

3 
 
General, Indian Council of Medical Research (Dr. R. S. Sharma), in his memorandum 
submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“The explosive development of cell phone system  in the country has 
greatly increased the extent and magnitude of RFR exposure.  These new 
technologies have been introduced without full provision of information 
about their nature and without prior detailed discussion within the 
scientific community abou t possible consequences for health.  Potential 
exposure also occurs in the vicinity of the fixed broadcast facilities often 
located in residential areas, schools etc. with no definite knowledge about 
harmful effects, if any,  to occupants nearby.”  
  
1.9 Enumerating further on the issue the State of Rajasthan (Shri Sudhir Kasliwal), in 
his memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“There is no denying that mobile phones have become indispensable  and 
are here to stay. They offer many convenien ces and have been  known to 
have saved human lives during accidents and natural  disasters. At the 
same time medical studies conducted at various  national and international 
levels by eminent doctors and scientists  have also pointed to the sinister 
biological effects of radiation on  human beings from mobile phones and 
towers, many of which are linked to changes in the electrical activity of the 
brain due to EMF  Radiation. However, it is the duty of the Government to 
ensure that along with the manifold benefits  of telecom revolution this 
technological boon should not be at the price of the invaluable human 
life.”  
 
1.10 According to Citizen Groups of Mumbai (Ms. Juhi Chawla Mehta and Shri Prakash 
Munshi), fixing of antennae without regulations has caused a steep  increase in health 
disorders in Mumbai which includes miscarriages, birth of deformed babies, cancer and 
leukemia. The health problems are growing exponentially similar to the exponential 
growth of mobile antennae - only a few years after the installation of antennae close to 
the citizen patients. 
 
1.11 Director, Bombay National History Society (Dr. Asad A. Rahmani), informed the 
Committee that India is one of the fastest growing mobile telephony industries in the 
world. The growth in cell phone subscribers  has also lead to growth of infrastructure in 
the form of mobile towers. Today, in the absence of any policy on infrastructure 
development and location of cell phone towers have been installed in the haphazard 
manner across urban and suburban habitats in India. 
 

4 
 
A. Need for a clear defined role for setting up of telecom towers  
 
1.12 On the issue of setting up of mobile towers, it is seen that one of the objectives 
included in the National Telecom Policy (NTP) – 2012 is to address the ‘Right of Way 
(RoW)’ issues in setting up of telecom infrastructure. The Department in the Background 
Note submitted to the Committee informed that Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 
describes the privileges and powers of the Government in respect of telegraphs and 
power to grant licenses. Para 4(1) of Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is 
reproduced below: 
  
4(1) – “Within India, the Central Government shall have the exclusive 
privilege of establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs: 
Provided that the Central Go vernment may grant a license, on such 
conditions and in consideration of such payments as it thinks fit, to any 
person to establish, maintain or work a telegraph within any part of India.”  
 
1.13 The Committee were further informed that the Department of 
Telecommunications has thus granted licenses, under Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885, for Cellular Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS) and Unified Access Service (UAS) to 
Indian registered companies to establish, maintain and work on telegraph for provid ing 
mobile telephone services in the licensed area. Under CMTS and UAS license, the 
telecom service providers are establishing towers to provide the coverage of mobile 
services in their service area.  
  
1.14 On the role of the Department with regard to the  setting of mobile towers, it was 
stated in the Background Note that as per existing policy, Wireless Planning and 
Coordination Wing of Department of Telecommunications (DoT) issues siting clearance 
for installation of mobile towers for each and every site  from the point of view of 
interference with other wireless users, aviation hazards and obstruction to any other 
existing microwave links. The siting clearance is issued without prejudice to applicable 
bylaws, rules and regulation of local bodies such as M unicipal Corporation/ Gram 
Panchayat etc.  
 
1.15 About the role of local bodies in granting licences, the position stated in 
Background Note is as under:- 
“As per Section 10(c) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the telegraph 
authority shall not exercise p owers to place telegraph line and posts in 

5 
 
respect of any property vested in or under the control or management of 
any local authority, without the permission of that authority. Therefore, 
for installation of tower and obtaining Right of Way (RoW), the tel ecom 
service providers have to obtain the permission from local authority.” 
 
1.16 With regard to the role of Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), it is further stated in 
the Background Note that:- 
“As per terms and conditions of UAS license, the LICENSEE is r equired to 
ensure that the Telecommunication installation carried out by it should 
not become a safety hazard and is not in contravention of any statute, rule 
or regulation and public policy. As per terms and conditions of the CMTS / 
UAS license and IP -I r egistration, the responsibility of obtaining 
Permission/Right of Way for establishing towers lies with the telecom 
service providers/IP-I companies.” 
 
1.17 Specifying the role of the Department and State/Local bodies in this regard, the 
Secretary, DoT duri ng the course of evidence before the Committee submitted as 
under:- 
 
“Sir, I would like to clarify.  There are two distinct parts to this issue.  One 
is, even if radiation is within the norms, whether the tower has been 
located with appropriate authority.  That comes from the local bodies.  So, 
even if, I am within the norms, I cannot go and install wherever I like 
unless I get the permission from a local body.  That is one thing. 
 
The second is even if I have got the authorisation from the local body, 
whether I am within the norms of the telecom regulations in terms of 
what is the level of radiation which is allowed, that, as has been explained, 
is measured both for the individual towers as well as the combined 
radiation from all the towers within that vici nity.  These are two separate 
aspects for which the authorities are different.  One is the physical aspect 
of simply setting up a tower whether it is permitted or not, and that 
location, that building etc.  The other is the radiation.  One part is 
controlled by the local body whether the tower has been given the 
permission or not by the local body.  If the doubt is with regard to whether 
the radiation is within the norms that is the DoT’s job, not the local body’s 
job.  But whether it has been allowed and a uthorised in that particular 
place, that is the local body’s job.” 
 
1.18 On being asked by the Committee whether some norms/guidelines for setting up 
of towers have been formulated, the Department informed in a written reply that 
before installation of tow er, the telecom service provider/infrastructure provider has to 

6 
 
obtain the necessary permission from the respective local bodies such as Municipal 
Corporation/Gram Panchayat Committee.  Each State Government has formulated its 
own guidelines regarding gran t of permission and levy of requisite fee for installation of 
mobile towers.  
 
1.19 On the reasons for conflict between the local bodies and cell operators, the 
Department in written reply stated as under:-  
“From the petitions filed by the telecom service  providers in various 
Courts, it appears that the main causes of dispute with the State 
Government are  levy of high fee (one time as well as annual recurring), 
restrictions on installation of towers  and delay in grant of permission for 
installation of mo bile towers. There is no separate authority appointed to 
resolve the disputes.” 
 
1.20 Coming out strongly against the role of local bodies in the setting up of mobile 
towers, The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) in a 
memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 “….xxxx…. telecom is a central subject and all issues related to installation 
of mobile towers fall within the domain of the central authority of the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology an d the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) as the concerned Department 
has already initiated the process for laying down uniform guidelines for 
installation of mobile towers.”  
 
1.21 Echoing similar concern, Association of Unified Service Providers of In dia (AUSPI) 
and Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI) in a joint memorandum submitted to 
the Committee also stated that telecommunication is a central subject and Central 
Government is exclusively empowered to legislate thereon. Elaborating furthe r on the 
issue, in the joint memorandum they had submitted as under:- 
  
“The telecommunication towers and the equipment installed at the site 
forms part of the “telegraph” having been installed by the telecom 
operators in exercise of powers of the “telegra ph authority” vested in it by 
the Central Government in exercise of powers under the provisions of 
Section 19B of the Indian Telegraph Act and it is completely beyond the 
jurisdiction of any State Authority to interfere in its functioning or 
operation in any manner, much less directing its removal.” 
 
1.22 Stating that the unreasonable and impractical conditions including but not 
limited to designated places for installation of towers, imposition of exorbitant fees & 
taxes by state/local authorities are a bi g hurdle in achievement of roll out and quality 

7 
 
obligations, Tower and Infrastructure Providers Association (TAIPA) in their 
memorandum submitted to the Committee stated that some of the irrational provisions 
laid down by the local municipal authorities are as under:  
 
a)  Exorbitant fees for giving permission to install towers,  
b)  Property Tax which sometimes goes upto 110% of the ratable value,  
c)  Permissions from Pollution Control boards,  
d)  Permission from Fire Safety,  
e)  Permission for Structural Safety,  
f)  Coordination with multiple agencies for clearances,  
g)  Provision of retrospective tax, etc and many more such conditions. 
  
1.23 To provide services in every nook and corner of the country, TAIPA in their 
memorandum also suggested for the implementation of the following measures:- 
 
(i)  Single Window clearance policy to be followed by all the states with 
standard set of copy of documents.  
(ii)  Grid power for telecom towers to be accorded on priority and low 
tariffs   
(iii)  Location of t owers should be decided by Network topography. 
There should be no other condition like minimum distance from a 
building etc as telecom service providers adhere to stringent EMF 
norms.  
(iv)  No artificial restriction on educational institutions and hospita ls for 
tower installations  
(v)  Any coercive actions like sealing or demolition of towers, 
disconnection of electricity could be done only in accordance with 
provisions of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and not on any other 
flimsy grounds  
(vi)  Reasonable nominal administration fee and time bound approvals.  
 
1.24 On the suggestions of the Committee to have public hearing before installing the 
towers, the Secretary of the Department, in a sitting of the Committee stated as under: - 
  
“If the Committee advises, we will certainly ensure that it will be done.” 
 
B. Need for an enforceable national guidelines for setting up of telecom towers 
 
1.25 On the issue of guidelines framed by the Government for regulation of 
installation of mobile towers in the country, the Department in a detailed background 
note submitted as under:- 

8 
 
“A broad guideline for issue of clearance for installation of Mobile Towers 
was formulated by DoT and forwarded to the Chief Secretaries of all States 
on 23.08.2012. The said guideline issued by  DoT was advisory in nature to 
have uniformity across all the States in respect of grant of permission for 
installation of mobile tower by telecom service provider. The guidelines 
were also placed on DoT website. The comments received thereon were 
examined and the said guidelines have further been reviewed. The revised 
guideline for grant of clearances for installation of mobile towers has been 
issued on 01.08.2013 and the same has also been placed on DoT website.   
 
As per the revised guideline, fixation o f standards for exposure limits of 
radio frequency field emissions from mobile base stations, monitoring 
their compliance, all radiation related technical issues, issues of Access 
Service Licence / Infrastructure Provider registration and SACFA clearance 
for frequency allocation at any location are dealt with by DoT. The 
documents to be submitted by telecom service providers to the local 
bodies, while applying for permission for installation of tower, has been 
clearly brought out in the said revised guideline.” 
  
1.26 When the Committee enquired about the practice followed in advance countries 
like USA/UK in setting up of mobile towers particularly in the big and populous cities, 
the Department in its written reply stated:- 
“The precise information is not av ailable, however, the countries are using 
camouflaging techniques to maintain aesthetic look of sky-line.” 
 
1.27 The Committee also sought the views of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations for formulating uniform national guidelines for setting up of t elecom 
towers in the country.  The following States/UT Administrations furnished their views as 
under:- 
 
State/UT Reply 
Himachal Pradesh It may be appropriate to have model guidelines at 
National level, but there are some issues which are 
required to be a ddressed only at state level for which 
state specific guidelines may be required. 
Lakshwadweep Yes 
Manipur The national Guideline should factor in geographical 
variations such as hilly terrains, plains, coastal areas, etc. 
In doing so, segmentation of ar eas with similar 

9 
 
demographic terrain into identifiable clusters can be 
done. A uniform policy for each cluster can then be 
drafted. 
Meghalaya Yes, the State strongly feels that there should be uniform 
national guidelines for setting up of telecom towers in the 
Country. Telecom being a subject of the Union List under 
Seventh Schedule (Sr. 31) of the Constitution of India, the 
uniformity is national guidelines is required. 
Rajasthan Yes 
Tripura Yes 
UT Administration 
of Daman and Diu 
Yes 
  
1.28 On the nee d to have uniform guidelines for telecom towers, Tower and 
Infrastructure Providers Association (TAIPA) in its memorandum submitted to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
“As DoT has already issued guidelines on EMF & for height, design, 
structural safety, etc . and the same are being followed by operators and 
the tower companies, there is no need for state Governments/ municipal 
corporations, etc. to issue separate guidelines creating arbitrary 
restrictions on tower roll-out. ” 
  
1.29 Further elaborating on the  need to have uniform guidelines for mobile tower 
installations, TAIPA in their memorandum further a elaborated as under:- 
 
“It will bring uniformity across the country enabling Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) and Infrastructure Provider (IP) Companies to  plan and 
roll-out networks in an environment of greater certainty. It will also 
contribute to better control over network roll -out and at the same time 
enable timely completion of roll-out.  
 
It will also help the Government administer the telecom sector in a more 
consistent and assured manner. There will be greater certainty on the 
applicable norms and guidelines and the overall administrative burden on 
the Government would reduce.  
 
Although the bulk of the Towers in urban India are already installed, 
uniform norms will enable systematic planning in rural India and can be 
leveraged to introduce any positive innovations and incentives such as 
greater use of renewable energy sources through incentive schemes. Tax 

10 
 
holidays or lower rates of tax on rentals ac cruing from mobile towers to 
land/building owners may also be considered to encourage leasing of roof 
tops for installation of towers. State Governments could also incentivize 
tower installations through priority for grant of State Electricity Board 
connections for cell sites.”  
  
1.30 Emphasizing the need for uniform guidelines, representative of the Department, 
during the course of oral evidence before the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“..xx.. It has now been decided that a uniform guidelines have to be 
formulated at the national level to enforce restrictions on establishment 
or setting up of towers.  This is one of the things that the Government has 
accepted and we will go ahead with this. We will go for national norms 
now.” 
 
1.31 Vodafone India Limited al so expressed the view that these Guidelines should be 
evolved into a National Infrastructure Policy and only items which lie within the purview 
of the States should be clearly identified for a State-specific policy.  
  
1.32 On the issue of setting up of te lecom tower, in his memorandum submitted to 
the Committee Retired Advisor (Technology), Department of Telecommunication               
(Shri Ram Kumar), stated that a Departmental Committee on BTS towers was 
constituted in March, 2012 under the Chairmanship of Advisor (Operations) and the said 
Committee had submitted its Report in June, 2012. 
 
1.33 On the major recommendations made by the said Committee, the Department in 
a written reply stated the main recommendations were as under:- 
 
i. Need for Uniform guidelines for setting up of BTS Towers. 
ii. Need for Structural safety for towers on roof- tops. 
iii. Need for Identification of location for installation of mobile towers 
in Master Plan 
iv. Creation of In -building Solutions for future expansion of Mobile 
network. 
 
1.34 When the Department was asked as to whether the framing of uniform 
guidelines applicable to all States across the country will be practical for a 
geographically diverse country like India, the Department in its written reply stated as 
under:-  
 

11 
 
“The guideline for grant of permission for installation of mobile towers is 
advisory in nature. At present, there is no proposal to give the guidelines 
any statutory status. However these guidelines have been revised  
effective from 01.08.2013 on the basis of feedback received after 
deliberations made with the state Government officials and various stake 
holders on 16.04.2013 and holding further consultations thereafter.” 
 
1.35 On the reasons for making the guidelines merely advisory in nature, the 
Department stated as under:- 
 
“Looking into the diverse geographical conditions and the fact that 
providing clearance for installation of tower is a State subject matter, the 
guidelines have been kept advisory in nature so that State Governments 
can incorporate additions/ modification to these guidelines suiting to their  
requirement wherever necessary. However, these guidelines have been 
sent to Chief Secretaries of all States and UTs for appropriate action.” 
 
1.36 With regard to the steps taken by the Department for the imple mentation of the 
guidelines, the Department in their written reply stated that DoT has issued revised 
advisory guidelines to State Governments for issue of clearance for installation of 
mobile towers (effective from 01.08.2013) and the same has also been p laced on the 
DoT website. The revised guidelines are provided at Annexure. 
C. Structural Safety of Telecom Towers 
 
1.37 In one of the memorandum received by the Committee, It was brought out to 
their notice that many of the towers have been erected in the country without ensuring 
safety of the building and even without taking any permission from the local bodies and 
such ‘illegal’ towers are a big threat to these building. 
 
1.38 When the Committee enquired about the safeguards that have been put in place 
for towers erected on rooftops, the Department in its written reply stated that the 
issues related to structural safety are presently being taken care of by the Local 
Bodies/Municipal Corporation while granting permission for installation of mobile 
towers. T he Committee also note that the Inter -Ministerial Committee set up by the 
Government had recommended for creation of an appropriate framework for structural 
safety clearance for towers set up on rooftops. 
  
1.39 Further commenting on the issue, Retired Adv isor (Technology), DoT, during the 
course of evidence before the Committee stated as under:- 

12 
 
“….xxxx....concern is regarding safety of building itself on which they are 
installed. Many a time the building strength is not checked properly on 
which these tow ers are installed which is dangerous.  Many municipal 
corporations have taken action against these towers for having installed 
without permission and without checking strength of the buildings.”  
 
1.40 He further added:- 
 
“God forbid, if some earthquake co mes somewhere, then I am sure the 
building on which the tower is there, that may be the first victim.” 
 
1.41 The Secretary, DoT during evidence before the Committee admitted that safety 
aspect of telecom infrastructures like towers is an area of concern. 
 
1.42 In this regard, when the Committee enquired about the details of the 
specifications regarding structural safety and design parameters for mobile towers 
issued by DoT, the Department in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Telecom Engineering Centre  (TEC) has developed 12 standards for 
telecom towers. These use the codes/specifications developed by BIS, for 
the quality of materials and foundation. These standards are not 
mandatory for the private telecom service providers at present. As far as 
the st ructural safety is concerned, it has been laid down by DoT in the 
guideline that the following certificates are to be submitted by all the 
TSPs: 
 
Copy of structural stability certificate for ground based tower. In case of 
roof top BTS towers, structural st ability certificate for the building and 
tower based on written approvals of any authorized Structural Engineer of 
state/local bodies/Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee/ 
IIT/NIT or any other agency authorized by local body”. 
 
1.43 When enq uired about the reasons for not making the standards developed by 
Telecom Engineering Centre mandatory for the private telecom service providers, the 
Department replied as under:- 
“The 12 Standards, developed by TEC for the mobile towers, are applicable 
to both private and public TSPs. The Department shall examine the issue of 
making the TEC standards for towers mandatory for all the TSPs.” 
 

13 
 
D. Sharing of Telecom Towers 
 
1.44 The Department in their Background Note submitted to the Committee stated 
that to  support the faster growth of telecom infrastructure including mobile tower, 
Department of Telecommunications has created a separate registration category known 
as Infrastructure Providers Category -I (IP -I). The Infrastructure Provider -I registered 
companies are permitted to create passive infrastructure such as towers, dark fibre, 
duct space etc. and provide the same to licensed telecom service providers.  
 
1.45 On being enquired about the challenges, opportunities and problems which 
might arise because of  tower sharing by different telecom service providers, the 
Department in its written reply informed as under:- 
 
“There are not much problems arising due to sharing of mobile towers, 
however, in case of catastrophe or major failure at a particular shared si te, 
the services of all the sharing service provides may become totally down 
and the area may be totally cut -off. The advantage of sharing is reduced  
capital expenditure and operating expenditure for service providers. 
Sharing of telecom tower amongst the  telecom service providers is 
permitted subject to mutual agreement. Further, the towers established 
under the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) scheme have been 
mandated to be capable of being shared among at least three telecom 
service provider.” 
  
1.46 The Department also informed the Committee that as on date there are 404 
numbers of IP-1 providers and to attract investment in this segment, 100 per cent FDI is 
already permitted for IP-1 providers. 
 
1.47 Further, on the issue of making sharing of towers mandatory so as to avoid 
installation of more number of towers, the Department replied that generally, the 
towers installed by Infrastructure Providers are also shared by more than one operators. 
Therefore, even without mandate the passive infrastru ctures such as mobile towers are 
being shared amongst the operators. 
 
1.48 On the steps being taken by the Department to encourage more and more 
sharing of towers, the Committee were informed that at present, the revenues earned 
by the Infrastructure Provi der companies are not subjected to the annual license fee 
which is levied on the telecom service providers. 
   

14 
 
1.49 Emphasising on the need for a mandatory sharing of telecom towers, Centre for 
Electronics Design and Technology, Indian Institute of Science , Bangalore (Prof. H.S. 
Jamadagni) in his memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“The towers set up for communication systems can be shared by several 
service providers. In view of efficient usage of towers and to reduce 
impact on the environment, it should be mandatory to share towers unless 
there are strong reasons otherwise”  
 
1.50 Elaborating on the issue, TAIPA in their memorandum submitted to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
 
“The telecom infrastructure providers, registered as Infras tructure 
Providers - Category I with the Department of Telecommunications have 
supported operators to build and maintain their own towers by promoting 
'Sharing of Towers'. They now provide an Integrated Neutral Host Platform 
that is used by diverse and oft en competing operators. This brings cash 
benefits like savings in Opex and Capex. Besides, this has ensured efficient 
use of resources through cost -reduction, helping bring scale to telecom 
business, lowered consumer prices and improved quality of services  etc., 
which has helped in building a unique, scalable and successful Indian 
business model for Telecom.” 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Issues relating to health hazards from EMF emission of Telecom towers and mobile 
handsets 
 
A. Need to follow precautionary approach before finding conclusive proof 
 
1.51 On the serious issue of apprehensions being expressed about the health hazards 
associated with the EMF radiation from the mobile towers, the Department in the 
Background Note submitted as under:- 
 
“The issue of health hazard from the radiations of mobile phone 
towers/networks has been in lime light for quite some time. In this regard, 
several studies have been conducted in different countries, under the 
aegis of World Health Organization (WHO) and none of these studies 
prove that the emissions from the mobile phone towers/networks are 
causing harmful effect on human beings. Further studies are going on 
around the world, since the effects on human beings are to be studied 
over a long period of time. 
 
Further, a Committee,  setup in 2006 under the Director General, Indian 
Council of Medical Research (IMR) to study the effects of radiations from 
mobile phone towers and related aspects, concluded that overall there is 
not enough evidence to show direct health hazards of Radio Frequency 
exposure from mobile Base Stations. 
 
As per ICNIRP guidelines, adopted by Telecom Commission, 
epidemiological studies on exposed workers and the general public have 
shown no major health effects associated with typical exposure 
environments. The studies have yielded no convincing evidence that 
typical exposure levels lead to adverse reproductive outcomes or an 
increased cancer risk in exposed individuals. Report has provided the SAR 
reference levels for body exposure to microwave transmissions of 
particular frequency of transmitting antennae.” 
 
1.52 The Department in the Background Note also provided the ICNIRP limits/levels of 
Base Station Emission as under:- 
 
Frequency 
Range 
E-Field 
Strength        
(Volt/Meter 
H-Field Strength 
(Amp/Meter 
(A/m)) 
Power Density 
(Watt/Sq.Meter 
(W/Sq.m)) 

16 
 
(V/m)) 
400MHz to 
2000MHz 
1.375f ½ 0.0037f ½ f/200 
2GHz to 
300GHz 
61 0.16 10 
 (f = frequency in MHz) 
 
1.53 The Department informed the Committee that in respect of BTS, norms for 
exposure limit for the Radio Frequenc y Field (Base Station Emissions) has been reduced 
to 1/10th of the existing limits prescribed by International Commission on Non Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) with effect from 01.09.2012. In India, the cellular GSM 
services are being operated at 9 00 MHz, 1800 MHz and 2100 MHz frequency band. As 
per reduced radiation norms, for 900 MHz, Permissible Power Density is 0.45 Watt/Sqm, 
whereas for 1800 MHz and 2100 MHz, Permissible Power Density is 0.9 Watt/Sqm and 
1.1 Watt/Sqm respectively. 
 
1.54 When the Committee enquired about the year in which ICNIRP had issued these 
guidelines and their relevance in the present context, the Department in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
 
“ICNIRP guidelines on EMF were issued in 1998. However, ICNIRP issued its 
Statement on EMF radiation in 2009, wherein, it has been stated that “it is 
the opinion of ICNIRP that the scientific literature published since the 1998 
guidelines has provided no evidence of any adverse effects below the 
basic restrictions and does not necess itate an immediate revision of its 
guidance on limiting exposure to high frequency electromagnetic fields. 
Therefore, ICNIRP reconfirms the 1998 basic restrictions in the frequency 
range 100 kHz–300 GHz until further notice”. 
 
 
1.55 On the number of studie s which have pointed out inadequacies of ICNIRP 
guidelines, the Department in its written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Some studies, including the Bioinitiative Report, have given 
recommendations which are stringent compared to ICNIRP guidelines. 
However, WHO is examining all the studies and changes, if any, suggested 
in the radiation limit by WHO shall be considered appropriately.” 
 
 

17 
 
1.56 The Department has cited that WHO in its Fact Sheet No. 304, of May, 2006 on 
Electromagnetic Fields and Public Health (Bas e Stations and Wireless Technologies) had 
concluded that:- 
 
“Considering the very low exposure levels and research results collected to 
date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF signals 
from base stations and wireless networks caused adverse health effects.” 
 
 
1.57 The  Department also informed the Committee that:-  
 
“Based on media reports and public concerns an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) consisting of officers from DoT, Indian council of Medical 
Research (Ministry of health) , Department of Biotechnology and Ministry 
of Environment and forest was constituted on 24 August, 2010 to examine 
the effect of EMF Radiation from Base Stations and mobile phones. 
 
Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) in its report, examined the 
environmental and health related concerns and indicated that most of the 
laboratory studies were unable to find a direct link between exposure to 
radio frequency radiation and health; and the scientific studies as yet have 
not been able to confirm a case and effect re lationship between radio 
frequency radiation and health. The effect of emission from cell phone 
towers is not known yet with certainty. It is to submit that the Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) has examined 90 international and national 
studies/reference papers, related with the EMF radiation, before finalizing 
the report.” 
   
1.58 However, various experts/stakeholders who submitted their memoranda to the 
Committee or appeared before the Committee expressed serious concerns about the 
harmful effects of EMF  emission from telecom towers and mobile handsets both on 
human beings and flora and fauna. In this regard, Bombay Natural History Society, in his 
memorandum submitted as under:- 
 
 “Microwave and radiofrequency pollution appears to constitute a 
potential cause for the decline of animal populations and deterioration of 
health of plants and humans living near radiation sources such as phone 
masts. Studies have indicated the significant non -thermal long -term 
impacts of EMFs on species, especially at genetic le vel which can lead to 
various health complications including brain tumors, reduction in sperm 
counts and sperm mobility, congenital deformities, psychiatric problems  
and endocrine disruptions. However, similar aspects are yet to be studied 
among animal populations.” 
 

18 
 
1.59 He further stated:- 
  
“More and more scientific data is coming in linking the effects of mobile 
radiation to the ill-effects on the wildlife like birds, bats, honeybees and 
even humans.” 
 
1.60 Further elaborating on the issue, School of Environmental Science, Jawarharlal 
Nehru University (Prof. Jitendra Behari), in his memorandum stated:- 
  
“Several adverse health effects have been linked to the exposure to 
electromagnetic fields from mobile phones, it is even more important in 
the case of  children and adolescents since not only their body is under 
development, but also because their cumulative exposure is higher than 
for adults.” 
  
1.61 Commenting on the issue, Indian Council of Medical Research (Dr. R. S. Sharma) 
in their memorandum submitted:-  
 
“There are two distinct possibilities by which the RFR exposure may cause 
biological effects.  There are thermal effects caused by holding mobile 
phones close to the body.  Secondly, there could be possible non -thermal 
effects from both phones and base stations.   
Effect on cell growth, cell differentiation, DNA damage, altered immune 
system, hormonal effects, reproduction (decrease in sperm counts, sperm 
motility, decrease in testicular size and histopathology) neurological (brain 
development, neu rotransmission, behavior), cardiovascular (blood 
pressure and ECG changes) systems etc have been reported.  
Association between exposure to these waves and different types of  
cancers ( blood cancer, brain cancer, breast cancer, testicular cancer) have 
also been reported in Army/ Naval personnel working in radio -
communication or other long term users.”  
1.62 However, emphasizing on the need to review the guidelines adopted by ICNIRP,  
Retired Advisor (Technology), DoT during the course of evidence before th e Committee 
stated as under:- 
“..xx..As you know the International Commission on Non -Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) is the agency which fixes the norms. They 
fixed the norms long ago, not now..xx..” 
 
1.63 Further commenting on the health hazards of  EMF emission from telecom 
towers, Retired Advisor (Technology), DoT during the course of evidence before the 
Committee stated as under:- 

19 
 
 
“Various studies have been made by many agencies including WHO and 
they have concluded that it is possible  carcinoge nic for human. A recent 
study has been released by Bioinitiative Report on 2012  in which 29 
scientist from ten countries participated …..xxxx…..They made some 1800 
studies over a period of time and they have concluded that the existing 
public safety limits are not adequate.” 
 
1.64 Elaborating on the health hazards of non -ionized EMF radiations, Retired Advisor 
(Technology), DoT, in his memorandum submitted:- 
 
“The various dangerous effects of mobile tower radiations on health of 
human beings are concluded to be as follows: 
 
* Pervasive impairment of metabolic and reproductive systems. 
* Effect on fertility, reproduction and health of Off-springs. 
* Damage to human sperms. 
* Risk of glioma (a malignant brain tumour) and acoustic neuroma (a 
slow   growing tumour of the nerve connecting ear and brain). 
 * Headaches, disturbed concentration and behavioral problems. 
 * Sleep disorders, confusion, anxiety and depression and appetite 
disturbances. 
* Prevent body from healing the damaged DNA. 
* Immune system imbalances and metabolic disruptions. 
* Low resistance to diseases. 
* Effect on blood brain barriers that stops the flow of toxins into the 
sensitive brain tissues.” 
 
1.65 Citizens of the State of Rajasthan, in their memorandum stated as under:- 
“Some of the repo rted biological effects as per research conducted 
worldwide are Sleep Disorders, Dizziness, Headaches, Loss in Memory, 
Depression, Fatigue, Palpitation of the Heart and other Heart Ailments, 
Visual Disorders, Cardiovascular problems, Altered Reflexes, Neur o-
degenerative disorders - Alzheimer, Parkinson, Immune system 
Degradation, Tinnitus and Ear damage - Tumours in Ears, Irreversible 
Infertility, Effect on skin, DNA Damage, Increase in Cancer risk, Deformed 
Babies being born and Miscarriages.” 
1.66 Citizen Groups of Mumbai (Ms. Juhi Chawla Mehta and Shri Prakash Munshi), in 
their memorandum while also expressing similar concerns, submitted as under:- 
 
“The exponential increase in incidence of Health hazards – especially 
Cancer Leukemia and other initial ail ments before reaching the terminal 
sicknesses should be enough proof to any layman of the link between 

20 
 
health hazards from EMF radiation from mobile tower antennae. 
Especially citizens who suffer due to living in the main beam of the 
radiation from the ant ennae, without any family history. The citizens do 
not want to wait for another 10 to 20 years like the Cancer and 
Carcinogenic revelations of the Cigarette, Asbestos and Dyestuffs 
industries.” 
 
1.67 Elaborating on the increasing concern of the public on t he issue, a representative 
of Citizen Groups of Mumbai, during the course of the evidence as under:-    
 
“..xx..I simply want to emphasise on the points of view of the residents.  
Every week we are invited by various citizen groups, schools, colleges, Lion  
Club, Rotary Club, etc. to give a presentation on the ill effects of the EMF 
radiation.  This is now a burning issue literally. It is in everyone’s mind.  
This is something which you cannot control and this is something you 
cannot see.  Yet, it will have its effect on you.  If you are lucky, you will 
escape with less effects and if you are unlucky, you will have to face the ill 
effects. People are getting restless and I will be frank with what they 
perceive as inaction by the relevant authorities.   The re levant authorities 
are Central Government, DoT, the State Government and the local 
bodies..xx. ” 
   
1.68 They also submitted:- 
 
“There are various health hazards faced by citizens all over the world due 
to electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation. EMF radiat ion is there from 
mobile phones, mobile tower antennae, microwave ovens, cordless 
landlines, televisions, laptops, computers and the like. 
..xx..The health problems begin with headaches, sleep disturbance and 
tingling in the head, memory loss, fatigue, mis carriage, birth of deformed 
babies, heart problems and later cancer, leukemia.” 
 
1.69 Presenting a diametrically opposite view on the issue, representatives of AUSPI 
and COAI in their joint memorandum to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“We would like to b ring to your notice that in 2008, India had adopted 
International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 
standards which are the international safety guidelines for RF exposure. 
These are based on a thorough and ongoing review of all relevant scientific 
studies and represent world’s best practice.  
 
 In India, the current EMF exposure levels from mobile communication 
systems have a substantial safety margin as prescribed by the Department 

21 
 
of Telecommunication (DoT). It is internationally a cknowledged, globally 
accepted and widely endorsed that the ICNIRP limits already incorporate a 
margin of 50 times (below) in the levels recommended for general public 
exposure. In addition, the DoT has, with effect from 1 September 2012 
further reduced th e EMF exposure limits to 1/10 of ICNIRP. Thus, the 
current EMF exposure levels from mobile communication systems in the 
country already include more than a substantial safety margin. Also it is 
submitted that we are in full conformity/compliance with the E MF levels 
required to ensure health and safety.” 
 
1.70 It has further been submitted in the memorandum that:- 
 
“It is most important to note that the RF radiations emitted by Mobile 
Communication Systems lie in the non-ionizing part of the electromagnetic 
spectrum and thus do not have enough energy to break the bonds that 
hold molecules in the cells together. Thus, the exposure to EMF Radiations 
emitted from Mobile Systems cannot produce ionization or cause any 
genetic damage.  
 
Also, the RF emissions from mobile base stations are some 50,000 times 
lower than the levels at which the first health effects begin to be 
established. The output power of mobile phones is less than 1 Watt 
(typically is in the range of 0.2 to 0.6 watts), which is far lower than the 
emission levels that emanating from the microwave or even the radio.” 
 
1.71 Further justifying their contention, they stated:- 
 
“Some of the other agencies who operate in the band 30MHz - 3GHz i.e. 
Non- Ionizing band are as below:  
 
Other sources of EMF Emitted Powers 
Door Darshan (UHF) – TV 10,000-20,000 W 
Akashvani (VHF) Radio/FM 10,000-20,000 W 
Microwave oven 1000 W 
Police Wireless 20-50 W 
Mobile Systems 10-20 W 
Mobile Phone 2W 
 
There are thousands of maintenance officials working in above 
departments for eight hours a day and reside in colonies hosting these 
sources of UHF/VHF since last thirty years. However, there is no evidence 
of any higher incidence of brain cancer or any other specific health 
problems in these departments. High power electric transmission lines, 
electric motors, railway engine and lines, spark plugs of vehicles, TV 

22 
 
remotes, Computers and kitchens all emit μ UHF power. Moreover, the 
radiations from the BTSs and mobiles are regulated as per guidelines 
specified by the DoT.” 
 
1.72 On this issue, Reliance Communications Limited in its memorandum submitted to 
the Committee stated as under:- 
  
“Electromagnetic Field (EMF) is part of everyday life, emitted both by 
natural sources like the sun, the Earth and the ionosphere. In the 
electromagnetic spectrum some rays like gamma rays, cosmic rays and X -
rays give off radioactive material called ionizing radiation’. However, EMF 
radiations emitted by Mobile Communication systems lie in the non -
ionizing part of the electromagnetic spectrum and  does not produce 
ionization or cause any genetic damage. 
 
The output power of mobile phones is less than 1 Watt (typically is in the 
range of 0.2 to 0.6 watts), which is far lower than the emission levels that 
are emanating from the microwave or even the radio.” 
 
1.73 On this issue, Chairman, Telecom Sector Committee, European Business Group, 
India (Shri J.P. Garg) in his memorandum, inter-alia, s submitted as under:-  
 
“The ICNIRP standards incorporate substantial safety margins (50 times 
reduction factor ), enough to provide protection from established health 
hazards / potential risks from EMF exposure for all members of the 
community based on scientific evidence / studies research. The safety 
factor includes consideration of  
 
o effects of EMF exposure unde r severe environmental conditions 
(high temperature etc) and / or high activity levels. 
 
o the potentially higher thermal sensitivity in certain population 
groups, such as the frail and / or elderly, infants and young children 
and people with diseases or tak ing medication that compromise 
thermal tolerance. 
 
1.74 In the same memorandum, EBG has also submitted as under:-  
 
“India should reconsider the 2012 decision of lowering the exposure 
limits and should revert back to the implementation of the 
international / ICNIRP guidelines on EMF exposure, which was the 
policy decision of Telecom Commission of India in 2008.  
 

23 
 
These ICNIRP standards have been endorsed by the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) and recommended to be adopted as national 
standard by the countri es. Most countries of the world have adopted 
these standards.” 
1.75 Reacting to the Inter -Ministerial Committee Report, ASSOCHAM in their 
memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
 “ASSOCHAM earnestly believes that the reduction in the EMF l imits made 
in India in September, 2012 to assuage public concerns should be an 
interim arrangement pending completion of the study by ICMR and the 
WHO review and that in the long run EMF safety standards should be 
based on scientific and medical evidence and should be harmonized.”  
 
1.76 When the Committee enquired about the total number of research and study 
done in India by various experts/universities and their findings, the Department in  
written reply stated:-  
 
“ (i)    Indian Council of Medical Resea rch (ICMR) supported an animal 
study (2005 -08) entitled “Microwave radiations effects on reproductive 
systems of male rats” under Prof. J. Behari, School of Environmental 
Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. Ante oxidative changes 
were noticed  in reproductive pattern of male rates and increase in the 
level of CAT activity.   The result obtained showed that the chronic 
exposure to these radiations cause double strand DNA breaks in sperm 
cells.  This study also shows that the microwave radiation exposure can 
cause statistically significant decrease in the sperm count and testes 
weight. 
 
(ii)    To study the adverse effects of cell phone the ICMR has just initiated 
(June, 2010) a study in Delhi to examine whether use of cell phone create 
risk of ne urological disorders and reproductive dysfunctions. 
Measurement of specific absorption rate (SAR) from various types of cell 
phones and power density, wave length and frequency of RFR emitted 
from cell phone towers is also under study. These physical chara cteristics 
of RFR will be correlated with the clinical & laboratory findings. 
 
(iii) Studies conducted in Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar has 
found correlation between mobile phone use (exposure to radio frequency 
radiations) and DNA and chromosomal da mage in lymphocytes of 
individuals using mobile phones which may have long -term consequences 
in terms of neoplasia and/or age -related changes (Gandhi & Anita, 
2007)80. Exposure to radiofrequency radiations has been reported to 

24 
 
affect physiological, neurolo gical, cognitive and behavioral changes. 
(Gandhi et al. 2005)75.  
 
(iv) PGIMER, Chandigarh, has conducted a study (Panda et al., 2010) 89 
and recommended following criteria’s for the release of harmful rays from 
mobile phones. 
  
 Mobile phones should not be  used continuously for more 
than one hour in a day. 
 
 Hands free technology to be used where excessive use of the 
mobile phone is unavoidable. This includes use of 
microphones and Bluetooth so that the handset remains 
away from the ear and thus avoids the d irect impact of 
harmful electromagnetic radiations on the ear and the brain. 
 
 People to avoid long talks and discussions on mobile phones 
as far as possible. 
 
1.77 On the considerations given to the findings of the research carried out in India, 
the Depart ment has stated that the IMC, in its reports, has examined the researches 
undertaken in India and its findings.  
 
1.78 Elaborating on the complexity of the issue, Secretary, DoT, during evidence 
before the Committee stated as under:- 
“Sir, this subject is actually a very complex subject because there are a 
number of players. There are international organizations which are 
working on setting the norms for radiation. There are organizations like 
WHO which are trying to understand the impact on the health by t he 
radiation. Then, there is of course the Government of India which is kind 
of taking care of the technical parameters. Then, there are State 
Governments and the local bodies, and there is also a lot of interest and 
activism from various NGOs in this field. The spectrum is actually very vast, 
the stakeholders who are involved.  
The other complexity is that science in this field is still not deterministic. It 
is broadly probabilistic and even in that respect WHO has not found any 
conclusive evidence to esta blish that the radiations from the towers have 
any harmful effect on the health.  
However, we need to see what the public perception is and we need to 
address that as well. So, it was keeping this in mind that -- despite the fact 
that the International Com mission on Non -Ionising Radiation Protection 
(ICNRP), which had already worked out some norms -- after consultation 

25 
 
with the Inter-Ministerial Committee, we worked out a set of norms which 
is ten times more stringent.” 
B. Restrictions on setting up of telecom towers in residential areas 
 
1.79 From some of the memoranda received by the Committee during the 
examination of the subject, the Committee noted that various individuals and housing 
societies have complained about the setting up of mobile towers in re sidential areas. 
Some of them had requested for removal of entire telecom towers from the residential 
areas irrespective of their sites in urban or rural areas and the same be installed at a 
suitable specified distance from the residential areas. 
  
1.80 Making a plea for the removal of mobile towers from the residential areas,                 
Citizens of the State of Rajasthan, in their memorandum submitted to the Committee 
stated that the towers may be re -located to vacant Government land away from 
residential areas, schools and hospitals. The Government/Municipalities can also collect 
considerable amount of revenue from the services providers. 
 
1.81 Further elaborating on the issue, Citizens of the State of Rajasthan stated as 
under:- 
“ As there have been cases in Jaipur and Mumbai (as revealed  by the media 
reports and personal observations) those buildings/  flats/ inhabitations 
directly exposed to the Tower/ or have  maximum exposure have reported 
more cases of cancer/ other related illness  due to ill effec ts of radiation. 
Whether it's a case of Usha Kiran building of Mumbai or residence in Pradhan 
Marg at Malviya Nagar, Jaipur  experts have studied and also residents have 
revealed that the flats which are not directly exposed to the radiation tower 
have no  reported case of illness while rest have definite cases of 
diseases which indicate cause and effect relationship. Hence, No transmitter 
on a tower should face houses which are within 100 mts. of the towers. 
This is possible only when the height of the tower  is in accordance  with the 
recommendation of the Ministry of Environment and Forest,  Govt. of 
India. An affidavit  in this regard must also be taken from the Tower 
companies.” 
1.82 Hon. Secretary, Roshni Co -operative Housing society Limited, Mumbai (Mrs. Jy oti 
Kotwani), in a memorandum submitted to the Committee stated that local municipal of 
Bandra (West) H ward authorities grant permissions to Mobile Provider Service 

26 
 
Companies to install their cell towers on the buildings having five to seven floors which 
are surrounded by high rise buildings having twelve and more floors. 
 
1.83 Raising similar concern, President, Defence Colony Welfare Association, New 
Delhi (Shri R. Ganesh Aiyar) in his memorandum submitted to the Committee submitted 
that in Defence Colon y, New Delhi, residents and individuals are most concerned and 
worried as a community about the health and the risks to their families, particularly the 
very young and the aged, from continuous exposure to cell phone tower electro -
magnetic radiation in den sely populated residential areas. There are people who live 
next to towers in the colony suffering from brain tumours, cancer, headaches, nausea 
amongst other problems.  Typically, the cell phone tower representatives go knocking 
door to door and offer a h andsome monthly rental to the property owner for allowing 
the tower on their roof and proceed to erect towers without any civic bodies or RAW 
approval. The towers are erected in residential colonies on 1 st and 2 nd floors beaming 
directly into people’s home s, schools etc. some as close as 10 meters with no 
consideration to the neighbours, children or the community as a whole. 
 
1.84 A resident of Chembur, Sindhi Society (Ms. Karina Kaur), has highlighted the 
serious health problem faced by the residents of th eir building which has the height of 8 
floors as around 30-35 antennas are installed at the adjacent building which has 6 floors. 
The agreement of the mobile towers in the adjacent building had already expired on 
31.03.2012. Due to these towers, they are f acing serious health problems, such as, 
continuous headaches, vomiting, rashes on skin, etc. It was also requested that strict 
provisions should be made so as to punish the owners of the mobile towers and the 
members of the building who are allowing setting up of towers on their terraces. 
 
1.85 On this issue, the Department while furnishing their comments informed the 
Committee that the complaints in this regard had been forwarded to TERM Cell, 
Mumbai, for appropriate action.  
 
1.86 From the above, sensing the serious concern of various individuals/residents of 
Housing Society, the Committee enquired about framing of separate rules for setting up 
of mobile towers in residential area. To this the Department in its written reply stated as 
under:-  
 
“There is n o bar on setting up of the mobile towers in residential areas. 
However, as per the guideline dated 01.08.2013, there shall be no building 

27 
 
right in front of the antenna(e), of equivalent height taking into account 
the tilt of the lowest antenna on tower as per details in the guideline.” 
 
1.87 On making the consent of the resident mandatory before installing mobile towers 
in residential areas, the Department replied as under:- 
 
“As per the advisory guideline dated 01.08.2013, the local bodies may seek 
submission of the copy of No Objection Certificate (NOC) from Building 
Owner / entities having roof top rights or roof top tenants in case of roof 
based tower/ land owner in case of ground based tower, as the case may 
be. As per their rules in force, State Govern ments, at their discretion, may 
seek fresh NOC at the time of renewal of site (tenancy) contract for mobile 
tower.” 
 
1.88 The Committee were also informed by the Department that while framing 
guidelines for setting up of towers in residential areas, follow ing measures have been 
taken into consideration:- 
 
“As per the revised guidelines dated 01.08.2013, it is envisaged that in 
case of both ground based towers & roof top towers, there shall be no 
building right in front of the antenna(e), of equivalent heigh t taking into 
account the tilt of the lowest antenna on tower as per details in the table 
below:  
 
Number of antenna(e) pointed 
in the same direction  
Building/Structure safe distance from 
the antenna(e) at the same height  
(in meters)  
1 20 
2 35 
4 45 
6 55 
 
1.89 Justifying the reasons for setting up of mobile towers in residential areas, the 
Department replied as under:- 
 
“The Department has to ensure expansion of telecom services, with good 
quality of service, while ensuring safety of the public. Installation of towers 
in the residential areas may create concerns among the members of 
public. Accordingly, it has been stated in the DoT guideline that  
“State Governments along with DoT may organize public awareness 
programs involving civil society members”. 
 
 

28 
 
C. Restrictions for setting up towers in schools, colleges and hospitals 
 
1.90 The Committee received suggestions from various individuals/organizations that 
telecom towers should not be allowed to be installed in public places like schools, 
hospitals, colleges and other public places. Citizen Groups of Mumbai submitted to the 
Committee that installation of mobile tower antennae on side walls, terraces of 
hospitals, nursing homes, educational institutions, old people homes, Government 
buildings and her itage buildings should be banned and there should be restrictions of 
mobile tower antennas at a distance of 100 meters from such buildings.  Similarly, in a 
memorandum submitted to the Committee, Mobile Tower Grievance Forum (Shri Milind 
Bembalkar and Shri  Rajendra Ranjan), proposed that towers should not be allowed on 
schools, colleges and hospitals, children correction homes ( Balsudhargriha), 
Vrudhashram and hotels/orphanage buildings for children.   
 
1.91 Similarly, Citizens of the State of Rajasthan, in  their memorandum submitted to 
the Committee stated as under:  
“There should be a  ban on installation of BTS and Antennae on Schools 
and Hospitals, Playgrounds for children, (on) along the Walls of Buildings 
and strictly prohibited for residential areas. S tudies have specifically 
pointed out that the health hazards emitting from the towers for Children 
are multifold putting them in the highly vulnerable group.” 
1.92 With regard to restriction of setting up towers in public places, such as, schools, 
hospitals and other such public places, the Department stated that as per the broad 
guidelines issued by DoT regarding installation of mobile towers, no restrictions has 
been imposed in installation of tower on specific building such as schools/hospitals.  
 
1.93 When the Committee enquired about the recommendation made by Inter -
Ministerial Committee in this regard, the Department stated as under:- 
“IMC, in its report, had made recommendation to impose restrictions on 
installations of mobile towers within the premise s of Schools and hospitals 
etc.  This recommendation was not accepted considering that 
banning/restriction of installation of towers in schools / hospitals or at any 
other location in fact may give rise to a perception that despite the 
tightening of the no rms, the radiations are harmful and this may lead to 
public resistance against installation of towers denying them the quality 
mobile services due to unfounded reasons which are not based on a 
scientific study or facts.” 
 

29 
 
1.94 On the reasons/findings on th e basis of which IMC has made the 
recommendation, the Department in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The Inter -ministerial Committee recommended to consider imposing 
restrictions on installation of BTS towers within the compound of schools 
and hospitals , based on issues raised by Stakeholders. However, no 
conclusive evidence has been established so far by any national / 
international organization regarding adverse effect of EMF radiation on 
human health.” 
 
1.95 With regard to the number of States which had imposed restriction on the setting 
up of towers in such places and the number of Court Orders filed in this regard, the 
Department informed the Committee as under:-  
 
“State Government of Rajasthan, in its guidelines for grant of permission 
for installation of tower, has stipulated that the mobile towers should not 
be installed in school/colleges buildings. High court of Rajasthan at Jaipur, 
in a PIL, has ordered the State Government of Rajasthan to implement its 
guidelines and submit compliance. However , the said order has been 
challenged by the telecom service providers in Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
the matter is sub-judice. 
 
Further, as per the available information, Madhya Pradesh Government 
has also issued a Gazette Notification which excludes school and hospital 
buildings/ premises from the list of places permissible for erecting telecom 
towers.” 
 
1.96 Elaborating further on international practices followed in this regard, the 
Department submitted:- 
“As per WHO and ICNIRP guidelines, there are no such  restrictions. 
Further, no information is available about such specific countries that 
impose such restrictions.” 
 
1.97 On the above issue, Chairman, Telecom Selector Committee, European Business 
Group India, in his memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
“There are a few countries like Switzerland, who are observing ICNIRP 
based limits as the national standard and for precautionary approach, 
lower limits for areas like apartments, schools, hospitals, workplace and 
children playgrounds.” 
 
 

30 
 
1.98 Reacting strongly against any such proposal for putting restriction for setting up 
of telecom towers in schools, hospitals, colleges, etc., Director General, TAIPA, in their 
memorandum submitted to the Committee suggested that there should not be any 
artificial restrictions on educational institutions and hospitals for tower installations.  
 
D. Need for undertaking Long Term Research 
 
1.99 Various individuals/experts/stakeholders who submitted their memoranda to the 
Committee or appeared before the Comm ittee emphasized upon the need for a long 
term research and conducting long term impact assessment studies to monitor the 
impact of EMR on biological environmental. Director, Bombay Natural History Society, in 
his memorandum submitted as under: 
 
“Pollution from EMRs being a relatively new environmental issue, there is 
a lack of established standard procedures and protocols to study and 
monitor the EMF impacts especially among wildlife, which often make the 
comparative evaluations between studies difficult. Moreover, there are no 
long-term data available on the environmental impacts of EMRs as of now. 
Well designed long -term impact assessment studies would be required to 
monitor the impact of ever-increasing intensities of EMRs on our biological 
environment. ”  
 
1.100 Commenting on the inadequacies of the present research and the difficulties in 
understanding the biological effects of RFR, Scientist -F, Indian Council of Medical 
Research, in their memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“The ma in difficulty in understanding the biological effects of RFR is 
caused by the complex interaction of the different exposure parameters as 
well as the mass, shape and size of the body, the orientation of the body 
with the field vectors and the electrical pr operties of both the body and 
the environment.  Other variables which may play a role in possible 
biological effects are those that are part of environment i.e. ambient 
temperature, air velocity, humidity and body insulation. Characteristics of 
the individ ual i.e. age, gender, activity level, debilitation and/or other 
diseases would also contribute. As all these factors have not been studied 
in a comprehensive manner, hence no conclusions can be drawn.” 
 
1.101 Also suggesting the need for undertaking long t erm research in biological effect 
of radiations from telecom tower radiations, the Ministry of Science and Technology 
(Department of Biotechnology) also furnished their comment as under:- 
 

31 
 
“Though there is no decisive scientific evidence that RF signals fr om 
telecom towers and wireless network causes adverse health effect, 
however, based on the literature survey number of studies have reported 
the link between exposures to radio frequency radiations on the 
occurrence of health disorders such as damage to ce ll, tissue and DNA, 
depression, suppressed immune function, tumors etc. The elderly people, 
pregnant women and children’s are at greatest risk due to their thinner 
skulls, and rapid rate of growth. Therefore, in view of the growing 
scientific evidence citing biological effect of radiations from telecom tower 
radiations it is essential that studies on the long term and cumulative 
exposure of electromagnetic radiations and other agents are conducted.” 
 
1.102 During the study visit of the Committee to Mumbai a nd Goa from 24 -28 January, 
2013, the Department informed the Committee that the main challenge in conducting 
studies of radiation hazard is the requirement of very long period of scientific research 
on targetted population. 
 
1.103 On being enquired about the measures taken by DoT for continuous or long term 
research, the Department replied:- 
 
“On the directive of Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), Department of Science 
& Technology (DST) has constituted a Committee on 01.10.2012, under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. N .K. Ganguly, Former Director General (ICMR), 
having representative from IIT Chennai, Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research, Lucknow, Department of Telecom, Ministry of Environment & 
Forest, ICMR and DST to examine the harmful effects from Cell towers on 
the population living in the vicinity and for developing the frame of 
reference for calling out Request For Proposals (RFPs) for scientific 
assessment of health hazards and adverse impact on ecology. “ 
 
1.104 On the issue of funding such research programme , Scientific Officer ‘G’, Bhabha 
Atomic Research Center (Dr. R.K. Bajpai), in his memorandum submitted to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
 
“A nominal charge may be included on operators to promote research on 
impact assessment and generate long term data. The reported harmful 
effects need to be substantiated through scientific data bases. For 
examples decline of house sparrow as a result of mobile tower radiation 
can be substantiated if baseline data on sparrow populations prior to 
installation of tower and  a monitoring for their population afterward can 
bring out better correlation.”  
 

32 
 
1.105 On the issue of budgetary grant allocated by the Department for studying the 
health hazards from radiation emanating from the telecom towers and mobile handsets, 
the Department in a written reply informed the Committee that no budgetary grant has 
been allotted for this purpose. 
 
1.106 On being pointed out by the Committee that radiation being an area of concern 
needs constant research and need a regular budgetary allocat ion under separate head, 
the Department stated:- 
 
“In India, studies on health hazards from EMF radiation are being 
conducted by Department of Science & Technology as well as by ICMR 
under Ministry of Health. There is an understanding with DST that such 
research shall be jointly funded by DoT and DST.” 
 
1.107 On the plans of the Department to allocate separate budgetary grant, the 
Department informed the Committee that the request for budgetary allocation for fund 
shall be processed as and when it is received from DST. 
 
1.108 On the issue of creating, a separate budgetary head, the Department informed 
the Committee that action has been initiated for opening a separate budget head of 
expenditure for studies on health hazard from EMF radiation. 
 
1.109 Further, on the issue of imposing nominal charge on telecom operators to 
promote or undertake research and generate long term data, the Department in a 
written reply also stated as under:- 
 
“So far, DoT has no proposal to charge Telecom operators to promote or 
undertake research and generate long term data. However, as replied 
above, Department of Science & Technology has undertaken such 
scientific researches/studies for assessment of possible health hazards due 
to EMR from mobile towers/handsets.”  
 
1.110 Emphasizing the need for India specific research, Citizen Groups of Mumbai, in 
their memorandum submitted to the Committee inter-alia stated as under:- 
 
“…….For example a Senior Academician Dr. Vijayalaxmi, in the Department 
of Radiation Oncology, University of Te xas Health Science Centre, Texas 
USA one of the persons on whose research World Health organization and 

33 
 
FCC rely on, informed that her research is based on One Antenna, Two 
Watts Power Transmission and one Mouse.  
 
She was not aware of clusters of antenna and the kind of power 
transmission by antennae in Mumbai or other cities in India. She was 
shown a cluster of antennae at Haji Ali Juice Center and told to do 
research based on clusters and power transmission of levels from 400 
watts to 800 watts.  Just bec ause we have more than a billion people 
Indian lives are not cheap and we should not be taken for granted.” 
 
1.111 When the Committee enquired about the details of the studies which have been 
relied upon by WHO, the Department in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“WHO has relied upon the international scientific studies and research on 
EMF radiation. WHO, through the International EMF Project, has 
established a programme to monitor the EMF scientific literature, to 
evaluate the health effects from expo sure to EMF in the range from 0 to 
300 GHz, to provide advice about possible EMF hazards and to identify 
suitable mitigation measures. Following extensive international reviews, 
the International EMF Project has promoted research to fill gaps in 
knowledge. In response national Governments and research institutes 
have funded over $250 million on EMF research over the past 10 years.” 
 
1.112 When enquired about the need for India specific research on the issue, the 
Department stated in a written reply as under:-  
 
“The effects of EMF radiation on the human health, if any, shall not be 
drastically different across the world. The conditions specific to India have 
been conveyed to WHO for their consideration.” 
 
1.113 On the measures taken by the Department to prom ote India specific research on 
health hazards of EMF radiations from telecom towers and mobile handsets, the 
Department stated that Department of Science & Technology (DST) has constituted a 
Committee on 01.10.2012, under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.K. Gangu ly, Former Director 
General (ICMR) to examine the harmful effects of radiation from Cell Towers on the 
population living in the vicinity. 
 
1.114 The Committee have also been informed that based on the recommendation of 
the Committee constituted on 01.10.20 12 under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.K. Ganguly, 
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) invited R&D proposals in June, 2013 on 
the possible impact of EMF radiation exposure from mobile towers and handsets on life 

34 
 
(humans, living organism, flora & faun a and environment) and related initiatives from 
Eligible Scientist/Organisations -public or private, individually or in collaboration. Now 
SERB under Department of Science and Technology (Government of India) has 
constituted an Expert Committee/Task Force v ide their letter No.:SER/CELL 
TOWER/2012 dated 04 September, 2013, to evaluate, R&D proposal to study the 
possible impact of EMF Radiation exposure from mobile tower and handset on life 
(humans, living organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives. 
1.115 On the query of the Committee on the study done to ascertain the different 
existing conditions between advanced and developed countries like USA/UK and 
developing country like India, the Department in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
“IMC constituted by DoT had examined about 90 national and 
international research / studies and after due deliberation with 
stakeholders has submitted its report in year 2011, based on which 
department has adopted radiation limits which are 1/10th of ICNIRP 
recommended limits.” 
 
1.116 With regard to India specific conditions that have been conveyed to WHO for 
their consideration, the Department informed the Committee that:- 
 
“Specific conditions that have been conveyed include multi -operator 
scenario, mobile phone usage, higher population density etc.” 
 
1.117 Bringing out some of the different conditions prevailing in the developed 
countries vis -a-vis India, Citizen of the State of Rajasthan, in their memorandum 
submitted to the Committee stated as under: 
“Currently, all the standards of radiation limit cater to the western world 
and are based on  research conducted in western countries where 
conditions are very different from those in India – 
 
 In USA and Europe, population density is very low as compared to 
that in India. 
 Climate in the countries is cold.  
 Density of mobile phone towers is very low as compared to India. 
 The body mass of the people in these countries is higher than 
Indian people 

35 
 
So, unless proper  research is done specifically for Indian condition s - it is 
better to act on the side of caution.” 
E. International Practices and countries having lower emission standards  
 
1.118 When the Committee enquired about the countries having lower emission 
standard than India, the Department informed as under:- 
 
“Some of countries having lower radiation emission norms than India are 
as below:- 
 
Country Frequency  Power Density 
Bulgaria 900, 1800 & 2100 MHz 0.1 Watt/Sqm 
Italy 900, 1800 & 2100 MHz 0.1 Watt/Sqm 
Lithuania 900, 1800 & 2100 MHz 0.1 Watt/Sqm 
Poland 900, 1800 & 2100 MHz 0.1 Watt/Sqm 
Russia 900, 1800 & 2100 MHz 0.1 Watt/Sqm 
 
However, in India, the limiting reference levels of Electromagnetic 
radiation from Mobile towers has been reduced to 1/10 th of the limit 
prescribed by the ICNIRP with effect from 01.09.2012 which is as below:- 
 
Frequency 
(MHz) 
ICNIRP Radiation 
Norms  
Revised DoT Norms 
effective from 01.09.2012 
900 4.5 Watt/Sqm 0.45 Watt/Sqm 
1800 9 Watt/Sqm 0.9 Watt/Sqm 
2100 10.5 Watt/Sqm 1.05 Watt/Sqm 
 
With above revision, India has become one of the very few countries in the 
world who have stringent EMF Radiation Standards not only for mobile 
towers but also for mobile handsets.” 
 
1.119 Chairman, Telecom Sector Committee, European Business Group, India, in his 
memorandum submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“Few countries are observing limits below ICNIRP and FCC regulations (i.e. 
more stringent levels), perhaps on the basis of precautionary principle like, 
- Belarus, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Israel, Lithuania, Poland, Russia, Belgium, 
Greece, Italy.” 
 

36 
 
1.120 The Department in a written reply has also stated that few countries viz; China, 
Russia, Italy, Poland have adopted stricter norms. India has already adopted 1/10th of 
the internationally accepted limits.  
 
1.121 Elaborating on the issue, Citizens of the State of Rajasthan, in their memorandum 
submitted to the Committee  stated that the radiation emission limit allowed in China is 
10 times less than in India even though China has more population and mobile usage. 
The towers in China a re emitting 100 times less radiation, even though there are more 
mobile users in China. 
 
1.122 When enquired about the views of the Department on the above issue, the 
Department submitted that the complete information about lower radiation norms by 
China is not available at this stage including pros and cons of such norms. 
 
1.123 When further queried by the Committee that India should also examine the 
practices of the countries including China that have adopted lower emission norms than 
India, the Department stated as under:- 
 
“The DoT is keeping a watch on  various reports of WHO and ITU in this 
matter. Any revision of norms will be based on recommendations of these 
organizations and also on result of the studies being carried out by DST 
and ICMR.” 
  
 

37 
 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Need for exploring new technological innovations 
 
A. Introduction of low power radiating antennae like Micro, Pico and Femto 
 
1.124 Retired Advisor (Technology), Department of Telecommunications, in his 
memorandum submitted to the Committee state d that high power radiating antennae 
should be avoided in future in high density populated areas by deploying low power 
radiating antennae (Micro, Pico and Femto). He has also cited some of the advantages 
of deploying low power radiating BTS in place of to wer based high power radiating BTSs 
as under:- 
 
“(a)  The fear of health hazards due to high radiations from mobile towers 
will be  eliminated from the society as tower -less low powered BTS 
will be safe. 
  (b)    The safety of the buildings will not be compromised 
  (c)    The low powered BTS will be possible to be powered back up by 
solar   or hybrid power systems, thus giving following vital 
advantages: 
         * Saving of precious diesel to the tune of 4 billion liters of diesel per  
year. 
        * Eliminating CO2 emission to the tune of 6 million tonnes per year. 
(d)   Huge quantities of precious steel will be saved. 
(e)   Skylines of the cities and towns can be kept clear.” 
  
1.125 Elaborating further on the issue, the Retired Advisor(T), DoT, during the course of 
evidence before the Committee stated:- 
 
“Sir, in developed countries, in USA and Europe, the practice of having 
towers on rooftops has already been abandoned.  I have gone of course 
not many but to two three countries....xxxx....You go to any  big country 
whether you go to New York or Paris or anywhere, do you find towers on 
the rooftops now?  We don’t find, Sir.  So they have already adopted the 
techniques which I mentioned earlier.  But our operators are not 
interested in doing so because it has financial implications.” 
 

38 
 
1.126 When the Committee enquired about the practicability of introducing such 
alternate low power radiating antennae in the country, the Department stated as 
under:- 
“These technologies are meant for coverage in a very small/ confined area. 
These may reduce the emission in that confined area but will not be able 
to provide the coverage that is sustained through outdoor BTS for 
providing seamless mobile connectivity.”  
 
1.127 Further elaborating in the issue, the Department also  stated that the use of these 
technologies, even in the indoor environment is very expensive. 
 
1.128 The Department has also informed the Committee that micro and pico cell 
technologies are already being used in India for providing coverage in multi -storey 
buildings. The femto cell technology is relatively new and is expected to be used by the 
TSPs in due course. On mandating the TSPs to adopt such technologies for residential 
buildings, office building etc., it was stated that the use of particular technol ogy may 
limit the choices of the TSPs with regard to technology options. 
 
 
B. Installation of Light Emitting Diode (LED) based Electromagnetic Radiation 
(EMR) Meters 
 
1.129 In a memorandum received by the Committee from Mechanical Engineering 
Student in Ch ennai (Shri Siddharth.V), the following suggestion was made in respect of 
creating an enabling mechanism for constant monitoring of radiations from mobile 
towers:  
 
“In every tower there should be an indicator that shows the radiation 
level. If radiation l evel reaches above a dangerous threshold (scientifically 
pre-determined) value, due to technical snags, should automatically shut 
down the tower until the problem is rectified.” 
 
1.130 On the above issue, Scientist ‘G’, BARC, Mumbai, in his memorandum subm itted 
to the Committee also stated as under:-  
 
“Such electronic meter must be installed in Basement/Society office of the 
buildings with mobile towers. Such meter should display green signal if 
EMR are below prescribed limits and must turn red through yel low in case 
unauthorized increase in tower capacity is introduced by operators. This 
will generate an atmosphere of belief and confidence in general public 
especially as the EMR are invisible radiations. Such radiation monitors are 
installed by Dept of Ato mic Energy in all its establishments involving 
radiations.’’ 

39 
 
1.131 On the above suggestions received by the Committee for installing electronic LED 
meters to check tower emissions, the Department replied as under:- 
“As per the available information, there is no such low cost meter that can 
make precision measurement and declare non -compliance. As stated 
before, compliance is ensured through the process of self -certification by 
the TSPs and audit by the TERM cells. It is to further clarify that the effect 
and level of radiation is at its minimum just below the tower, therefore it 
will be very low at ground/basement below the tower.”    
1.132 When enquired about the effectiveness of LED based EMR meters in checking 
unauthorized increase in tower capacity by operators, Department stated:- 
 
“A meter like the LED based EMR meters is not a solution.” 
 
1.133 On the issue of manufacturing LED based meters, the Department stated:- 
 
“Such instruments can be used after examination of their accuracy and 
calibration. Howe ver, no such manufacturer has approached TEC for 
testing of the product so far.” 
 
1.134 Scientist ‘G’, BARC in his memorandum also suggested for the establishment of 
Central EMR Monitoring Control Units. He suggested:- 
 
“All mobile towers must be compulsor ily equipped with sending GPRS 
based EMR data transmissions to Central Control Room where competent 
authority can monitor errant/malfunctioning tower with exceeding EMR 
limits.” 
1.135 When enquired about the specific views of the Department to the above 
suggestions, the Department stated as under:- 
 
“In our understanding, technically the monitoring equipment need not to 
be installed at all the towers as the radiation pattern does not change until 
there is a change due to technical or operational reasons and  hence 
continuous EMR monitoring may not be desirable. Presently there is no 
proposal to install such monitoring equipment in India in view of the EMR 
testing mechanism put in place by DoT.” 
 
1.136 On the issue of continuous EMR monitoring of telecom tower s, the Department 
in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The radiation parameters of the BTS are submitted by the TSPs, along 
with the self-certificate. Such BTS are subjected to audit by the TERM cells 

40 
 
as per prescribed procedure. Any subsequent changes i n the parameters 
are to be intimated by the TSPs along with the fresh self -certificate. 
Accordingly,  the compliance to the radiation limits is ensured at all times. 
In case self -certificates are found wrong during audit, penalty is imposed 
on TSPs. Theref ore, there is no immediate need to set up centralized 
monitoring systems.” 
 

41 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Supply of sub-standard mobile handsets to India by reputed global manufacturers 
 
1.137 In the context of Supply of sub -standard mobile handsets to India by reputed 
global manufacturers, Retired Advisor (Technology), DoT in his memorandum submitted 
to the Committee stated as under:-  
 “It is to be noted that more than 90% of the mobile hand -sets, except 
about 10% coming from the grey market, are being supplied by the 
reputed global manufacturers like Nokia, Samsung, Blackberry etc. who 
are supplying the same to the whole world including the developed 
countries like USA, Europe, Japan etc including the countries of their 
origin. But in these countries, are observing all sa fety limit norms 
prescribed in those countries, although the sets are coming out from the 
same factories. The possible reason for resisting the norms in India comes 
to the mind of a common man is that, probably, the hand -sets being 
supplied in India are th e ones rejected by the developed countries, not 
complying the norms prescribed in these countries, taking Indians granted 
to be treated in any way.” 
1.138 When queried by the Committee about the existing mechanism to ensure that 
only those mobile handsets that meet international standards and are in conformity 
with DoT standards are imported in the country, the Department in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“The standards for mobile phones is still under deliberation at Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) tech nical Committee. Once the standard is 
approved, it shall be considered for implementation.” 
1.139 On the reasons for the delay in finalizing the standards by BIS Technical 
Committee, the Department submitted as under: 
“BIS has started deliberation on the d raft Standards and may finalise soon 
following Standard Development Procedure. However, at present, the 
standards for mobile phones have been finalized by TEC and the same can 
be considered for implementation without waiting for the BIS report.” 
1.140 With regard to the standards adopted for import/manufacture of the mobile 
phones in the country the Department  stated: 
 

42 
 
“The presently available mobile phones use the Global System for Mobile 
(GSM)/Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) air interface standards.  
There are other parameters also which have been provisioned in the TEC 
developed standard, including SAR value.” 
 
1.141 On the quantum of penalty for violation, the Department informed the 
Committee that under the BIS Act, 1986, following punishment is mentioned:  
 
“33.  (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or 
section 12 or section 14 or section 15 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
(2) Any court trying a contravention under sub -section (1) may direct that 
any property in respect of which the contravention has taken place shall 
be forfeited to the Bureau.”  
  
1.142 The Committee have also been informed that Hon’ble High C ourt of Allahabad, 
Lucknow Bench in a Writ Petition No. 11275 (M/B) of 2010 filed by Shri Ram Singh 
Jauhari Vs UoI & Others has given direction vide its order dated 10.01.2012 to the 
Government of India to constitute a Committee consisting of five members of Electrical 
Engineering Department of the IITs Mumbai, Kharagpur, Kanpur, Delhi, Roorkee 
including Prof (Dr.) Girish Kumar and four other prominent persons of other scientific 
institutions of the country like AIIMS (Delhi), Indian Council of medical Rese arch, etc. to 
submit a report so that the Government of India may take necessary precaution while 
granting permission for establishment of mobile towers as well as to regulate sale of 
mobiles with necessary precautions. In compliance of above order of Hon’ ble High Court 
a Committee has been constituted vide this office letter no. 17 -63/2011-CS-III dated 
20.08.2013. The Committee is examining the matter and is expected to submit its 
recommendation within three months. 

43 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Issues relating to Increasing Public Awareness and Grievance Redressal Mechanisms 
 
A. Need for effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
1.143 In some of the memoranda submitted to the Committee, a suggestion was made 
that the name and address of the operators, contact person details,  address of 
complaint redressing authority etc., should be displayed on the dash board of each 
telecom towers as well as at easily accessible places in the locality. In this regard, the 
Department informed the Committee that the suggestion is being examine d in 
consultation with stakeholders which include telecom service providers and 
infrastructure providers. 
   
1.144 Shri Amit Kumar Maihan, in his memorandum submitted to the Committee  
submitted as under:- 
 
“No specific provision is available to general pu blic whereby details or 
information can be sought in respect of prescribed norms of radiation and 
level of radiation/waves emanating in their vicinity. The applicant would 
like to refer piece of information which suggest the general public do not 
have any option or right to know the level of radiation in vicinity thereby 
making them dependent on discretion of officers of concerned 
departments/regulators.” 
   
1.145 Replying on the issue, the Department in their written reply  stated as under:- 
 
“DoT has pres cribed the radiation norms to be followed by the telecom 
service providers which are also available on DoT website for the 
information to the general public. A mechanism is already available to 
ensure that TSPs adhered to the prescribed norms.” 
 
1.146 On the remedies available to the ordinary citizen for redressal of their grievances 
related to radiation and possible health hazards, the Department  a written reply stated 
as under:- 
“Any citizen may submit their complaint to the Public Grievance portal of 
DoT or to the concerned TERM Cell. Further, a specific Complaint Handling 
System for Electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation from Mobile Towers 
has also been launched by DoT on 4th October 2012 in Mumbai. Initially, 
this facility has been started for the resi dents of Mumbai. The online 
facility is available on DoT website “http://www.dot.gov.in” through a link 

44 
 
“Public Grievance – EMF Radiation”. There is a proposal to extend this 
facility to other metros also.” 
 
1.147 On the plan of the Department on launching  the system in remaining metros, the 
Department informed as under:- 
 
“It has been decided to put in place the complaint redressing mechanism 
in Metro cities. The system has been made operational in Mumbai first, 
where number of complaints was initially hig h. Based on the experience 
gained in Mumbai and feedback from TCIL and TERM Cell, deliberations 
are underway for launching the system in remaining Metros.” 
 
B. Setting up of State/District Telecom Committees 
 
1.148 The Department informed the Committee tha t DoT has issued broad guidelines 
to all States on 23.08.2012 and one of the guidelines was formation of State and District 
Telecom Committees for ensuring regular interactions between TERM Cells of DoT and 
State/District administration. Hence, it is propo sed to set -up State and District Telecom 
Committees for review of all Telecom Infrastructure related issues at State/District level. 
 
1.149 On the status of formation of State and District Telecom Committees, the 
Department informed the Committee that the guideline issued by them were  advisory 
in nature but so far no State Government has informed DoT on setting up the State and 
District Telecom Committees. Only Kerala State has invited DoT officials for discussion 
on the formulation of State Tower Policy in this regard. 
 
1.150 Looking at the dismal performance of States/UTs for setting up of State/District 
Telecom Committees, the Committee enquired about the steps being taken by DoT for 
early constitution of these important Committees. To this, the Departme nt stated as 
under:- 
 
“In the revised guidelines issued by DoT on 01.08.2013, the formation of 
State Level and District Level Committees has been re -emphasized with 
the following terms: 
 
In order to effectively address public grievances relating to 
installation of towers and issues related to telecom infrastructure, 
State Governments may setup:  

45 
 
State Level Telecom Committee (STC) consisting of officers from 
TERM Cells, State Administration, representative(s) of concerned 
Telecom Service Provider(s) and eminent public persons etc.  
District Level Telecom Committee (DTC) consisting of officers from 
District Administration, representative(s) of concerned Telecom 
Service Provider(s) and eminent public persons etc. 
 
The matter shall be taken up with the State Go vernments for early 
implementation of the Committees.”  
 
1.151 The Committee were subsequently informed by the Department that as per the 
information available, States of Uttarakhand and West Bengal have formed State level 
Committees. 
 
1.152 With regard to  the powers and functions of this Committee, the Department 
informed that the terms of the Committees have not been specified by DoT. However, 
their main function shall be the redressal of grievances of the Stakeholders relating to 
installation of towers and issues related to Telecom Infrastructure.  
 
1.153 On the issue of including representatives of local bodies/State 
Assemblies/Parliament etc. in these Committees so as to make them more effective, the 
Department replied that DoT has envisaged inclusion o f eminent public persons in the 
Committees, to be constituted by State Governments. 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
Issues relating to TERM Cells 
 
A. Shortage of manpower  
 
1.154 The Committee noted that Telecom Enforcement Resource and Monitoring Cell 
(TERM) were created by  the Government for having a continuous monitoring of 
compliance to prescribed norms by the Telecom Service Providers.  With the increasing 
concerns over the harmful effects of Electromagnetic radiation on human health, the 
Government in the year 2010 deci ded that TERM Cells may be entrusted the work of 
cross checking the compliance of EMF radiation norms as prescribed by the 
Government.  TERM Cell tests annually upto 10 per cent of new BTS sites randomly at its 
discretion. Additionally, BTS sites against w hich there are public complaints are also 
tested by TERM Cells. The Department also informed the Committee that a proposal for 
augmentation of manpower in TERM Cells is under consideration, so that the testing of 
BTS may be augmented. 
 
1.155 Clarifying on the issue of randomly testing only 10 per cent of the new BTS, the 
Department submitted that as per amendment issued by Access Service Cell of DoT vide 
letter dated 10 December, 2010, it has been decided that TERM Cell shall test annually 
upto 10 percent of total BTS sites (including existing and new sites).  
 
1.156 With regard to the violation of radiation norms and punitive action taken, the 
Committee were informed as under:- 
 
“As on 30.06.2013 there are 747917 BTSs in the country. The number of 
BTS tested during the financial year 2010-11 (since 15.11.2010), 2011-12 & 
2012-13 are 2440, 21709 & 28814 respectively. Violation of radiation 
norms were detected by TERM Cells in 128 cases. Demand Notices 
imposing penalty has been issued in 84 cases and show caus e notices 
issued in 19 cases and remaining cases are under process for issue of show 
cause notices.” 
 
1.157 On the percentage of BTS sites tested by TERM Cells during the last  three years, 
the Committee were apprised as under:-  
 

47 
 
“The status testing carried out by TERM Cells is reproduced below: 
 
  Approx number of BTS 
(in lacs) in the 
beginning of the year 
Total Testing 
during the 
year 
%age 
testing 
Nov. 10 -  March 11 5.58 2440 0.44 
April 11 -  March 12 6.20 21709 3.5 
April 12 -  March 13 7.14 28814 4.0 
April 13 -  June  13 7.42 6235 Ist quarter 
 
1.158 When the Committee enquired about the composition, mandate and functioning 
of TERM Cells, the Department submitted as under:- 
 
“The TERM Cells are being headed by a Dy Director General level officer 
(Senior Administrative Grade (SAG)) supported by Junior Administrative 
Grade (JAG) and Senior / Junior Time Scale (STS)/(JTS) officers. The broad 
functions mandated to TERM Cells include ensuring compliance of 
licensing conditions by TSPs, interface between Security Agencies and 
TSPs, curbing of grey market activities, redressal of grievance of telecom 
subscribers in respect of deficiencies by TSPs etc. The actual strength of 
TERM Cells is not adequate to test all the BTS sites across the country. The 
sanctioned /actual strength of the officials/staff in TERM Cells is as below: 
  
Grade Sanctioned strength Working strength 
HAG NIL NIL 
SAG 34 34 
JAG 68 55 
STS/JTS 136 30(approx) 
AD/JTO NIL NIL 
TTA NIL NIL 
Assistant NIL NIL” 
 
1.159 On the plans to fill up these vacancies, the Department in their written reply 
stated as under:-  
 
“From the officers repatriated from BSNL/ MTNL, 54 officers at SAG grade, 
44 officers at JAG grade have been entrusted with the functional 
responsibility of TERM Cells. Apart from t his 70 officers of Indian Telecom 
Service Gr ‘A’ are under their probationary training. After completion of 
their training, majority of them will be posted in TERM Cells. Further 
recruitment through UPSC is under process. For Group B, C & D posts, 

48 
 
some officials  have been taken on loan from BSNL which may be further 
increased to meet the shortage.” 
 
1.160 With regard to the measures to strengthen the existing mechanism of checking 
EMF radiations from mobile towers, the Department in their written reply sta ted as 
under:-  
 
“Strict penalty regime has been put in place for violation of radiation 
norms. Further, a Complaint Handling System for Electro Magnetic Field 
(EMF) Radiation from Mobile Towers has also been launched by DoT on 
4th October 2012 in Mumbai. Initially, this facility has been started for the 
residents of Mumbai. The online facility is available on DoT website 
“http://www.dot.gov.in” through a link “Public Grievance – EMF 
Radiation”. There is a proposal to extend this facility to other metros also.” 
 
B. Non-availability of test equipment 
 
1.161 On the issue of availability of adequate testing equipment with TERM Cells, the 
Department replied:- 
 
“All the TSPs have been directed to make available the test instruments to 
the concerned TERM Cell on demand.”  
 
1.162 When the Committee enquired about the reasons for relying on the test 
equipments provided by the Telecom Service providers, the Department informed that 
the procurement process for radiation test equipment for the TERM Cells is underway.  
 
1.163 On the constraints being faced by the TERM Cells in fulfilling their mandate, the 
Committee were informed as under:-  
 
“TERM Cells are fulfilling their mandate, inspite of constraints of staff 
particularly at executive and support level. As a stop gap  arrangement, 
upto 7 Group ‘B’ officers are being borrowed from BSNL for each TERM 
Cell. Enhancement of Financial powers of TERM Cells for hiring of 
outsourced manpower is under consideration. Proposal for further 
augmentation of manpower in TERM Cells is also under consideration.” 
 
C. Issues relating to ‘Self-Certificate’ 
 
1.164 On the issue of EMR radiations from mobile towers and ensuring compliance of 
such radiation to the prescribed norms, the Department in their Background Note 
stated as under:- 

49 
 
 
“DoT in the year 2008, adopted the ICNIRP norms and inserted a clause in 
the Unified Access Service Licence Agreement vide amendment dated 4 th 
November, 2008 stating that “Licensee shall conduct audit and provide 
self-certificates annually as per procedure pre scribed by 
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC)/or any other agency 
authorized by Licensor from time to time for conforming to limits/levels 
for antennae (Base Station Emissions) for general public exposure as 
prescribed by International Commission o n Non -Ionizing Radiation 
Protection (ICNIRP) from time to time.  
 
Apart from above, Access Service Cell of DoT issued instructions, vide 
letter dated the 8 th April, 2010, to all the Access Service Providers 
regarding implementation of radiation norms on el ectro Magnetic Field 
(EMF) exposure by Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) by submitting the self 
certification for each and every BTS. The instructions, inter -alia, includes 
the following:- 
 
o All base Station Transceivers (BTSs) must be self certified as 
meeting the radiation norms. Self certification is submitted to 
respective Telecom Enforcement Resource and Monitoring (TERM) 
Cells of DoT by the telecom service providers. 
 
o If a site fails to meet the Electro Magnetic Radiation criterion, there 
is a provision  of penalty of Rs. 5 lakh BTS per service provider. 
Service providers must meet the criterion within one month of the 
report of TERM Cell in such cases, after which site will be shut 
down.” 
 
1.165 On the periodicity of submission of ‘Self -Certificate’, the Department replied that 
the periodicity of submission of ‘self -certificate’ by different Telecom Service Provider is 
once in two years. 
 
1.166 Justifying the requirement of submitting ‘Self -Certificate’ of BTS towers only once 
in two years, the Department also stated as under:-  
 
“The radiation parameters of the BTS remain constant, unless changed by 
the TSP. In case of change, the TSP has been mandated to issue revised 
self-certificate. Keeping this in view, the cycle of two years has been fixed 
for self-certification.” 
 
1.167 On the reasons for adopting the Self -Certification of telecom towers by Telecom 
Service Providers instead of respective TERM Cells checking the radiation of telecom 

50 
 
towers, the Committee were informed by the Department of Telecommuni cations as 
under:-  
 
The respective TERM Cells are checking the radiation from BTS towers. 
Self-certification is a process by which the telecom service provider 
ensures compliance to the prescribed radiation norms. The procedure has 
been adopted in consult ation with the stakeholders considering the 
feasibility of implementation. However, TERM Cells are checking the self 
certified BTS site on random basis as per the prescribed procedure. 
 
1.168 Elaborating on the numbers of telecom towers that were shut down  due to non-
compliance, the Department informed:- 
 
“The Telecom Service Providers are submitting the ‘self -certificate’ of their 
BTS towers as per procedure. Total 12 BTS sites including 2 BTSs of Tata, 1 
BTS of Idea, 1 BTS of Aircel, 1 BTS of Loop, 3 BTSs  of Reliance, 2 BTSs of 
Airtel, 2 BTSs of Vodafone were shut down temporarily due to non -
compliance to radiation limits.” 
 
1.169 With regard to the details of penalty imposed since 1 September, 2012 since the 
revised prescribed limit came into effect, the Department in a written reply stated as 
under:-  
 
“For violating the prescribed radiation limits, penalty has been imposed in 
84 cases which include Airtel, Spice, Vodafone, TTSL, Idea, Dishnet 
Wireless (Aircel), Loop Telecom, MTNL, Reliance Comm, TTML, Un inor, 
Videocon.” 
 
1.170 Taking note of the newspaper report that instead of ‘self-audit and self -
certification’ as followed in India, some countries have resorted to a third party audit for 
having an unbiased checking of mobile tower radiation , the Committee desired to know 
about the information about the countries that have adopted ‘Third Party Audit’ for 
telecom towers. The Department, in its reply, however, stated that at present, no such 
information is available. 
 
1.171 Elaborating the reasons on the ba sis of which method of ‘Self -Certification of 
telecom towers has been adopted in India, the Department informed the Committee as 
under:-  
“India has adopted the self -certification along with sample audit & heavy 
penalty, used in many other sectors also. In dia is among few developing 
countries who have  implemented such an elaborate procedure for 
monitoring the EMF compliance. International standards are being 

51 
 
followed for the testing of EMF Radiation. The detailed implementation 
procedure in other countries is presently not available.” 
 
D. Effective implementation of prescribed Specified Absorption Rate (SAR) value 
for mobile handsets 
 
1.172 Specific absorption rate (SAR) is a measure of the rate at which energy is 
absorbed by the human body when exposed to a radio frequency electromagnetic field. 
The SAR Labs have been set up by the Department for verification of SAR values of 
mobile handsets and other hand held devices as declared by the manufacturer in 
compliance with the EMF exposure norms prescribed by t he Government. In this regard,   
the Department in the Background Note informed the Committee as under:- 
 
“ICNIRP has prescribed the following values for Specific Absorption Rate 
(SAR) for mobile handset: 
 
For Frequency 
Range 10 MHz 
to 10 GHz 
Whole body 
average SAR 
(W/Kg) 
Localised SAR 
head & trunk 
(W/Kg) 
Localised SAR 
limbs (W/Kg) 
General Public 
Exposure 0.08 2 4 
 
For the mobile handsets, DoT, in the year 2008, notified for compliance of 
Mobile Handsets being manufactured in India to conform to ICNIRP 
prescribed Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) limit of 2 W/kg in the frequency 
range of 10 MHz to 10 GHz.” 
 
1.173 The Department in the Background Note also informed the Committee that from 
1 September, 2013, only the mobile handsets with revised SAR value of 1. 6 watt/kg 
averaged over a mass of 1 gram tissue are permitted to be manufactured or imported in 
India for domestic market. It is reported that India has so far been following a SAR limit 
of 2 watts/kg in accordance with ICNIRP norms. An Inter -Ministerial Committee has now 
curtailed the SAR level for mobile handsets further to 1.6 watt/kg average over a six 
minute period and taken over a volume containing a mass of 1 gram of human tissue. 
The SAR level shall now be displayed on handsets. 
 

52 
 
1.174 On the measur es taken by the Department to ensure that mobile handsets 
manufacturers strictly conform to prescribe SAR value from 1 September, 2013, the 
Department submitted as under:-  
 
“DoT has issued instructions that all the mobile handset manufacturers, 
both indig enous and imported, shall provide a self declaration in respect 
of SAR value based on certificate issued from internationally accredited 
labs (ILAC accredited labs) or accredited by Telecom Engineering Centre 
(TEC), India to TEC with a copy to DoT for comp liance and necessary 
action. Such self declared SAR limits shall be subjected to TEC audit as and 
when required.  However, the enforcement will be dealt as per applicable 
Act of the Government.” 
 
1.175 The Committee were further informed by the Department that Indian Cellular 
Association (ICA) has stated that all the new design mobile phones being manufactured 
for domestic market are compliant to new norms and Mobile manufacturers Forum 
have made provision for display of SAR value by dialing *#07# in new mo bile handsets 
conforming to revised norms. 
 
1.176 When the Committee enquired about the provisions/penalties that would be 
imposed on those who are found manufacturing or importing the mobile handsets not 
complying with the revised SAR values w.e.f. 1 st September, 2013, the Department in a 
written reply stated that Quantum of penalty will be as per provisions in the applicable 
Acts/Rules. 
 
1.177 On the issue of making the customers aware of the new SAR value, the 
Department informed that the instructions ha ve been circulated to 
manufacturers/importers through industry associations as well as print media and also 
placed on DoT website. 
 
1.178 When further queried by the Committee for wider dissemination of this 
instruction, the Department stated as under:-  
 
“A Handbook on “Mobile Communication - Radio waves and Safety” 
indicating various Dos and Don’ts related to mobile phone users clarifying 
various myths regarding deployment and use of radio waves had been 
prepared and under print for enhanced customer awareness to be given to 
the customer at the point of sale through  mobile service providers.  
Precautionary guidelines for mobile phone users have been hosted on the 
DoT website. Also these instructions have been published in National 

53 
 
newspapers in Hindi, Engl ish and Regional newspapers in Regional 
languages.” 
 
1.179 With regard to publicizing these instructions in regional languages also, the 
Department stated that these instructions have been published in National newspapers 
in Hindi, English and Regional newspapers in Regional languages. 
 

54 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
Introduction of Green Energy in telecom sector 
 
1.180 One of the mandates of the Government as envisaged in the NTP -2012 is 
continued adoption of green policy in telecom and incentivize use of renewable 
resources for sustainability. Regarding the plans of the Department for the gradual 
introduction of green energy in telecom sector, the Committee were informed that DoT  
has already issued directions to telecom service providers vide letter dated 23.01.2012, 
which envisages that at least 50% of rural towers and 20% of urban towers are to be 
powered by hybrid power (RET+ Grid Power) by 2015, while 75% of rural towers & 33% 
of urban towers to be powered with (RET + Grid Power) by 2020. 
 
1.181 Elaborating on the steps  being taken by the Department to reduce carbon 
footprint and introducing Carbon Credit Policy in the telecom sector, the Department 
stated:- 
  
“Vide letter dated 23.01.2012, the telecom service providers have been 
directed to reduce their carbon footprint  by adopting Renewable Energy 
Technologies (RETs) and deploying Energy Efficient Equipments. The 
directions in this regard envisages for an ultimate objective of achieving a 
maximum of 50% over the carbon footprint levels of the base year in rural 
areas an d 66% in urban areas by 2020, with base year being 2011.The 
service providers should aim at Carbon emission reduction targets for the 
mobile network at 5% by the year 2012 -2013, 8% by the year 2014 -2015, 
12% by the year 2016-2017 and 17% by the year 2018-2019. 
 
In compliance to the above said DoT Directives, all Access providers except 
BSNL have submitted the base year i.e. (April, 2011 to March, 2012) 
carbon footprint report of their network operations to TRAI. Similarly, 
most of the NLDs, ILDs, and some o f the ISPs have also submitted carbon 
foot print report for the base year 2011 -12. From April 2012 onwards, 
Carbon footprint report are being received in TRAI on half yearly basis. 
First half year and second half year carbon footprint report for year 2012 -
13 have also been received from most of the access providers, NLDs, ILDs 
and some of the ISPs. Volunteer code of practice has also been submitted 
by all the telecom associations i.e. ISPAI, ACTO, COAI & AUSPI, in TRAI 
wherein service providers have committed various initiatives to reduce the 
carbon footprint of their network operation.” 
 
 

55 
 
1.182 In this regard, Shri Ram Kumar, Retired Advisor (Technology), DoT,  in his 
memorandum submitted to the Committee, stated as under:- 
 
“*  Due to high power radiating antennas, the requirement of power is 
high and, accordingly, consumption of diesel to maintain back up 
power supply is high. 
*  About 5, 00,000 mobile towers are operating throughout the 
country, consuming about 4 billion liters of diesel per year. 
 * More than 6 million tones of CO2 emission per year.” 
 
1.183 On the points raised above, the Department was asked whether they have 
conducted any study to ascertain the amount of diesel consumed annually by Telecom 
Service Providers for operating telecom towers  in the country.  The Department replied 
that TRAI in its recommendation on “Approach towards Green Telecommunications” 
dated 12th April 2011 has stated that  there is an average fuel consumption of 8760 
liters of diesel every year per tower, assuming 8 hours of operation of DG sets. 
 
1.184 On the steps being taken to overcome the major constraints and obstacles faced 
by the Department for introduction of Green Energy, the Department has stated as 
under:- 
“A Committee has been constituted in DoT to examine the following: 
 Preparing a road map to facilitate increased use of Renewable 
Energy  Technologies (RETs) for powering Telecom networks and to 
develop sector specific schemes for promotion of RETs. 
 To analyze the viability gap funding for deployment of RETs in 
Telecom.” 
 
1.185 Elaborating on the major constraints and obstacles being encountered by the 
Department for the introduction of Green Energy, the Department informed the 
Committee that High Capital Expenditure (CAPEX), non -availability of clear south fa cing 
space and operation /maintenance of distributed sites across the country are some of 
the constraints and obstacles which have come out after discussion with the telecom 
industry for implementation of the green telecom.  
 
1.186 On the concern raised by  ASSOCHAM that the guidelines issued on 23rd January, 
2012 are unrealistic and illogical since it ignores the ground realities and technical 
constraints, the Department has replied as under:- 
“The broad directions and goals to achieve the desired reduction  in carbon 
emission through the use of Renewable Energy Technologies and energy 

56 
 
efficient equipments, laid down by DoT vide letters dated 23.01.2012, are 
based on the recommendations of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
(TRAI) dated 12th April, 2011.  
 
Based on continuous interactions by TRAI with the service providers and 
their associations, i.e. ISPAI, ACTO, COAI & AUSPI have submitted 
‘Voluntary Code of Practice’, wherein the service providers have 
committed to implement various energy efficient solu tions including 
deployment of hybrid site. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) is 
monitoring the implementation of the introduction of Green Energy in 
telecom sector and TRAI is of the view that the stipulated targets can be 
achieved.” 
 
 

57 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
Security related concerns due to import of telecom equipment 
1.187 On the issue of security of telecom networks, the Department in their 
Background Note has stated as under:- 
 
“With respect to security related concerns for expansion of telecom 
services in various zones of the country, Dot has issued an amendment 
dated 31 May, 2011 in Unified Access Service (UAS), National Long 
distance (NLD) and International Long Distance (ILD) licenses. 
 
As per amendment, the licensee shall be completely and totally 
responsible for security of their networks. The licensee shall have the 
organizational policy on security and security management of their 
networks. 
 
The licensee shall induct only those network elements into his telecom 
network, which have been got tested  as per relevant contemporary Indian 
or international security standards. Further the licensee shall audit their 
network or get the network audited from security point of view once a 
year from a network audit and certification agency. 
 
The licensee shall i nclude all contemporary security related features and 
features related to communication security as prescribed under relevant 
security standards while procuring the equipments and implement all such 
contemporary features into the network.” 
 
1.188 On being enquired about the number of studies done to ascertain security 
implications and risk involved due to dependence on imported equipment, the 
Committee were informed that no specific study has been carried out by the 
Department but it is assessed that the im ported equipment, if not tested properly could 
cause security concerns due to vulnerabilities embedded and malware in them and that 
from 1 April, 2013 the certification shall be got done only from authorized and certified 
agencies/labs in India.  
 
1.189 In view of the above, the Committee desired to know the number of  authorized 
and certified agencies/labs for testing telecom equipments set up in the Country. To 
this, the department has replied that although some organisations are in advance stage 
of establishing the authorised security testing and certification labs in the country, but 
so far no authorised and certified agencies/labs for testing telecom equipment has been 

58 
 
set up in the country. However, pilot lab at Indian Institute of Bangalore has alread y 
been set up to develop the Security test standards, procedures, tools for security and 
certification of telecom equipment. 
 
1.190 The Department further informed the Committee that even the deadline of 1st 
April, 2013 for testing and certification of tel ecom equipment in India has been 
extended to 1st October, 2013. 
 
1.191 On the reasons for the failure to establish any authorized and certified agencies 
and extending deadline till 1 October, 2013 for testing and certification of telecom 
equipment in India, the Department stated:- 
 
“Initially there were some reservations amongst the Industry against 
mandating the indigenous test standards and testing within India instead 
of relying on the global standards and international test agencies/ test 
labs. After th e continuous efforts, regular interaction and firm stand, 
apparently there is an acceptance within Telecom Industry for security 
certification within the country. Thus, it has taken some time for the 
industry to imbibe the idea of such testing and certific ation within the 
country.   
  
Further, understanding the test standards and developing the test 
processes and testing tools thereto, is a complex phenomena and it is 
taking some time to come out with requisite indigenous security standards 
for telecom equi pments / network elements.  Hence, the extension of 
deadline for testing and certification of telecom equipment in India has 
been extended till 1 October, 2013.” 
 
1.192 With regard to the present mechanism that has been put in place by the 
Department to ensure that only those telecom equipment strictly complying to security 
norms are put in place, the Department informed the Committee as under:- 
 
“Licensees have been inter -alia mandated through License amendment of 
May/June, 2011 that they shall induct only  those network elements into 
their telecom network, which have been got tested as per relevant 
contemporary Indian or International Security Standards from any 
recognized international agency/ labs for that specific standard. It is also 
mandated that copie s of test results and test certificates shall be kept by 
the licensee for a period of 10 years from the date of procurement of 
equipment. Thus, till the authorized Indian lab / agencies are established,  
licensees need to get their telecom equipment tested  from recognized 

59 
 
international lab / agencies and the record of test results / reports is to be 
kept for 10 years, which can be verified by the DOT anytime, if required.   
 
To verify the compliances of security conditions by the Telecom Service 
Providers, a proposal for establishing the Telecom Security Directorate has 
been proposed. Once this proposal is accepted, adequate man power will 
be available to carry out the security audit of the network of Telecom 
Service Providers. However, as an adhoc arrangeme nt, one DDG and 8 
directors have been recently posted for Security Audit. Presently, these 
officers are studying the subject matter and are likely to initiate the 
security audit work soon to verify the compliances by the Telecom Service 
Providers.” 
 
1.193 On the measures available to deal with those Telecom Service Providers violating 
the prescribed security standards/norms, the Department has stated as under:- 
 
“There is penal provision of upto Rs. 50 crores for the security breach. 
Besides the penalty, li ability and criminal proceedings under the relevant 
provisions of various acts such as Indian Telegraph Act, Information 
Technology Act, Indian Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) etc 
can be initiated. In such cases license of the licensee can also be cancelled, 
vendor or supplier who supplied the hardware/software, that caused the 
security breach, could be blacklisted for doing business in the country or 
both. The licensee has been mandated to include the clause of licensor 
discretion of blacklistin g of vendor or supplier in the agreement signed 
with vendors/ suppliers, in case of any security breach.”  
 
A. Setting up of Telecom Testing and Security Certification Centre 
 
1.194 When the Committee sought the opinion of the Department regarding the  
newspaper reports that two years after the Department of Telecommunications decided 
to set up a telecom equipment testing lab at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), 
Bangalore, to address security issues, foreign vendors have now refused to share their 
design details with the premier academic institute as it could hurt their business 
interests, the Department replied as under;- 
 
“A pilot lab has been established at IISc, Bangalore, to develop the test 
standards, test processes and test tools for the telecom  equipment testing 
and security certification.  IISc, Bangalore has developed the Evaluation 
Assurance Level (EAL) - 4 for Voice over IP (VoIP) switches and EAL – 3 for 
Routers except few tests remaining.  IISc, Bangalore is also working on 
open Base Trans -receive Station (BTS). IISc, Bangalore has reported that 

60 
 
vendors / manufacturers are reluctant to share their equipment details etc 
with IISc, being an academic institute.  Since, EAL - 3 and above level of 
testing require equipment details etc sharing by  the manufacturer with 
the test lab, DoT should consider to create the centre under the 
Government. Accordingly, proposal has been initiated to establish the 
centre for Telecom Testing and Security Certification in Government.” 
 
B. Growth of telecom equipm ent manufacturing sector including R&D facilities in 
India 
 
1.195 On the measures for the robust growth of telecom equipment manufacturing 
sector including R&D facilities in India, the Department has furnished the reply as 
under:- 
“For robust growth of tel ecom equipment manufacturing sector including 
R&D, National Telecom Policy 2012, inter-alia, has following objectives: 
 Promote the ecosystem for design, Research and Development, IPR 
creation, testing, standardization and manufacturing i.e. complete 
value chain for domestic production of telecommunication 
equipment to meet Indian telecom sector demand to the extent of 
60% and 80% with a minimum value addition of 45% and 65% by 
the year 2017 and 2020 respectively.  
 Create a corpus to promote indigenous R&D, IPR creation, 
entrepreneurship, manufacturing, commercialisation and 
deployment of state -of-the-art telecom products and services 
during the 12th five year plan period.  
Following measures are suggested for robust growth of telecom 
equipment manufacturing including R&D in telecom sector: 
i) Create corpus for R&D, entrepreneurship development, 
product development and its commercialisation 
ii) Set up Telecom  Standard Development Organisation in India 
iii) Set up test facility for product development 
iv) Incentivise ecosyste m from R&D, Design development, 
creation of IPR up to product commercialisation 
v) promote telecom equipment manufacturing including units 
for manufacture of components, sub‐assemblies  
vi) Incentivise export of telecom equipment.” 
 
 
 

61 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Introductory 
 
2.1 The Committee note that Telecommunications has become a n essential 
component for overall socio -economic development of the country, empowerin g 
the common man through access to information, health -care, education and 
greater financial inclusion.  More particularly, the mobile telephony has become an 
integral part of our lives both in urban as well as rural areas. From the low strata to 
higher echelon of the society everybody today is dependent on mobile phones and 
the exponential growth of this sector over the last decade bears the testimony of 
the same. As per the information furnished by the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), there are 864 .72 million wireless telephone 
connections (as on December, 2012) and to provide network coverage there are 
7,47,917 Base Transmission Stations (BTS) in the country. Moreover, the primary 
objective of the recently announced National telecom Policy (NTP) -2012 is 
maximizing public good by making available reliable and secure telecommunication 
and broadband services across the country. India is one of the countries which has 
witnessed the fastest growth of mobile telephones in the world and to sustain this 
growth there has also been a tremendous growth of infrastructure in the form of 
mobile phone towers. In this regard, the Committee note that such tremendous 
development of mobile telephony in the country has also greatly increased the 
extent and magnitude of the Electromagnetic Radiations (EMR) exposure on 
human beings. Apprehensions have been raised about the harmful effects of EMF 
radiations associated with the mobile towers. It has been brought to the notice of 
the Committee that while some studies have sho wn that these are harmless 
radiations, some others have pointed out serious repercussions and ill effects of 
such radiations. The Committee find it worrisome that in the absence of any kind 

62 
 
of regulatory framework, mobile towers have mushroomed across the country in a 
haphazard manner, more so in the urban areas.  
2.2 The Committee find it most unfortunate that the Government has failed to 
take any concrete steps to regulate this infrastructure sector as well as to address 
the public apprehensions  about imp act on their health . The Committee strongly 
deprecate the lackadaisical approach of the Department of Telecommunications 
which is the nodal department for expansion and modernization of mobile 
telephony. Considering the immense importance of the subject, t he Committee 
undertook detailed examination of various issues relating to the subject by holding 
consultations with various stakeholders, viz. public at large, experts, citizen groups, 
telecom industry organisaitons, etc. The Committee also held discussion s with the 
representatives of the nodal Department i.e. the Department of 
Telecommunications and sought clarifications on the vital aspects relating to the 
subject. The examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed several 
areas of public concer n which need s to be addressed by the Government at the 
earliest. These are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
(Para Nos. 2.1 & 2.2, Recommendation No. 1) 

63 
 
 
Need for clear defined role for setting up of telecom towers 
2.3 The Committee note that Entry N o. 31 of the List I (Union Government) of 
the 7th Schedule to the Constitution provides for posts and telegraphs; telephones; 
wireless; broadcasting and other forms of communications. Resultantly the 
matters relating to telephones; wireless; etc. comes wit hin the domain of the 
Central Government. In terms of section 10 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 18 85 Act, 
for installation of towers on a property i.e. the Right of Way (RoW), the TSPs have 
to obtain the permission of local authorities such as Municipal Corporations, Gram 
Panchayats etc. of the concerned State Governments/ Union Territory 
Administrations. Thus, as per the existing legal framework, the role of DoT is 
confined only to issuing site clearance for installation of mobile towers for each 
and every s ite from the point of view of interference with other wireless users, 
aviation hazards and obstruction to any other existing microwave links only, 
whereas the physical aspects like permission for use of property for erecting the 
tower, rent, structural safety etc. comes within the domain of local authorities. The 
Committee find that in the absence of any uniform national policy, different local 
civic authorities/ State Governments have evolved their own criteria which vary 
widely across the length and bread th of the country. Thus, each State and city to 
city have different terms and conditions with regard to taxes, levies, safety aspects, 
restrictions on installation of towers in certain areas and time frames for granting 
permission for installation of mobil e towers etc. even though all telecom services 
are governed under the same Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. This, besides having an 
adverse impact on the smooth growth of telecom sector has also resulted in 
disputes between the TSPs and the local authorities le ading to filing of petitions in 
various courts across the country. The TSPs associations like Associated Chambers 
of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), Association of Unified Service 
Providers of India (AUSPI), Cellular Operator’s Association of In dia (COAI), Towers 
and Infrastructures Providers Association of India (TAIPA), etc. in their memoranda 

64 
 
submitted to the Committee, have strongly advocated that Telecommunication 
being a Central subject, the  Central government should have exclusive jurisdi ction 
to legislate therein as it is completely beyond the jurisdiction of any State 
Authority. The Committee also find that the existing framework does not provide 
any say to the public in addressing their concerns / apprehensions when a tower is 
installed in their vicinity.  
2.4 The Committee find the existing system undesirable and unhealthy for the 
conducive development of telecom infrastructure in the country and are of the 
view that DoT has failed to address such a critical and important issue concerni ng 
the entire nation. The Committee, while observing that ‘Addressing the Right of 
Way’ issue in setting up of telecom infrastructure is also one of the objectives 
enumerated in the NTP -2012, strongly recommend that the entire issue of 
jurisdiction of DoT vis-à-vis State Government/Local Bodies in respect of setting up 
of mobile towers be re -examined in depth by the Central Government and a 
national policy be evolved to streamline these procedural issues for ensuring faster 
and smooth growth of telecom serv ices in the country  while taking note of he alth 
concern of the people.  
(Para Nos. 2.3 & 2.4, Recommendation No. 2) 

65 
 
 
Need for an enforceable national guidelines for setting up of telecom towers 
2.5 The Committee note that mobile telephony which was introd uced in the 
country more than one and a half decade back underwent high pace of growth and 
already more than 7 lakh Base Transmission Stations (BTSs) have been installed in 
the country to cater to the need of more than 860 million mobile connections. The 
Committee, however, are unhappy to note that even after the lapse of such a long 
period, no uniform telecom infrastructure policy has been framed by the 
Government for setting up of the mobile towers in the country. This has resulted in 
a haphazard growth o f this sector with varying parameters from State to State in 
setting up of mobile towers besides mushrooming of a large number of illegal 
towers all over the country. It was only in the year 2012 that DoT came out with 
some guidelines on grant of clearance s for installation of mobile towers which too 
were just advisory in nature. The Committee note that these guidelines were sent 
to the Chief Secretaries of all States and UTs and were also placed on the website 
of the Department for inviting comments/ sugge stions and based on the 
comments/ suggestions so received, the DoT issued revised guidelines on 1 st 
August, 2013 which again are advisory in nature and none of the provisions 
contained therein have any kind of statutory backing. The Committee express their 
strong displeasure that even though the DoT has formulated revised guidelines, the 
Department is not aware of the practices followed in advance d countries like UK/ 
USA with respect to setting up of mobile towers. The Committee are of the strong 
opinion th at before formulating and issuing revised guidelines for sett ing up of 
mobile towers, the DoT  ought to have studied and adopted the best practices 
prevalent in the advance countries in this regard.  Further, the scrutiny of these 
revised guidelines has rev ealed various loopholes and ambiguities which in the 
opinion of the Committee render the guidelines ineffective and deficient on a 
number of crucial aspects. The Committee find that the revised guidelines have not 
addressed the important issue of removal o f already existing illegal mobile towers 

66 
 
or making it mandatory for the existing more than 7 lakh towers to comply with 
the guidelines. Moreover, no road map has been prescribed as to how the revised 
guidelines are supposed to be implemented within a specific timeframe. 
2.6 The Committee are of the firm opinion that until or unless the deficiencies in 
the guidelines are fully addressed, the se are hardly expected to serve any 
meaningful purpose in streamlining the process of mobile tower installations and 
relocation of the already existing towers, wherever necessary, in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that effort s should be made by the 
Department to come out with fresh guidelines in consultation with State 
Governments taking into consideration the above concerns of the Committee. The 
Committee further recommend that the implementation of guidelines should be 
made mandatory across the entire country by giving them a statutory backing.  
Apart from this, the Committee also strongly recom mend for issuing of directive s 
to all State Governments/Local Municipal bodies for immediate removal of all such 
illegal towers which have been set up without permission or which have failed to 
obtain the required ‘No Objection Certificate’ for structural safety or otherwise 
pose any kind of risk or health hazard to the public or to the residents living in the 
vicinity of mobile towers. 
  (Para Nos. 2.5 & 2.6, Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
Structural Safety for setting up of telecom towers 
2.7 The Committee ha ve been informed that many of the mobile towers have 
been erected in the country without ensuring safety of the buildings and even 
without taking any permission from the local bodies thereby posing a great risk to 
the buildings as also the residents living  nearby. The Secretary, Department of 
Telecommunications, also admitted during evidence before the Committee that 
safety aspects of telecom infrastructure like towers is an area of concern. The 
Committee are perturbed to find that such an important issue h as been given a 
very scant attention both by the Central as well as State Governments. While 
strongly deprecating this kind of approach, the Committee note that the Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) of the Department of Telecommunications has developed 
12 s tandards concerning structural safety and design parameters of telecom 
towers using codes/specifications by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). The 
Committee, however, are dismayed to find that these standards have not been 
made mandatory for Telecom Service  Providers. The Committee are not at all 
convinced with the justification given by Secretary, DoT, during evidence before 
the Committee, that since structural safety is the domain of State, the Department 
does not want to venture into the area. Instead of ensuring that standards 
developed by TEC are strictly adhered to, the revised guidelines issued by DoT 
regarding States to secure Structural Stability Certificate from authorized structural 
Engineer of State/Local bodies/Central Building Research Institute  (CBRI), 
Roorkee/IIT/NIT or any other agency authorized by local body .  The Committee 
recommend that for the purpose of avoiding any ambiguity in this regard, the 
Central Government may finalise a specific list of institutes of excellence and 
repute belonging to Central Government/State Governments and also autonomous 
organization/Institutes funded by the Central/State Governments. The Committee 
also recommend that it should be made mandatory for all TSPs to scrupulously 
follow uniform norms concerning stru ctural safety of telecom towers across the 
entire country and adequate mechanism must be put into place for ensuing strict 

68 
 
compliance of the same. Further, all such towers which do not adhere to the norms 
should be removed immediately. The Committee also d esire that to deter 
installation of towers not conforming to the safety norms, stringent penalty 
provisions must be imposed on the service providers.  
(Para No. 2.7, Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Sharing of Telecom Towers 
  
2.8 The Committee note that more that 7,00,000 telecom towers are already in 
existence all over the country and taking into consideration the rapid growth of 
mobile sector, more and more mobile towers are likely to come up during the 
coming years. The Committee, therefore,  are of the strong opinion that some 
urgent action needs to be taken to curb the ever growing number of the mobile 
towers as already serious apprehensions are being expressed about the cascading 
effects of the radiations emitted by the mobile towers both o n human health and 
the environment. Taking into consideration the views/concerns expressed before 
the Committee by various stakeholders, Committee strongly feel that tower 
sharing can prove to be a very effective tool in restricting the number of towers. 
Further, sharing of towers would be cost advantageous to Telecom Service 
Providers in terms of capital and operating expenditure. The Committee also feel 
that by sharing of tower infrastructure, telecom coverage can be achieved more 
efficiently and effectively due to reduced need of infrastructure facilities as well as 
electricity. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government 
must bring clear guidelines in this regard and encourage the service providers for 
tower sharing.  
 (Para No. 2.8, Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Issues relating to health hazards from EMF emission 
2.9 The Committee note with concern that the Government had not adopted or 
prescribed any standards relating to safe exposure from electromagnetic radiations 
emitted by the mobile towers as well as the mobile handsets and it was only in the 
year 2008 that the Department of Telecommunications adopted the standards 
prescribed by the International Commission for Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) although the same were i n existence since 1998. These norms are a kind 
of international safety guidelines for RF exposure. Thereafter, based on the 
growing media reports and increasing public concern on the possible health 
hazards of EMF emission from antenna(e) of telecom towers /networks, an Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) was constituted by the Government in August, 2010 
to examine the effect of EMF Radiation from Base Transmission Stations (BTSs) and 
mobile phones. Based on the recommendation s of the IMC, in respect of BTSs, 
exposure limit for Base Station Emissions was subsequently reduced to 1/10 th of 
the limits prescribed by ICNIRP with effect from 01.09.2012, which according to the 
various memoranda received by the Committee has still failed to allay the fear 
amongst the p ublic who have cited various kinds of health hazards to human 
beings, animals, flora and fauna from the EMF emission of telecom towers.   
2.10 During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee found 
two contradictory views on ill effects o f EMF emissions from telecom towers and 
mobile handsets on humans and wildlife. The Committee note that on one side, 
various organizations/ stakeholders, such as, Association of Unified Telecom 
Service Providers of India (AUSPI), Cellular Operators Associa tion of India (COAI), 
Reliance Communications Limited, Vodafone India Limited, European Business 
Group etc., have denied the harmful effects of EMF radiations from mobile towers 
and mobile handsets and also contended that sufficient precautionary measures 
have been put in place. On the other side, various studies including Bioinitiative 
Report of 2012 have linked several adverse health effects to electromagnetic fields 

71 
 
from mobile tower and handsets including effects on wildlife like birds, bats, honey 
bees, etc. Some of the health effects reported are effect on cell growth, cell 
differentiation, DNA damage, altered immune system, hormonal effects, pervasive 
impairment of metabolic and reproductive system, effect on fertility, reproduction 
and health of off -springs, risk of glioma (a malignant brain tumour), sleep 
disorders, confusion, anxiety and depression and appetite disturbance, etc. The 
Department of Telecommunications has cited a World Bank Report of May, 2006 
which has concluded that considering the v ery low exposure levels and research 
results collected to date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF 
signals from base stations and wireless networks caused adverse health effects. In 
this regard, the Committee feel that the Departme nt is selectively relying on the 
research findings which have concluded that there is no health effects of EMF from 
telecom towers/networks while ignoring host of other reliable research and 
concerns made which have proved to the contrary. Considering the seriousness of 
the matter which concerns the citizens of the country, the Committee recommend 
that Government should entrust the scientific study on impact of Telecom towers 
and handsets on humans to a reputed Government organization in a time bound 
programme. T ill such time Government should strictly enforce EMF radiation 
norms finalized in September, 2012 which are reportedly 1/10 th of ICNIRP 
prescribed norms.  
  
(Para Nos. 2.9 & 2.10, Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
 Restrictions on setting up of mobile towers in residential areas 
2.11 The Committee note that in the existing scenario, the setting up of a mobile 
tower generally involve a commercial agreement between the Telecom Service 
Provider (TSP) and the property owner who has rented out his property, th ereby 
serving the interests of both. However, no right is available to the people living 
nearby although they have to face risks associated with the mobile towers, be it 
the EMF radiation or other kind of mishappenings associated with the high rise 
telecom towers in the residential areas. The Committee have received various 
complaints from individuals and housing societies about the undesired setting up 
of mobile towers in residential areas and have sought their removal and relocation 
at a specified distanc e from the residential areas. The main reasons for the 
complaints are that people living near the towers are suffering from brain tumors, 
cancer, headache, nausea amongst other problems due to continuous exposure to 
electro-magnetic radiation from the mobi le tower.  The Committee note that as 
per the existing practice there is no bar on installation of mobile towers in 
residential areas as well as taking consent of the nearby residents is not 
mandatory. Only the consent of the building owner in case of roof  based towers 
and land owner in case of ground based towers is required to be taken. As a result, 
more and more mobile towers are being installed by the TSPs in residential areas 
after paying huge monthly rental to property owners without the requirement o f 
getting any kind of approval from the people residing nearby or civic bodies or 
Residential Welfare Associations. The Committee feel perturbed to find that no 
efforts have been made by the Department, TSPs and local bodies to involve the 
general public i n the setting up of mobile towers. The Committee are of the view 
that  the attitude of the Department in turning a blind eye to the concerns of the 
public highly deplorable and tantamount to shirking of responsibility towards the 
public safety. The Committ ee are of the strong view that general public are the 
greatest stakeholders and therefore without their involvement in the issue, any 

73 
 
decision would be incomplete and unjust. While the Committee agree that the 
purpose of setting up mobile towers is to prov ide better connectivity to the public 
and not alone the profit generation by the telecom companies, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Government must frame a comprehensive policy on 
setting up of telecom towers in residential areas in densely popul ated cities taking 
into consideration the public health concerns, mandatory involvement of public/ 
Resident Welfare Association/ NGOs/ Public Forums/ residents of the nearby 
buildings or areas before installing telecom towers in their area as well as 
emulating the safest international practices followed in this regard. The Committee 
further recommend that such policy framework should be made uniformly 
applicable all across the country irrespective of the prevailing local laws of the 
concerned States/UTs/local municipal bodies.  
 
(Para No. 2.11, Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
Restrictions on setting up towers in schools, colleges and hospitals 
 
2.12 The Committee note that there are few countries like Switzerland which 
have adopted ICNIRP norms but impl emented lower ICNIRP limits as a 
precautionary approach for areas like apartments, schools, hospitals, workplace 
and children playgrounds. However, the DoT has not made any efforts or collected 
information about the countries which have imposed such restri ctions. Moreover, 
the recommendations made by the Inter -Ministerial Committee in their Report to 
impose restrictions on installations of mobile towers within the premises of 
schools, hospitals etc. housing vulnerable sections of the society, were rejected by 
the Department on the ground that these are not based on scientific study or facts 
and imposing restrictions on installation of towers in schools and colleges etc. may 
lead to increased public resistance against installation of towers. The Committee at 
the same time note from the information furnished by DoT that some States like 
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have imposed restrictions on setting up of telecom 
towers in schools, colleges, etc. and have issued their own guidelines and Gazette 
Notifications in this regard. The Committee also cannot ignore the information 
placed before them by various experts/ organizations about the growing scientific 
evidence regarding biological effect of radiations from telecom tower radiations 
especially on the more vulne rable sections of the society like elderly people, 
pregnant women and children.  Also taking note of the reports about a number of 
ongoing litigations in various parts of the country on this account, the Committee 
strongly feel that as a precautionary appr oach there is an imperative need to fix 
stringent norms with regard to radiation for areas like schools, hospitals, 
residential premises, children playgrounds etc.  
(Para No. 2.12, Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
Need for India Specific long term Research 
 
2.13 The Committee note that all the standards of radiation limit which the 
government has chosen to follow are based on the researches conducted in 
western countries where conditions are very different from countries like India. 
Some of the specific differenc es between western countries and India are low 
population density, cold climatic conditions, low density of mobile phone towers 
etc. The Committee also note that DoT has acknowledged that some of the India 
specific conditions, such as, multi -operator scenario, mobile phone usage, higher 
population density etc., have been conveyed to WHO for their considerations in 
carrying out with India specific research. Against this backdrop, the Committee are 
not convinced with contention of DoT that none of the studies  done under the 
aegis of the WHO had proved that the emissions from the mobile phone 
towers/networks are causing harmful effect on human beings as the same are not 
based on India specific research. The Committee find it deplorable that some of the 
India specific research carried out by eminent scientists and other Governmental 
organisations have not been taken into consideration by DoT in forming its  
guidelines. For instance, a 10 year study conducted by Prof. Gandhi of Department 
of Genetics, Guru Nanak De v University, Amritsar has found that radiations 
emitted from the towers are degenerating DNA and chromosomes . Similarly, a 
study conducted by Prof. Jitendra Behari in Jawaharlal Nehru has found that the 
exposure to radiation from mobile towers and mobile phones could have an 
adverse impact on male fertility and deplete  the defense mechanism of cells. Also 
the Environment and Forest Ministry study has blamed electromagnetic radiation 
from communication towers for the declining number of sparrows and bees, e tc. 
The Committee, in view of the above findings made by the reputed experts and 
research institutes, feel that there is no room for complacency on the issue by 
selectively relying only on the findings of WHO whose research reports are mainly 
based on deve loped countries and strongly recommend that the findings of India 

76 
 
specific studies should also be taken into consideration by DoT in coming out with 
its policy initiative on mobile towers.  
 
2.14 The Committee also note that the main challenge involved in conducting 
studies on radiation hazards from mobile towers and mobile handsets is the 
requirement of very long period of scientific research on targeted population and 
the lack of established standard procedures and protocols to study and monitor 
the EMF impacts on humans and wildlife. The Committee are , however, concerned 
to note that in spite of exponential growth of mobile telephony in the country over 
the last decade, no efforts have been made by the Department to undertake a 
continuous or long term re search on the issue. It is rather surprising to note that 
even though the Department of Telecommunications is the nodal Department for 
all telecommunication related issues, it is only the Department of Science and 
Technology which on the direction of Prime  Minister’s Office has constituted a 
Committee under Dr. N.K. Ganguly, former Director General (ICMR) on 1.10.2012 
to examine the harmful effects from Mobile towers on the population living in the 
vicinity and for developing the frame of reference for call ing out Request For 
Proposals (RFPs) for scientific assessment of health hazards and adverse impact on 
ecology. The Committee feel that DoT should be more sensitive and proactive in 
discharging its prime responsibility on such critical matters. The Committ ee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the DoT must wholeheartedly associate itself   
with such long term research works being carried out within the country and also 
make regular budgetary allocation under a separate budget head of expenditure 
for research on health hazards from EMF radiation.  
(Para Nos. 2.13 & 2.14, Recommendation No. 9) 

77 
 
International practices and countries having lower emission standards 
2.15 From the information provided by DoT, the Committee note that countries 
like China, Russia, I taly, Poland etc. are having more stricter norms on radiation 
exposure than India. On the contention raised in one of the memorandum received 
by the Committee that towers in China are emitting 100 times less radiation even 
though there are more mobile user s in China than in India, the DoT in its written 
reply submitted that the complete information about lower radiation norms in 
China is not available including pros and cons of such norms. The Committee 
deplore  such callousness on the part of DoT in not ke eping itself abreast with the 
practices followed in other countries including China that have adopted lower 
emission norms than in India. The Committee feel that merely keeping a watch on 
various reports of WHO and ITU without knowing their bases, as is be ing done by 
DoT is uncalled for as such an approach would result in formulating lopsided 
opinion and norms. The Committee strongly recommend that DoT should always 
keep itself updated with the best practices followed in the world and take 
concerted steps to implement them as suitable to  India. 
 
(Para No. 2.15, Recommendation No. 10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
Need for exploring new technological Innovations 
 
Introduction of low power radiating antennae like Micro, Pico and Femto 
2.16 During the examination of the subject, the Committee were informed by one 
of the experts of the field that high power radiating antennae could be avoided in 
high density populated areas by deploying low power radiating BTSs such as Micro, 
Pico and Femto which would be more advantageous in terms of elimination of fear 
of health hazards due to high radiation from mobile towers and safety of the 
buildings. These BTSs could be powered by solar or hybrid systems thus saving 
precious fuel and reducing carbon emission, saving huge quantities of s teel and 
clearing the skyline of cities and towns. The Committee were also informed that 
these technologies have been adopted in developed countries. The Department, in 
its response has informed the Committee that these technologies are meant for 
very small/confined areas and would not be suitable to provide the coverage that 
can be sustained through outdoor BTSs. In the case of Femto, however, the 
Department has stated that it is expected to be used by the Telecom Service 
Providers in due course. In this r egard, the Committee would like the Department 
to seriously explore the option of utilising such technologies in our country 
especially in highly populated urban cities by implementing some pilot projects in 
selected areas to ascertain its feasibility. The  Committee may be apprised of the 
initiatives taken in this regard. 
(Para No. 2.16, Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 

79 
 
Installation of LED based EMR meters 
2.17 The Committee take note of a suggestion contained in one of the 
memorandum received by them tha t in every mobile tower there should be an 
indicator that shows the radiation level and if that level crosses a pre -determined 
limit, the device should automatically shut down the tower till the problem is 
rectified. It has also been suggested that such me ter should display green signal if 
EMR are below prescribed limits and must turn red through yellow in case some 
unauthorized increase in tower capacity is introduced by operators and all mobile 
towers must be equipped with sending GPRS based EMR data to s ome Central 
Control Room where the competent authority can monitor errant/ malfunctioning 
tower with exceeding EMR limits. The Committee, however, feel highly 
disappointed at the lukewarm response of the DoT to such innovative ideas/ 
suggestions as the sam e is reflected in its stubborn response that there is no need 
for continuous monitoring of radiation pattern from telecom towers and there is 
no such low cost meter that can make precision measurement and declare non -
compliance. The DoT has gone on to say that such meter is not a solution and 
moreover, no manufacturer has approached TEC for testing such product.  
2.18 The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for the Department to 
explore new scientific innovations to address the growing public appreh ensions 
about the ill-effects of mobile tower radiations in view of the near total absence of 
any information to the public regarding the level of EMF radiation being emitted by 
towers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the DoT must play a proactive 
role in exploring new technological ideas and innovations and ,if necessary, also 
involve premium scientific institutes across the country for development of such 
products like the suggested LED based EMR meters and setting up of centralized 
monitoring s ystem which would strengthen the existing monitoring mechanism 
and will go a long way in allaying the public fear on the issue. 
(Para No. 2.17 & 2.18, Recommendation No. 12) 
 

80 
 
Supply of sub-standard mobile handsets to India by reputed global manufacturers 
 
2.19 The Committee note from a memorandum submitted to them by an expert 
of the field that more than 90 per cent of the mobile handsets are being supplied in 
India by reputed global manufacturers like Nokia, Samsung, Blackberry etc. While 
these reputed glo bal manufacturers are strictly complying with all the prescribed 
safety limits when supplying the mobile handsets to countries like USA, Japan and 
European Countries , they are resisting the prescribed norms when it comes to 
supplying mobile handsets to Ind ia, probably taking the country for granted. From 
the response of DoT, the Committee feel perturbed to find that no standards for 
mobile handsets have so far been prescribed in the country and the same are still 
under deliberation of a Technical Committee of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS). The Committee have been informed that even the standards which have 
been finalized by TEC have not been implemented. The Committee are unable to 
understand the reasons for the delay in formulation of standards for m obile 
handsets in the country which in the opinion of the Committee is an issue of 
paramount importance in ensuring standardization and quality control of mobile 
handsets being imported or manufactured in the country. The Committee while 
deprecating such s orry state of affairs prevailing in the country, strongly 
recommend that DoT must make all possible efforts in finalizing and implementing 
the standards for mobile handsets without any further loss of time and the 
Committee must be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 (Para No. 2.19, Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
Need for Effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
2.20 The Committee note with concern that as the things stand today, the 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism available to the public in respe ct of EMF radiation 
from mobile towers located in their immediate vicinity is either totally insufficient 
or non-existent. The public has no means to verify as to whether the radiation from 
towers to which they are being exposed continuously is within the prescribed 
limits and whom to approach to allay their fears as no such details are required to 
be mentioned at the tower site.  The Committee note that the only existing 
Complaint Handling System for Electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation from Mobile 
Towers has been launched by DoT in Mumbai on 4 th October, 2012 through an 
online facility on DoT website http://www.dot.gov.in and there is a proposal to 
extend this facility to other metros also. The Committee, however, note that even 
after the lapse of more t han one year, the facility has not been extended to any 
other metro. Further, no publicity has been given with respect to online complaints 
redressal mechanism. No wonder that most of the people are not aware of 
existence of such a mechanism. The Committee  strongly feel that above grievance 
redressal mechanism of the Department is too little, too inadequate and is akin to 
making a deliberate attempt to ring fence the TSP and Infrastructure Providers 
from any public complaints and grievances. Holding the DoT  squarely responsible 
for the absence of any effective mechanism for redressal of public grievances, the 
Committee recommend that urgent efforts should be made to extend “Complaint 
Handling System for Electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation’ to other metros of the 
country along with an aggressive campaign to make the public aware of the 
existence of such Complaint Handling System. The Committee further recommend 
that the suggestion to display the information regarding name and address of the 
operators, contact person details, address of complaint redressing authority, level 
of EMF radiation etc.  at the entry point of the facility of the tower, which is being 
examined by DoT in consultation with telecom service providers and 
infrastructures providers, should be finalized and implemented at the earliest. The 

82 
 
Committee, at the same time, feel that such consultation process would be more 
meaningful if members of the public forum, Resident Welfare Associations, NGOs 
etc. are also consulted in evolving an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism. 
(Para No. 2.20, Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Setting up of State/District Level Telecom Committees  
 
2.21 The Committee note that the guidelines issued by DoT in 2012 and revised 
guidelines in 2013 inter-alia stipulates setting up of State and District Level 
Committees in each State consisting of officers from TERM Cells, State 
Administration, representatives of concerned Telecom Service Provider(s) and 
eminent public person etc. to effectively address public grievances relating to 
installation of towers and issues related to telecom infrastructure by holding 
regular interactions. The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that so far 
only two States viz. the States of Uttarakhand and West Benga l have formed such 
State Level Committees although their formation has been re -emphasized in the 
revised guidelines issued by DoT on 1 August, 2013. The Committee would like to 
attribute such Luke warm response of the State Governments towards formation 
of such important Committees, to the casual approach of the DoT as well as 
advisory nature of guidelines issued by them making their constitution by various 
States just discretionary. The Committee feel that formation of State/District Level 
Committees can p rove to be a very effective tool in addressing public grievances 
and until and unless the Department pursue vigorously with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations, the formation of such important Committees 
would remain a pipedream only. The Committee, t herefore, recommend that DoT 
must make all out efforts to expedite the formation of such Committees. The 
Committee also feel that to make the functioning of State/District level telecom 
Committees more effective, DoT may consider inclusion of elected repre sentatives 
of local bodies/State Assemblies/Member of Parliament in the composition of 
these Committees. Alternatively, the work can be assigned to District/State 
Monitoring and Vigilance Committees constituted by Ministry of Rural 
Development. These Committee are monitoring the Schemes/programmes relating 
to Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking Water, Panchayati Raj and Power 
(Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojna). 
(Para No. 2.21, Recommendation No. 15) 

84 
 
TERM Cells: Issues relating to shortage of manpower and equipment 
2.22 The Committee note that the Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring 
(TERM) Cells of the DoT have been assigned with an important task of cross 
checking the compliance of EMF radiation norms as prescribed by the Government 
for m obile towers. Apart from this, TERM Cells have been mandated to ensure 
compliance of licensing conditions by TSPs, interface between security agencies 
and TSPs, curbing of grey market activities, redressal of grievance of telecom 
subscribers in respect of deficiencies by TSP etc. and carrying out test audit of 10 
per cent of the BTS sites on random basis. The Committee are, however,  
constrained to find out that the TERM Cells have been severely handicapped by 
shortage of manpower in effectively carrying ou t its mandate, especially annual 
testing of 10 per cent of total BTS sites (including existing and new ones) which has 
also been acknowledged by the Department. As per the information provided by 
the Department, the Committee note that during the period fr om November, 2010 
to March 2011 and April, 2012 to March, 2013 only 3.5 and 4 per cent of the BTS 
were tested respectively against the mandate of randomly testing upto 10 per cent 
of the BTS sites. The Committee, therefore, have strong reasons to conclude that 
the other important activities of the TERM Cells are also being underperformed 
due to acute shortage of manpower. The Committee feel that not filling the 
existing vacancies of the TERM Cells amounts to conveniently ignoring the concerns 
of the public across the country over the possible health hazards from EMF 
radiations being emitted by telecom towers. Taking a very serious note of this 
sorry state of affairs, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department 
should take all necessary steps to stre ngthen the TERM Cells by filling up all the 
existing vacancies so that the Cells could effectively carry out their mandate. In the 
opinion of the Committee any further delay in filling up the existing vacancies 
would be only at the cost of ignoring the pub lic concerns and defeating the very 
purpose of constitution of the TERM Cells.  
      (Para No. 2.22, Recommendation No. 16) 

85 
 
Shortage of equipment in Term Cells  
2.23 The Committee find it surprising to note that the TERM Cells are carrying out 
the testing of the BTSs by using the test instruments provided by Telecom Service 
Providers instead of using their own equipment which unfortunately has not so far 
been procured by the Department. In this regard, while seriously questioning the 
credibility of using t he equipment provided by TSPs, the Committee in their 43 rd 
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30th 
April, 2013 had highlighted the lack of testing equipment and  had strongly 
recommended that serious efforts must be made by DoT to procure the requisite 
number of test equipment at the earliest to become self -sufficient in EMF testing 
besides promoting domestic production of the same instead of relying only on 
import. Again in their 51 st  Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the 
recommendations contained in their 43 rd Report presented to Lok Sabha on 16 th 
December, 2013, the Committee had expressed their serious displeasure at the 
lack of any urgency being shown by the Department in procuring the EMF testing 
equipment and had reiterated their earlier recommendation.  In this background, 
the Committee view that any further delay in procurement is bound to give an 
impression that there is a tacit understanding between DoT and TSPs in taking any 
concrete steps for mea suring compliance with EMF exposure limits. The 
Committee, therefore, once again strongly recommend that all out efforts must be 
made by the Department to procure such test equipment at the earliest. Further,  
domestic production of these equipment should be promoted to save precious 
foreign exchange and to ensure  that these equipment do not remain as an 
exclusive monopoly of few TSPs, but are also available to the concerned 
individuals/public organizations so that they may also freely use such testing 
equipment themselves and effectively work as a watchdog in ensuring compliance 
of prescribed safety norms on radiation exposure.  
(Para No. 2.23, Recommendation No. 17) 

86 
 
Issues relating to ‘Self-Certificate’ 
  
2.24 The Committee note that based on the recomme ndation of an Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) report, norms for exposure limit for EMF Radiation 
emitted by BTS towers have been reduced to 1/10 th of the existing limits 
prescribed by ICNIRP w.e.f. 1 September, 2012. The Committee are, however, not 
at al l satisfied with the existing mechanism which has been adopted by DoT for 
ensuring compliance of the prescribed limits. In this regard, the Committee observe 
that instead of conducting verification departmentally or getting the same done by 
some independent agency, the  Department is relying only on the ‘self -certificates’ 
furnished by the Telecom Service Providers themselves. The only safeguard 
evolved by the DoT is the requirement of carrying out inspection of 10 per cent of 
randomly selected BTS sites by  the TERM Cells of the DoT which are woefully 
lagging behind in carrying out their task due to the acute shortage of both the 
manpower as well as the equipment. The Committee also note that the method of 
‘Self-Certification’ has been adopted by the Departm ent just by consulting the 
stakeholders who are mainly Telecom Service Providers without studying the 
detailed implementation procedure/method followed in other countries. The other 
deterrent which has been put into place is that in case of violation of pr escribed 
limits, a provision for imposing penalty of Rs. 5 lakh per BTS per Telecom Service 
Providers has been prescribed. The Committee strongly deprecate that the 
Department is not even clear on the periodicity of furnishing of ‘self -certification’ 
of BTSs by the concerned TSPs. While the Department has informed the Committee 
in the Background Note that licensees should conduct audit and provide self -
certificate annually as per the procedure prescribed by Telecom Engineering Centre 
(TEC), the DoT in their  subsequent written reply has stated that the periodicity of 
submission of ‘self -certification’ by TSPs was once in two years because radiation 
parameters of the BTS remain constant, unless changed by TSPs. Considering the 
fact that radiation parameters of  the BTS are totally in the hands of the TSPs and 

87 
 
can be re-set by the TSPs at any point of time in the absence of any kind of 
constant monitoring mechanism, the Committee are of the strong view that no 
purpose is being served by requiring submission of ‘S elf-Certificate’ by TSPs only 
once in two years which otherwise also is too long a period.  The Committee are of 
the view that ‘Self -Certification’ method provide a freehand to TSPs to indulge in 
mis-information. The Committee also feel that considering la ck of manpower and 
testing equipment of TERM Cells, the majority of the TSPs are enjoying a kind of 
complete immunity from detection of any violation on their part when it comes to 
complying with the radiation norms of BTSs towers. The Committee, therefore , 
recommend that to make the monitoring mechanism more stringent, the 
Department should explore other options, such as evolving a constant monitoring 
mechanism of EMF radiation from all BTSs on real time basis or conducting surprise 
tests, conducting an in dependent ‘Third Party Audit’ of BTS towers etc. besides 
finding out the practices followed in other countries in coming out with its own 
effective procedure.  
 (Para No. 2.24, Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
Effective implementation of prescribe d Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) Value for 
mobile handsets 
 
2.25 The Committee while observing that Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) is a 
measure of the rate at which energy is absorbed by the human body when exposed to 
a radio frequency electromagnetic fiel d, find that DoT, in the year 2008, notified for 
compliance of Mobile Handsets being manufactured in India to conform to ICNIRP 
prescribed SAR limit of 2 W/kg in the frequency range of 10 MHz to 10 GHz and 
subsequently revised the same to 1.6 watt/kg avera ged over a mass of 1 gram 
tissue w.e.f. 1 September, 2013 for all mobile handsets manufactured or imported 
in India. The Committee also note that to ensure effective implementation of SAR 
norms so prescribed, DoT has issued instructions that all mobile han dsets 
manufacturers, both indigenous and imported, shall provide a self declaration in 
respect of SAR value based on certificate issued from Internationally Accredited 
Labs (ILAC) or accredited by TEC, India to TEC with a copy to DoT for compliance 
and necessary action. It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that 
as per Indian Cellular Association (ICA) all the new design mobile phones being 
manufactured for domestic market are compliant to new norms and Mobile 
Manufacturers Forum have made  a provision for display of SAR value by dialing 
*#07# in new mobile handsets in order to verify their compliance. The Committee, 
however, are concerned to note that as regards penalty provisions in the cases of 
detection of non -compliance with the prescri bed SAR norms, the reply of DoT is 
vague and evasive according to which the quantum of penalty will be as per the 
provisions in the applicable Acts/Rules. The reply gives an impression that that 
there is no clarity in the DoT on the quantum of penalty to b e imposed on the 
defaulter. The DoT has failed to furnish any information in respect of number of 
violations detected so far. The Committee, therefore, feel that the provision of 
penalty in case of any violation is still unclear and hence more specific pro visions 
for penalty are required to be laid down at the earliest for ensuring meaningful 
compliance with SAR norms. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 

89 
 
the Government must prescribe precise and specific provisions on penalty in such 
cases and may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also 
desire that efforts should also be made by the Department for greater 
dissemination of information relating to Do’s and Don’ts of mobile phones users 
and revised SAR value by bringing out a handbook in Hindi, English and regional 
languages and making the same available  to mobile handset customers at the 
point of sales/retail shops. 
2.26 As regards availability of adequate infrastructure for verifying compliance of   
 Mobile handsets wi th the prescribed SAR norms, the Committee would like to 
refer to the recommendation made by them in their 43 rd Report (15th Lok Sabha) 
wherein the Committee had expressed concern at the scarcity of the available 
infrastructure for meeting the requirement of verification of SAR values of mobile 
handsets of a vast variety involving a large number of manufacturers, while 
observing that only one SAR lab has been set up by the DoT at new Delhi and 
another being set up at Mumbai. The Committee have strongly reco mmended that 
DoT must undertake a thorough review of the number of SAR Labs required to be 
set up in the country for carrying out this task as well as making the verification of 
all models of mobile handsets by SAR Labs a mandatory provision.  Subsequently , 
the Committee in their 51 st Report on action taken by the Government on the said 
recommendation, had expressed their unhappiness at the reply of the Government 
that all handset manufacturers of both indigenous as well as imported are only 
required to pro vide a self -declaration in respect of SAR value subject to TEC audit 
as and when required. While strongly feeling that the DoT should be equipped with 
sufficient number of SAR Labs so as to keep a strict vigil on the manufacturers with 
regard to adhering t o SAR norms, the Committee had reiterated their 
recommendation and desired that DoT should undertake thorough review of SAR 
Labs required in the country and take expeditious steps to set up the Labs. The 
Committee desire that they may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 (Para Nos. 2.25 & 2.26, Recommendation No. 19) 

90 
 
Need for Introduction of Green energy in Telecom Sector 
  
2.27 The Committee feel concerned to note that there is an average fuel 
consumption of 8760 liters of diesel every year per  tower, assuming 8 hours of 
operation of DG sets and on this assumptions, billions of liters of this fossil fuel is 
consumed in the country every year. In this regard, the Committee note that based 
on the recommendations of TRAI dated 12 April, 2011 on ‘Approach towards Green 
Telecommunication’ for gradual introduction of green energy in telecom sector,  
the DoT on 23 January, 2012, has issued directions to Telecom Service Providers 
which envisaged that alteast 50 per cent of rural towers and 20 per cent of  urban 
towers are to be powered by hybrid power (RET + Grid Power) by 2015, while 75 
per cent of rural towers and 33 per cent of urban towers to be powered with (RET + 
Grid Power) by 2020. The Committee have been informed that based on 
continuous interactions by TRAI with the  TSPs, their associations, i.e., ISPAI, ACTO, 
COAI & AUSPI have submitted ‘Voluntary Code of Practice’ to reduce the carbon 
footprint of their network operations. It has also been brought to the notice of the 
Committee that DoT has cons tituted a committee to prepare a roadmap to 
facilitate- increased use of Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs), development of 
sector specific schemes and analyzing the viability gap funding for deployment of 
RETs in Telecom.  
2.28 While appreciating the various initiatives being undertaken by TRAI and DoT, 
the Committee are of the view that the issue of fossil fuel consumption to power 
telecom towers and its polluting nature deserves serious attention. Moreover, the 
Government has to spend huge amount of money on diesel subsidy and it may not 
be desirable to consume billions of liters of diesel in powering the telecom towers. 
The Committee also feel that the ‘Voluntary Code of Conduct’ adopted by various 
telecom associations would be too weak unless backed b y some regulation or 
some kind of mandatory provision. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take all necessary steps to effectively implement the targets as 

91 
 
envisaged to be implemented by 2015 and 2020 for powering the urban and r ural 
telecom towers by hybrid power  i.e. using more and more energy from renewable 
energy sources like wind and solar energy . The Committee while taking into 
consideration the objectives of the NTP -2012 which inter -alia include enhanced 
and continued adopt ion of green policy in telecom and incentivize use of 
renewable resources for sustainability, desire that to promote voluntary 
introduction of green energy by Telecom Service Providers, Government may 
explore the possibility of giving them some kind of inc entives/ rebates on license 
fee or reduction in levy rates. In this regard, the Committee feel that the 
Department may also consult the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy who are 
currently implementing the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Power Mission 
besides ensuring that the Committee constituted by DoT completes its task of 
preparing the roadmap to facilitate increased use of Renewable Energy with due 
promptitude. 
(Para Nos. 2.27 & 2.28, Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
Security related concerns due to  Imported Telecom equipment 
 
2.29 The Committee note that the Indian Telecom Sector is heavily dependent on 
imported equipment and such telecom equipment if not tested properly could 
cause security concerns due to vulnerabilities embedded and m alware in them. In 
this regard, the Committee note that for securing the telecom network, DoT has 
issued an amendment on 31 May, 2011 making the licensee completely and totally 
responsible for security of their networks and mandating that licensee should 
induct only those network elements which have been got tested as per relevant 
contemporary Indian or international security standards. Further, the licensees 
shall audit their networks or get the network audited from security point of view 
once a year from a network audit and certification agency. The Committee also 
note that a penal provision of upto Rs. 50 crore has been prescribed for breach of 
security by vendor or supplier who supplied the hardware/software that caused 
the security breach could be blacklisted or their license cancelled besides initiation 
of criminal proceedings under the relevant Acts.  
  
2.30 To the surprise of the Committee, the D oT knowing fully well that telecom 
equipment, if not tested properly could cause security concerns, has not  so far 
conducted any study to ascertain the security implications and risks involved due 
to dependence on imported equipment. What is even more dismaying to the 
Committee is that not a single authorized and certified agencies/labs for testing 
telecom equipment has been set up in the country. The Department has taken the 
plea that understanding the test standards and developing the test processes and 
testing tools thereto, is a complex phenomenon and it is taking some time to come 
out with requisite indigen ous security standards. The Committee also note that 
setting up of telecom equipment testing lab at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), 
Bangalore, has run into rough weather due to refusal of foreign vendors to share 
their design details with the premi er academic institute as it could hurt their 
business interests and as a via media, the Government is considering establishment 

93 
 
of a Telecom Testing and Security Certification Centre under it. The Committee find 
the reluctance of the industry to comply with the indigenous standards and testing 
within India unacceptable as the committee feel that national security should not 
be compromised and sacrificed at an altar of commercial profit. The Committee 
strongly recommend the Department to take all necessary s teps for the early 
establishment of Telecom Testing and security certification centre in the country at 
the earliest.  
 2.31 It is also apparent to the Committee that in the absence of any authorized 
and certified agencies/labs for testing telecom equipmen ts, no security audit of 
telecom networks is presently possible to be conducted in the country and the 
officers posted for security audit as an ad -hoc arrangement are still studying the 
subject matter before initiating any security audit work to verify the compliance by 
the Telecom Service Providers. Feeling extremely concerned that the Department 
has done precious little for the security of telecom networks in the country, the 
Committee strongly recommend that urgent measures should be taken by the 
Department for the establishment of the proposed Telecom security Directorate to 
ensure compliance of security conditions by the Telecom Service Providers instead 
of relying on ad-hoc arrangement.  
 
    
 (Para Nos. 2.29, 2.30 & 2.31, Recommendation No. 21) 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
10 February, 2014 Standing Committee on  
21 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 

94 
 
Annexure-I 
DEPARTMENT of TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ADVISORY GUIDELINES FOR STATE GOVERNMENTS FOR 
ISSUE OF CLEARANCE FOR INSTALLATION OF MOBILE TOWERS 
(Effective from 01.08.2013) 
 
1. Indian telecom sector has witnessed phenomenal growth and mobile telephony in 
particular has revolutionized in the country over the past decade. Providing telephone 
coverage across the country has been one of DoT’s top priority areas. Out of 921 mil lion 
connections, 891 million are wireless, as on May 2013. The popularity of cell phone and 
wireless communication devices has resulted in a proliferation of cell towers across the 
country.  
 
2. Fixation of standards for exposure limits of radio frequency  field emissions from 
mobile base stations, monitoring their compliance, all radiation related technical issues, 
issues of Access Service Licence / Infrastructure Provider registration and SACFA clearance 
for frequency allocation at any location are dealt with by DoT.  
 
3. India has adopted strict limit for radiation from Base Transceiver Station (BTS), as 
below, which is 1/10th of the International norms (ICNIRP):  
 
Frequency in MHz  Power density limit  
900  0.45 watt/m2  
1800  0.9 watt/m2  
2100 and above  1 watt/m2  
 
4. Broad guidelines for issue of clearance for installation of mobile phone towers were 
issued on 23.08.2012 and later modified on 26.03.2013. Subsequently, on the basis of 
feedback received after deliberations m ade with the state government officials and various 
stake holders on 16.04.2013 and holding further consultations thereafter, the guidelines 
have been finalized for the state governments. These are detailed in A and B below. These 
guidelines are issued in supersession of all earlier guidelines on the subject.  
 
A. Documents to be submitted by Telecom Service Providers/ Infrastructure Providers for 
obtaining clearance from local bodies / state governments for installation of mobile 
towers:  
 
I. Copy of relevant license / Infrastructure Provider Registration Certificate from 
Department of Telecommunications.  
II. Data Sheet  
a) Name of Service/Infrastructure Provider  
b) Location  
c) Tower Reference:  
i) Height, ii) Weight iii) Ground/Roof Top iv) Pole/wall mounted  v) Number of 
antennae  

95 
 
III.  Copy of SACFA clearance / copy of SACFA application for the said location 
submitted to WPC wing of DoT with registration number as  WPC 
acknowledgement along with undertaking that in case of any objecti on/ 
rejection, TSPs/ IPs will take corrective actions / remove the tower.  
IV.  Copy of structural stability certificate for ground based tower. In case of roof 
top BTS towers, structural stability certificate for the building and tower 
based on written app rovals of any authorized Structural Engineer of 
state/local bodies/Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee/ IIT/NIT 
or any other agency authorized by local body.  
V.  Copy of the type test certificate issued by Automotive Research Association 
of India (ARAI) to the manufacturers of the Diesel Generator (DG) Sets.  
VI.  Copy of clearance from Fire Safety Department only in case for high rise 
buildings where Fire Clearance is mandatory.  
VII.  For forest protected areas, the copy of clearance from St ate Environment & 
Forest Department, if applicable.  
VIII.  The local bodies may also seek submission of the copy of No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) from Building Owner / entities having roof top rights or roof 
top tenants in case of roof based tower/ land o wner in case of ground based 
tower, as the case may be. As per their rules in force, State Governments, at 
their discretion, may seek fresh NOC at the time of renewal of site (tenancy) 
contract for mobile tower.  
IX.  Acknowledgement receipt issued by TERM Cells (DoT) of the self -certificate 
submitted by Telecom Service Provider/ Infrastructure Provider in respect of 
mobile tower/ BTS (ground based/ roof top/ Pole/ wall mounted) in the 
format as prescribed by TEC, DoT, establishing / certifying that all Gene ral 
Public areas around the tower will be within safe EMR exposure limit as per 
peak traffic measurement after the antennae starts radiating.  
 
B.  Action by State government/Local body  
 
I.  Nominal one time Administrative Fee as may be decided by the State 
Government to recover its costs on the issue of permis sion for installation of 
Tower. 
 
II.  Single Window Clearance may be provided in a time bound manner to 
telecom service provider / infrastructure provider by the local body / State 
Government. This will ensure issuance of faster clearances.  
 
III.  Telecom towers have been given infrastructure status by Government of 
India vide gazette notification no 81 dated 28.03.2012. All benefits, as 
applicable to infrastructure industry, should be extended.  Electricity 
connection may be provided to BTS site on priority.  

96 
 
IV.  Telecom installations are lifeline installations and a critical infrastructure in 
mobile communication. In order to avoid disruption in mobile 
communication, an essential service, sealing of BTS towers / disconnection of 
electricity may not be resorted to without the consent of the respective 
TERM Cell of DoT in respect of the EMF related issues.  
V.  State Governments along with DoT may organise public awareness 
programmes involving civil society members.  
VI. In order to effectively address Public Grievances relating to installation of 
towers and issues related to telecom infrastructure, State Gove rnments may 
setup:  
 State Level Telecom Committee (STC) consisting of officers from TERM 
Cells, State Administration, representative(s) of concerned Telecom 
Service Provider(s) and eminent public persons etc.  
 District Level Telecom Committee (DTC) con sisting of officers from 
District Administration, representative(s) of concerned Telecom 
Service Provider(s) and eminent public persons etc.  
 
C. Action by DoT/ TERM Cells  
 
I.  Public awareness programme (Through DoT web portal / Govt. Publication).  
II.  a) For all the existing as well as new BTSs / Towers, Telecom Service Providers 
are required to submit self -certificates periodically in the format as 
prescribed by TEC, DoT, in order to ensure that normally all general public 
areas around the site are withi n the safe EMR exposure limits. Any violation 
noticed attracts heavy penalties on Telecom Service Provider(s) and may also 
lead to shut down of BTS in case the violation persists.  
b) The TERM Cells have been given clear instructions with regard to the 
technical audit of BTS, including for radiation from towers within safe limits. 
These include roof top/ ground based/ pole mounted/ wall mounted towers. 
They will also verify antenna orientation, safe distance from the tower 
(exclusion zone) etc. Installation  and augmentation of BTS and antenna is a 
continuous process. DoT is organizing frequent workshops for these officers 
to ensure observance of the latest guidelines issued by DoT on the subject of 
EMF radiation and public safety. Additional Guidelines for T ERM Cells as 
follows: 4  

97 
 
Additional Guidelines to TERM Cells for auditing BTS 
For EMF radiation 
(Effective from 01.08.2013) 
******* 
1. Instructions/guidelines have been issued to the TERM Cells for auditing the RF 
radiations from BTS for compliance to the prescribed norms. Following are additional 
guidelines to TERM Cells in the matter.  
 
2. With a view to strengthen monitoring and compliance of safety aspects / provisions 
in regard to radio frequency emissions from mobile towers, TERM Cells may take th e 
following also into account while conducting their audits for the purpose of ensuring that all 
general public areas are within safe EMF exposure limits as prescribed by DoT.  
 In case of both ground based towers & roof top towers, there shall be no buil ding 
right in front of the antenna(e), of equivalent height taking into account the tilt of 
the lowest antenna on tower as per details in the table below. Further, the antennae 
at the same height only are to be counted, as the beam width of the mobile 
antennae, in the vertical direction, is very narrow.  
 
Number of antenna(e) 
pointed in the same 
direction 
Building/Structure safe 
distance from the 
antenna(e) at the same 
height 
(in meters) 
1 20 
2 35 
4 45 
6 55 
 
 The distance figures in the above table are based on empirical estimation 
considering that all the antennae are emitting at their maximum RF power of 20 
Watts and exactly in the same direction with same heig ht (a worst case scenario). In 
practice, the values of safe distance of buildings will depend upon actual deployment 
scenarios and mostly, may be far less than depicted above.  
 
3. Wall Mounted/Pole mounted Antenna:  
 
 Wherever the antennae are mounted on  the wall of building or pole on/along the 
road, their height should be at least 5 meters above ground level /road level. 
However, such installations will have to comply with the radiation limits.  
 As far as safe distance of buildings from antenna is con cerned, guidelines as given 
above will apply.  
 
****** 

98 
 
Annexure-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18th November, 2011 from 1 100 hours to 1 300 hours in 
Committee Room ‘53’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh –Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
7. Shri Tapas Paul 
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
9. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
  
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
11. Shri Salim Ansari  
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
13. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  -  Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

99 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Department of Telecommunications 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Rentala Chandrashekhar Secretary (T) 
2. Shri Chandra Prakash Member (T) ex-officio Secretary to Government of India 
 
3. Shri J.K. Rao Advisor (T) 
4. Shri S.R. Rao Additional Secretary (T) 
5. Dr. Ashok Chandra Wireless Advisor ex -officio Add itional  Secretary  to 
Government of India 
 
6. Shri N.K. Srivastava Sr. Dy. Director General (TEC) 
7. Shri A.K. Mittal Sr. Dy. Director General (AS) 
8. Shri P.K. Panigrahi Sr. Dy. Director General (BW) 
9. Shri Malay Srivastava Joint Secretary (T) 
10. Shri R. K. Upadhyay  CMD, BSNL 
11. Shri Kuldeep Singh CMD, MTNL 
12. Shri G.P. Srivastava Dy. Director General (CS) 
13. Shri R.K. Pathak Dy. Director General (IP) 
14. Shri Ram Narain Dy. Director General (S.Term) 
15. Shri Suresh Chandra Sharma Dy. Director General (C&A) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened …..xxxxx….. and to have  briefing by the representatives of  the Department of 
Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology ) on the subject 
‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and Setting up Security Stan dards 
in expansion of telecom facilities.’  
 
3. xxxxx        xxxxx          xxxxx            xxxxx      xxxxx. 
 
4. xxxxx        xxxxx          xxxxx            xxxxx      xxxxx. 
 
5.  The Committee, thereafter, took up the next agenda i.e. briefing by the representatives 
of the Department of Telecommunications on the subject ‘ Norms for setting up of telecom 
towers, its harmful effects and Setting up Security Standards in expansion of telecom facilities.’ 
 

100 
 
(The representatives of the Department of Telecommunications were then called in) 
 
6. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department of Telecommunications 
(Ministry of Communications and Information Technology ) to the sitting of the Committee . He 
also drew the attention of the representatives to Direction 55(I) relating to confidentiality of 
the matter till the Report is presented to the House. 
 
7. The representatives of the Department  of Telecommunications  then briefed the 
Committee about the various aspects related to the aforesaid subject which included  norms for 
setting up telecom towers, safety aspects of telecommunications in respect of infrastructure 
and mobile handsets, research findings of the studies carried out both at National and 
International levels to establish EMF radiation on human health, BIS standards for mobile 
handsets to test SAR value , etc. through a Power Point presentation.  The representatives also 
responded to the queries of the Members during the course of deliberations.   
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 

101 
 
Annexure-III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
- - - - - - - 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th March, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1 740 hours 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary  
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
7. Dr.  Thokchom Meinya 
8. Shri Tapas Paul 
9. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur) 
10.  Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri  Joy Abraham  
12. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
13. Shri Salim Ansari 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash -  Deputy Secretary 
 

102 
 
Representatives of the  
Department of Telecommunications 
 
Sl. 
No.  
       Name Designation 
 
1. Shri R. Chandrashekhar Secretary 
 
2. Shri S.C. Misra Member (S) 
 
3. Ms. Sadhana Dikshit Advisor (F) 
 
4. Shri R.K. Bhatnagar Advisor (T) 
 
5. Ms. Rita Teaotia Additional Secretary (T) 
 
6. Shri N. Ravi Shankar Administrator (USOF) 
 
7. Shri R.K. Upadhyay CMD, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
 
8. Shri A.K. Garg CMD, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
 
9. Shri Vimal Wakhlu CMD,  Telecommunications Consultants India Limited 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Aggarwal Secretary,  Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to …..xxxxx….. and to take evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications on the subject ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful 
effects and setting up security standards in expansion of telecom facilities’. 
 
 xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
 
3. xxxxx        xxxxx          xxxxx            xxxxx      xxxxx. 
 
4. xxxxx        xxxxx          xxxxx            xxxxx      xxxxx. 
 
 xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
 
 The representatives of the Department of Telecommunications were then ca lled in 
for evidence. 
 

103 
 
5. At the outset the Chairman apprised about day ’s agenda i.e. evidence of 
representatives of Department of Telecommunications in connection with examination of  
‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and setting up security 
standards in expansion of telecom facilities’.  
 
6. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department of Telecommunications 
to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings till the 
report on the subject is presented to the House  and Direction (58) regarding the evidence 
liable to be treated as public . Thereafter, the  representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications made a Power Point Presentation covering various issues relating to the 
subject viz. norms for setting up telecom towers, prescribed radiation norms,  ICMR Report 
2006 on RF exposure, Inter -Ministerial Committee on radiation, current radiation norms, 
Committee constituted by Department of Science and Technology , steps taken by DoT  to 
reduce radiation hazards, introduction of green energy and reports of i nternational bodies on 
radiation. Clarifications sought by the Committee on various issues relating to the subject were 
replied to by the witnesses.  The representatives of the Department/BSNL  assured the 
Committee to furnish written replies on the points in respect of which information was not 
readily available  with them . The Chairman then thanked the representatives for appearing 
before the Committee and furnishing information in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
  
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
 
A verbatim record of proceedings of the sitting has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 

104 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 24th July, 201 3 from 1 500 hours to 1 800 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajendra Agrawal– In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
8. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
9. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Joy Abraham  
11. Shri Salim Ansari 
12. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
13. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 

105 
 
List of experts/organizations/stakeholders who appeared before the Committee 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Rajendra Agrawal, a 
Member of the Committee to act as the Chairman for the sitting in accordance with Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear the views/suggestions of the 
individuals/experts/organizations and stakeholders, in connection with examination  of 
the subject ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its ha rmful effects and setting up 
security standards in expansion of telecom facilities’. 
 
4. The aforesaid individuals/experts and representatives of each of the organization 
were heard by the Committee separately and in each case their attention was drawn to 
the provisions of Direction 55(1) regarding confidentiality of the proceedings and 
Direction 58 regarding evidence liable to be treated as public. 
I.         Shri Ram Kumar, Retired Advisor (Technology), Department of Telecommunications 
 
II.    Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India (AUSPI) & Cellular 
Operators Association of India (COAI) 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sud , Secretary General, Association of Unified Telecom Service 
Providers of India 
2. Shri Vikram Tiwathia, Additional Director General, Cellular Operators Association 
of India 
3. Mr. C S Rao, President, AUSPI & President Reliance Communications 
4. Mr. Anand Dalal , Vice-President, AUSPI & Sr. Vice President, Tata Tele Service 
Ltd. 
5. Ms. Jyoti Pawar, Bharti Airtel 
6. Ms. Anjali Hans, Vodafone 
III.     Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) 
 
1. Mr. T.V. Ramachandran, Chairman, ASSOCHAM Telecom Committee 
2. Mr. T.R. Dua, Member, ASSOCHAM Telecom Committee 
3. Ms. Kanupriya Bhardwaj, Vodafone India, Member ASSOCHAM 
4. Mr. Ajay Sharma, Senior Director, ASSOCHAM 
 
IV.     Citizen Groups of Mumbai 
 
1. Ms. Juhi Chawla Mehta 
2. Shri Prakash Munshi 
3. Ms. Veena Singhal 
 

106 
 
 
5. The Committee first heard the views/suggestions of Shri  Ram Kumar, Retired 
Advisor (Technology), Department of Telecommunications. He briefed the Committee 
about the various issues related to the subject viz. possible health effects of radiations 
from BTS telecom towers and mobile handsets; recent studies cond ucted by various 
agencies including WHO and Bioinitiative Report 2012 which have talked about the 
possible carcinogenic effects of radiation on humans; the refusal of the operators to 
accept the findings of these reports; switching over to deployment of sm all antennae 
with alternate technologies such as Micro, Pico and Femto type of cells and their 
financial implications ; pollution caused by diesel to run high powered radiating 
antennas; structural safety of the buildings; amount of  steel  being used for setting up 
towers and the diversion of steel for alternate use ; security risks of excessive 
dependence on imported telecom equipment s, etc. He also informed the Committee 
that he was the Chairman of the Inter -Ministerial Committee which was constituted for 
revising norms for radiation limits for BTS towers and SAR limits for mobile handsets and 
that Committee submitted its report to the Government in November, 2010.  
Clarifications sought by the Committee were replied to by the witness. 
 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 
6. The Committee, then, hear d the views/suggestions of the representatives of 
Association of Unified Telecom Service of India (AUSPI) and Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI) on the subject. The representatives of AUSPI and COAI  
through a Power Point Presentation highlighted various issues relating to Indian Mobile 
Industry; link between increase in teledensity and economic growth; features of 
National Telecom Policy, 2012; continuous monitoring and up -dation done by 
Department o f Telecommunications to check Electro Magnetic Fields ( EMF) from 
telecom towers; implementation of ICNIRP guidelines as recognized by WHO; need for a 
uniform  national  guidelines  for  setting  up of towers;  setting up of  security standards   
for telecom, etc. The Committee sought clarifications on few aspects which were replied 
to by the witnesses.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
7. The Committee, thereafter, hear d the views/suggestions of the representative s 
of Associated Chambers of Commerce an d Industries of India (ASSOCHAM) on the 
subject. The representatives of ASSOCHAM through Power  Point Presentation explained 
the Committee various issues related to the subject. The issues, inter-alia, included the 
views of the leading experts that had suggested no evidence of adverse effects  from 
exposure  within limits and recent scientific research; lack of balance in the Bioinitiaitive 
Report, 2012; study on electromagnetic radiation emanating from cellular towers being 
undertaken jointly by DoT and Department of Science and Technology in collaboration 

107 
 
with ICMR, Ministry of Environment and Forests; DoT ’s initiative on EMF; issues related 
to tower installation and other related issues , etc. The Committee soug ht clarifications 
on few aspects and the same were replied to by the witnesses. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
8. At the end, the Committee heard the views/suggestions of the representatives of 
Citizen Groups of Mumbai on the subject. The representatives  through Power Point 
Presentation highlighted to the Committee various issues related to the subject, which 
inter-alia, included nature of mobile tower antenna and mobile phone  radiation; health 
risks posed by clusters of antenna atop buildings and homes i n densely populated areas; 
ill-effects from constant use of mobile phones; cre ating awareness about radiation  and 
safe use of mobile phones , etc. The Committee’s queries related to the subject were 
replied to by the witnesses. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
9. The Chairman at the end of each discussion  thanked the 
individuals/experts/representatives of each of the organization s for appearing before 
the Committee and furnishing valuable information in connection with examination of 
the subject. The Committe e also directed the individuals/experts/representatives to 
furnish documents with regard to the issues on which the information was not readily 
available.  
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 
Annexure-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 13th August, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1600 hours 
in Committee Room ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – Chairman  
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Abdul Rahman 
3. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
7. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
8. Tapas Paul 
9. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Joy Abraham  
11. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
12. Shri Salim Ansari 
13. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
 
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 

109 
 
List of representatives of the Department of Telecommunications 
 
1. Shri M.F. Farooqui  Secretary (DoT) & Chairman, 
Telecom Commission 
2. Shri S.C. Misra Member (S) 
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIInInAdditional 
Secretary & FA 
3. Smt. Nirmala Pillai Member (F) 
4. Shri Anil Kaushal Member (T) 
5. Shri R.K. Bhatnagar Advisor (T) 
6. Shri N. Ravi Shankar Administrator (USOF) 
7. Shri R.J.S. Kushwaha Wireless Advisor 
8. Shri P.K. Panigrahi Sr. DDG (BW) 
9. Shri S.S. Sirohi Sr. DDG (TERM) 
10. Shri R.K. Upadhyay CMD, BSNL 
11. Shri A.K. Garg CMD, MTNL 
12. Shri Ram Narain DDG (Security) 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications in connection with examination of the subject ‘Norms for setting 
up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and setting up security standards in expansion 
of telecom facilities’. 
 
[The representatives of the Department were then called in] 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings and Direction 58 regarding evidence liable to be treated as public. 
 
4. After introduction by the witnesses, the Secretary of the Department provided an 
overview of th e subject. Thereafter,  the representative of the Department highlighted 
and explained through power point presentation the following aspects:- 
 
i. Issues relating to setting up of towers, such as, location of towers, 
obtaining siting clearance from WPC and permission from local bodies; 
ii. Revised guidelines for setting up of telecom towers; 
 
 
 
 

110 
 
 
iii. Radiation norms , such as, ICNIRP norms, submission of Self -Certificates 
and Inter-Ministerial Committee Report; 
iv. Monitoring of radiation norms, such as, provision o f penalty of Rs. 5 lakh 
per BTS per Service Provider and Monitoring done by TERM Cells, 
v. Norms for mobile handsets,  such as, action taken on the recommendation 
of Inter Ministerial Committee to reduce SAR value from 2 watt/kg to 1.6 
watt/kg average ovr a mass of 1 gram of human tissue w.e.f. 1 September, 
2013; 
vi. Research work being done by Department of Science and Technology; 
vii. WHO Report relating to the subject and ICNIRP Statement 2009; and   
viii. The steps and safety measures taken by DoT and public awareness on the 
issue. 
 
5. The Committee, thereafter, sought clarifications on various issues related with 
the subject like  impact of EMF radiation  on biodiversity, composition of the Committee 
appointed by Department of Science and Technology  for research on the subject , 
structural safety of telecom towers, penalty imposed on those service providers found 
violating the prescribed radiation limit s, precautionary guidelines  related to mobile 
usage, measures to increase public awareness, etc. and  the same were replied to by the 
witnesses. In the concluding remark, Chairman emphasized on the need to have India 
specific research  on health hazards of EMF radiation from telecom towers and mobile 
handsets, ability of the TERM Cells to monitor the telec om towers, uniform policies for 
installation of towers, etc. The Committee also asked the representatives of the 
Department to furnish documents with regard to the issues on which the information 
was not readily available. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
 Annexure- VI 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th February, 2014 from 1000 hours to 1030 
hours in the Chamber of Hon’ble Chairman, Roo m No. 145 -A, Third Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh–Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
3. Shri Khagen Das 
4. Dr. (Prof.) Thokchom Meinya  
5. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
6. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Gazipur) 
7. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
8. Shri Salim Ansari 
9. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
10. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
4. Shri Brahm Dutt - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri N.C. Gupta - Director 
6. Shri A.K. Garg - Additional Director 
7. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 

112 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider two original Reports viz. (i)  xxxxx  and (ii) Draft Report 
on ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and setting up of security 
standards in expansion of telecom facilities ’, relating to xxxxx and Department of 
Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology)  
respectively.  The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Reports and adopted 
the same without any modification.  The Committee , then, authorized the Chairman to 
finalize and present the Reports to the House.   
 
3. The Committee placed on record the ir appreciation for the assistance rendered 
to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.    
  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 
 