 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on                  
Demands for Grants (2009-10)] 
 
   TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
     LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                                      NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
10 
 

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on              
Demands for Grants (2009-10)] 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
 
 May, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
CONTENT 
  Page No. 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
  
INTRODUCTION  (iii) 
  
  
Chapter       I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
Chapter      II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
9 
Chapter     III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the Government………………… 
 
33 
Chapter     IV Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration…………………………………………………….......... 
34 
Chapter     V Recommendation/Observations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………………………. 
40 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observati ons contained in their Second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) …………………………………………………… 
48 
 
 
APPENDIX* 
 
 Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Standing Committee On 
Information Technology (2009-10) held on 4th May, 2010....... 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Not included in the cyclostyled copy of the Report. 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-2010) 
    
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh  -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Shri Milind Deora  
*5. Shri Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
**9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Abdul Rahman 
12. Shri Prem Das Rai 
  #13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
15. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
16. Dr. Bhola Singh 
17. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19. Shri C. Sivasami 
20. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
 @23. Vacant 
24. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
25. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
26. Shri Prabhat Jha 
27. Shri P. Rajeeve 
28. Shri Shriram Pal 
29. Shri N.R. Govindarajar 
30. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
31. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
 
** Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 10th September, 2009. 
# Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 13th October, 2009. 
* Nominated to Committee w.e.f. 19th November, 2009. 
@ Consequent upon retirement of Shri Dharampal Sabharwal from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.  
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2009 -10) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Tenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in their Second  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on „Demands for Grants (2009-10)‟ of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16  December, 2009 and laid 
on the Table  of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Ministry of Information  & 
Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on 8 March, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was con sidered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 4th May, 2010 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by t he Government on the Recommendations / 
Observations contained in their Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
is given at Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER   I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2009-10) deals with the Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Sec ond 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 
2009 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It conta ined 29 
Recommendations/Observations.   
3. Action Taken Notes by the Government  in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and these have been 
categorized as under: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos. 
 1,2,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,17,18,19,20,22,23, 
 
 Total 18 
 Chapter II 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue i n view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Nil  
 Total    Nil 
 Chapter III 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and require reiteration 
 

 Para Nos:-  15,16,27,28  
 Total 04 
 Chapter IV 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies are of interim nature:- 
 
 Para No:- 3,14,21,24,25,26,29  
 Total 07 
 Chapter V 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by 
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the 
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with 
reasons for non-implementation.  The Committee further desire that 
Action Taken by the Government  on the Observations 
/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and final Action Taken 
by the Government  to the Recommendations contained in Chapter - 
V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the Government  by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
I. FILM SECTOR 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
6. In their Second Report, the Committee while observ ing under utilization of 
outlay under Film Sector during the year 2008-09, had desired that the reasons for 
under utilization of outlay may be probed and all corrective actions taken by the 
Ministry in respect of the various projects/schemes under Film Sector. 
 
7. The Ministry in their action taken note have submitted as follows:  

   
“The F (PSU) Desk in this Ministry has two Plan Schemes, namely (i) 
Film Production in various regional languages and (ii) Equity 
Participation in NFDC”.  “In the year 2007 -08 Rs.3 crore was provided 
in BE for the Plan Scheme „Film Production  in various regional 
languages‟ whereas Rs.10 lakhs was provided for Plan Scheme „Equity 
Participation in NFDC.  Since Plan Scheme „Film Production in various 
regional  languages‟ could not be approved during the financial year 
2007-08, provision of Rs.3  crore in BE was revised to nil at RE 
stage.  Also the provision of Rs.10 lakhs for „Equity Participation in 
NFDC‟ could not be spent as investment in Equity Participation 
required the approval of the Cabinet and the exercise was taken up by 
the Ministry but no approval could be obtained. 
 
In the year 2008-09 a provision of Rs.6.50 crore was made in respect of the 
Plan  Scheme‟ Film Production in various regional languages‟ and a provision 
of Rs.8 crore was made in respect of the plan scheme „Equity participation in 
NFDC‟ at BE stage.  While the provision of Rs.6.50 crore for Film Production 
in various regional languages  could be spent during the financial year the 
BE provision of Rs. 8 crore towards Equity  Participation in NFDC was 
revised to a token provision of Rs.1 lakh as it was decided during this year to 
refer the case of revival of NFDC to Board for Reconstruction of  Public Sector 
Enterprises  for their consideration and recommendation as  the  company 
became sick and approval of the Cabinet to the proposal for equity 
investment in NFDC was not likely to be obtained during the year. 
 
In the year 2009 -2010 so far BE provision of Rs.6.50 crore has been 
provided for the  Plan Scheme „Film Prod uction in various regional 
languages‟ and the entire provision has already been released to NFDC.  In 
respect of plan scheme „ „Equity Participation in  NFDC‟ only a token 
provision of Rs. 1 lakh has been made as it was felt that it may not be 
possible to get the approval of the Cabinet to the proposal for Equity 
Participation in NFDC during the current financial year as well.” 
 
8. The Committee observe that during the year 2007-08, Rs.10 lakh was 
provided for the Plan scheme `Equity Participation in NFDC’.  However, the 
amount could not be spent as the Ministry could not take approval of the 
Cabinet.  Again during the year 2008 -09, a provision of Rs.8 crore was 
made for the above scheme, which was reduced to a token provision of 
Rs.1 lakh due to the reasons  that NFDC became sick and the case for 
revival of NFDC was referred to the Board for Reconstruction of Public 
Sector Enterprises for their consideration.   The above development         
re-inforces the views of the Committee that there are problems in 
implementation of the programme under Film Sector during the year  
2008-09. In the opinion of the Committee, the planning and 

implementation process need to be synchronized in order to ensure 
utilization of outlay.  The Committee hope that steps will be taken  by the 
Ministry to probe the reasons  for under utilization of outlay and all 
corrective action taken by the Government in respect of various 
projects/schemes under Film Sector. 
 
II. Museum of Moving Images 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
9. In their previ ous Report, the Committee while deprecating the delay in 
implementation of the scheme had desired that adequate steps should be taken by 
the Ministry to get clearance of the project.  The Committee had recommended that 
definite timelines regarding conceptu alization and implementation of the project 
should be drawn so that Museum of Moving Images is set up within a definite time 
frame. 
 
10. The Ministry in their action taken notes have  stated as follows- 
 
 “The proposal for setting up Museum of Moving Image s (MOMI) has 
been considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting 
held on 11.01.2010.  The Committee has recommended the proposal 
for approval of the competent authority, in accordance with the 
existing guidelines on appraisal/approval of EF C.  Timelines regarding 
implementation of the project have also been drawn up in order to set 
up the said Museum expeditiously.  Broadly, it has been proposed to 
set up the Museum through National Buildings Construction 
Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) while the interactive galleries would be set up 
by National Council of Science Museums (NCSM).  Most of the items to 
be displayed would be procured from the historians, collectors and 
others through voluntary donation basis for the museum.  However, 
some historical items may have to be purchased.  After approval of the 
EFC, Films Division would enter into a contract with NBCC which is the 
main executive agency clearly delineating its responsibilities for timely 
completion of the project including coordination with NCSM  and other 
agencies. “ 
 
 
 
11.  The Committee observe that the information furnished in the action 
taken note in respect of Museum of Moving Images (MoMI) is just 
reproduction of what had been earlier submitted to the Committee during 
the course of examination of the Demands for Grants (2009-10).  The reply 

furnished by the Ministry is silent about the steps taken to get clearance of 
the projects and drawing up of definite timelines for implementation of the 
project.   While expressing their displeasure over  the delay in 
implementation of the project, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for taking expeditious steps for finalizing the scheme so 
that MoMI is set up within a definite time frame. 
 
 
 
 
III.   Content Regulation Mechanism  -  Broadcasting Regulation and 
Regulatory Authority 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
12. The Committee had been informed that the Government proposes to put in 
place the Broadcasting Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) under an Act of 
Parliament and a new Content Co de to be issued hereunder.  The Committee had 
also been informed that the views of all the State Governments have been solicited 
on the draft Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill.  Having felt that there is an 
urgent need for a proper monitoring mechanism  for broadcasting industry, the 
Committee had desired the Ministry to complete the process of consultation with all 
stakeholders in a time bound manner and make earnest efforts to introduce the 
said Bill in the Parliament expeditiously. 
 
13. The Ministry in their action taken note have submitted as follows: 
 
“The Ministry has been consulting States/UTs on the proposed 
Broadcasting Services   Regulation Bill . So far 18 States and 6 UTs 
have submitted   their  comments    on the proposed Bill. Ministry has 
also initiated wide ranging consultations with stakeholders for arriving at a 
consensus on this issue.  The Ministry has already held consultations with 
Indian Broadcasting Foundation, Multi System Operator (MSO) Alliance, 
News Broadcasters Association (NBA), Broadcast Editors Association (BEA) 
and the Cable Operators Federation of India (COFI).   To take the process 
further, a Task Force has been constituted on 27.11.2009  under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, I&B with two representatives each from News 
Broadcasters Association, Indian Broadcasting Foundation and Broadcast 
Editors Association. The Task Force would interact with different 
Stakeholders to understand their perspective on the need, scope and 
jurisdiction, organizational structure, powers and funct ions of independent 
Broadcast regulator and issues relating to regulation of content. The Task 
Force held its first meeting on 29 th December 2009 to discuss the 

methodology, to identify various interest groups, frequency of meetings 
etc. The Task Force pro poses to furnish its recommendations to the 
Government at the earliest.   This issue has also been discussed in the 27th 
Conference of the State Information Ministers held on 5 th December 2009 
at Vigyan Bhawan.”   
  
14. While noting the steps being taken b y the Ministry on the proposed 
Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill, the Committee express displeasure 
over the tardy progress in the matter.   The Ministry after soliciting the 
views of the State Governments and UTs, have constituted a Task Force to 
take the process further for consultation with various stakeholders etc.  
However, no definite timeline has been fixed for submission of findings to 
the Government.  The Committee desire that the process of consultation 
may be completed in a time bound manner so that the Ministry introduce 
the proposed Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill in the Parliament 
expeditiously. 
 
 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
  
15. The Committee had noted that the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 contains 
provisions for constitution of Parliamentary Committee and Broadcasting Council.  
However, these provisions have never been put into operation.   The Committee 
were informed that two Committees of Prasar Bharati ( Sengupta Committee report 
dated August 1996 and Narayan murthy Committee report dated May, 2000) had 
recommended that there was no need for these provisions in the light of Standing 
and Consultative Committees of Parliament.   Taking note of the fact that the 
reports of the aforesaid Committees were submitted in  the years 1996 and 2000 
and since then 13 and 9 years respectively have passed.  Even then the Ministry 
could not take the decision.   The Committee, while taking the non -implementation 
of these provisions seriously particularly when the word `shall‟ has been used in the 
legislation had desired that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should 
take the final decision on the constitution of these bodies. 
16. The Ministry in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 
 “The matter of constitution of Parliamentary Committee and the Broadcasting 
Council as per the provisions of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 was placed before 

the last GOM but it could not be taken  up.   In the proposal sent to Cabinet 
Secretariat by the Ministry for reconstitution of GOM, this  issue has been 
mentioned among others as one of the reasons for continuation of GOM.  
Since  the matter requires high level int er-ministerial deliberations, a  final  
view is proposed to be  taken after  the reconstitution of GOM and its 
recommendations on the issue are obtained.  Now that the GOM has been 
reconstituted, the matter will be placed before it for consideration”.  
 
 
17  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  Even 
after two decades since the Prasar Bharati Act. 19 90  came into effect, the 
provisions of the Act regarding constitution of a Parliamentary Committee 
and Broadcasting Council have not been implemented even when the word 
`shall’ has been used in the legislation.  While deploring the delay on the 
part of th e Government, the Committee reiterate their recommendation 
that a final decision in this regard should be taken without any further 
delay. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee observe that as per Demand No. 59 pertaining to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation is for a total amount of 
Rs. 2568.07 crore which include Rs. 800 crore as Plan Outlay and Rs. 1768.07 crore 
as non-Plan Outlay.  The examination of the outlay earmarked under Plan schemes 
during the first three years of Eleventh Plan reveals that out of the total allocation 
of Rs. 5,439 crore as approved for Eleventh Plan, the actual utilization during the 
first two years of Eleventh Plan  is just Rs. 822.76 crore i.e. not even 1/5 th of the 
total allocation.  Besides under the Plan schemes, there is variation between the 
proposed outlay, BE and RE during each of the years.  During the year 2008 -09, 
Rs.700.00 crore were provide d at BE stage against the proposed outlay of 
Rs.1072.00 crore.  The outlay was further reduced to Rs. 600.00 crore at RE stage.  
Even the reduced outlay could not be utilized and there was under spending to the 
tune of Rs. 175.34 crore.   Again during the year 2009-10, the Ministry has been 
allocated Rs. 800.00 crore against the proposed allocation of Rs.1466.17 crore.  
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the allocation provided 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan is less than the prop osed outlay.  The outlay 
provided is further reduced at RE stage and even the reduced outlay could not be 
spent. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has acknowledged that 
there have been some slippages in the utilization of allocations.  Accor ding to the 
Ministry one of the reasons for under utilisation of funds is non approval of the 
schemes of the Ministry.  The Committee take note of the under utilization of outlay 
seriously and strongly recommend that all efforts should be made to ensure th at 
financial and physical targets under each of the project/scheme are fully achieved.   
 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry notes the recommendations of the Committee and assures that 
it will continue to sustain its efforts to ensure that fi nancial and physical targets 
under each of the project / scheme are fully achieved. 
[Ministry of I & B O.M. No. 4/18/2009-PC (Vol.V) dated 08.02.2010]    

 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 During examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry, the 
Committee have been informed that initially the Ministry had formulated 
86 schemes.  However, at the time of Zero Based Budgeting exercise 
undertaken by the Planning Commission in May, 2007, the total number of 
schemes were reduced to 65.  The Committee find t hat out of total 28 on -
going schemes, the requisite approval/clearance in respect of 2 schemes 
viz. National Press Centre under information Sector and Museum of Moving 
Images under Film Sector is still pending.  Further, out of the total 37 new 
schemes inc luded in the Annual Plan for 2009 -10 of the Ministry, 12 
schemes are still awaiting requisite approval.  These include some 
important schemes like Converting Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication into Media University, Setting up of Centre of Excellence 
for Animation, Gaming and Special Effects, Digitalization of Transmitters, 
E-Governance, Setting up of Transmitters for Border area of J&K, Global 
Film School, DTH and Software Acquisition.  The representative of the 
Ministry during the course of oral evide nce has acknowledged that the 
delay in approval processes has resulted in under utilization of funds.  The 
Committee disapprove the way the projects are being planned by the 
Ministry.  There is an urgent need to analyze the position critically and 
streamline the whole planning process.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that the process of evaluation/restructuring of the schemes 
and obtaining various clearances etc. should be over before 1 st April of the 
first year of Five Year Plan so that the targets set u nder the different 
schemes are realistically achieved.  The Committee urge that atleast now 
the Ministry should properly coordinate with the Ministry of Finance so that 
the clearance for these 14 schemes are obtained immediately.  The 
concerns of the Commi ttee in this regard should also be duly 
communicated to the Ministry of Finance. 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
The Ministry notes the recommendations and assures that it will continue to 
make efforts to expedite the approval process.  The concern of the  Committee has 
also been communicated to Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
[Ministry of I & B O.M. No. 4/18/2009-PC (Vol.V) dated 08.02.2010]   

 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4 & 5) 
 
 The Commonwealth Games are scheduled to be held in October, 
2010.  While scrutinizing  the Demands for Grants 2009 -10 of the Ministry, 
the Committee have noted that the proposal for Commonwealth Games 
involving an expenditure of Rs.155.00 crore, which include Rs.134.00 crore 
for Prasar Bharati, Rs.10.00 crore for Press Information  
Bureau a nd Rs.11.00 crore for ITPO, has been approved by Planning 
Commission.  As per the information made available to the Committee, the 
projects relating to Commonwealth Games are at the 
tendering/negotiation stage.   Prasar Bharati is the host broadcaster for 
these Games.  In addition to setting up coverage facilities at various 
competition and non -competition venues at Delhi, the host broadcaster is 
also required to set up an International Broadcasting Centre at Pragati 
Maidan.  So far, the Ministry has been able to finalize the agency in respect 
of only production and coverage facilities.  The selection of agencies for 
other critical activities is either at the tendering stage or at financial 
negotiation stage.  For international Broadcasting Centre, an agency  is yet 
to be awarded the work as financial negotiations are underway in Prasar 
Bharati.  Further, the tendering process is also under way for selection of 
entity for ‘booking -cum-information facilities and website designing and 
maintenance’.  The Committe e also note that, due to non -availability of 
sufficient response, Prasar Bharati is considering the option of  re -
tendering the work for Broadcast compounds and customization of space 
and broadcasting facilities at all competition venues. 
5. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the tardy progress of 
the project.  Many of the entities are at the tendering/negotiation stage 
with only 10 months left for the prestigious games.  Keeping in view the 
fact that only limited time is available with the Ministry , the Committee 
desire that the process of selection of entities for the Commonwealth 
Games should be expedited.  The Committee would like the Ministry to 
ensure that apart from expeditious selection of agencies, the 
implementation schedule should be worke d out in such a manner so to 
avoid last minute hassles. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 

 
 The Press Information Bureau (PIB) has already selected BECIL as 
turn-key delivery partner for CWG and the contract with BECIL has also 
been signed. The Implementatio n schedule has been worked out by PIB, a 
copy of which is as below:- 
 
Time lines for project of setting up of Main Press Centre for Commonwealth  
Games 2010. 
 
Sl. no.  Name of activity Completion date 
1  Engagement of architect consultant  November 30,2009  
2  Engagement of international media consultant.  December 31, 2009  
3  Signing of contract by PIB and BECIL  January 8, 2010  
4 Finalization of detailed design, drawings of RFP 
documents for the various media facilities. February 28, 2010 
5  Tendering for the media facilities.  March 31, 2010  
6  
 
 
Award of works  April 30, 2010  
7  Taking over of Hall 12 and 12 A, Pragati Maidan  April 10, 2010  
8  Execution of overlays in Main Press Centre.  June 30, 2010 
 
  9  Execution of fitments in Main Press Centre.  August 31,2010  
10  Dry run, testing and training in Main Press Centre.  September 30, 
2010  
 
 
 
 [Ministry of I&B‟s ID No. 14/14/2009- PPC (PART- V) dated 27.01.10] 
 
 
Reply by Prasar Bharti: 
 
The Organizing Committee - Commonwealth Games Del hi2010 has 
appointed, Doordarshan - a constituent of Prasar Bharati as the “Host Broadcaster” 
for the Games. A communication of the appointment of Doordarshan as Host 
Broadcaster for the Games from Organising Committee was confirmed on March 26, 
2007.  
The Host Broadcaster is required to produce and cover the designated sports -
events and ceremonies from various Competition - Venues and non Competition - 
Venues in accordance with the International standards. Host Broadcaster intends 
outsourcing the aforesaid s ervices, inter -alia, for Production and Coverage in 
respect of designated Sporting and Non - Sporting events relating to the said 
GAMES, from potential Broadcasting and/or Production entities. The Host 
Broadcaster assignments include: 
 
 
 Production and Coverage facilities and services 
 Setting up of IBC 
 Broadcast Rate Card 
 World Broadcaster Meetings 
 Host Broadcast Manuals and Style Guides 

 Pre-Games Programming 
 
       
 The updated status of various activities under Host Broadcaster assignments is as 
stated below: 
1. Production and Coverage activities:  
 
 After an elongated tendering process comprising EOI and RFP stages, SIS 
Live, UK was identified 
 Approval of Competent Authority, i.e., Hon‟ble Minister of I&B was 
obtained on October 22, 2009 
 Accordingly, Letter Of  Award (LOA) was issued to SIS Live for Rs. 246 
crore (Two Hundred Forty Six crore only) on October 22,  2009 
 The entity made presentation on basic „production and coverage plan‟ 
alongwith HB during the recently held WBM – I (First World Broadcast Meet) fr om 
October 26 - 28, 2009 at New Delhi. 
 The opening ceremony of Queen‟s Baton Relay held at Buckingham 
Palace, London on October 29, 2009 was covered live in HDTV by SIS Live. The 
ceremony was graced by Queen of England and H.E., the Hon‟ble President of India. 
The signal was uplinked for its reception by the HB in New Delhi. International leg 
of Queen‟s Baton Relay is being covered by the entity at identified locations since 
October 29,  2009 
 Master tapes in HDCAM are being delivered by SIS to HB on Pre -Game 
Programming.  
 HB is to make copies of Pre -Game Programming capsules and Queen‟s 
Baton Relay capsules for CGF, OC, RHBs and other stakeholders on regular basis till 
October 2010.  
 First Joint Venue survey by SIS Live, HB and OC teams of all the venues 
was done from November 23 to December 2, 2009. On the basis on the first 
survey, SIS Live has provided inputs regarding design, specifications and layout of 
various broadcast facilities to be customised /fabricated at Venues on January 12, 
2010.  
 Second Joint Venue survey scheduled from January 11, 2010 to January 
20, 2010 is in process. In this survey SIS Live technical and production team will 
finalize location and deployment technique for the specialized cameras i.e. 
underwater cam, helicams, robocams, moto cams ,etc. The expert team of the SIS 
Live is also testing Radio Frequencies for RF equipments to be deployed during 
Games time.  
 Class - room training to PB personnel (around 430) has been successfully 
completed on December 8, 2009. On-site training of Hockey was also completed at 
Gurgaon just after Class – room training. 
 On site hands on training of Badminton (scheduled 11 -13) is completed 
on January 13, 2010 and Hands on training of Table –Tennis (scheduled January 
14-16) is also completed on Jan. 16,201 0 at Sports Hall, AIIMS complex, New 
Delhi. 
 
2. IBC activities:  
 During the financial evaluation exercise as part of the tendering process, 
the bids offered by two entities were opened. M/s Shaf Broadcast Pvt Ltd 
(Consortium of M/s Global Television Pty Ltd, Australia and M/s Shaf Broadcast Pvt 
Ltd, India) was found to be L -1. HBMC recommendations were forwarded to M/o 
I&B on November 20, 2009 for approval and decision. 
 

 Ministry of Information & Broadcasting vide OM no 10/12/2009 -
b(Fin)Part-I dated  11 th January 2010 has approved the selection of  M/s  Shaf 
Broadcast  Private Limited (Consortium of M/s Global Television Pty Ltd, Australia 
and M/s Shaf Broadcast Pvt Ltd, India) for Design , Installation and Operation of 
IBC. 
 Letter of Award (LOA) was  issued on  January 12, 2010 for 
Rs.65,90,96,986/- (Rs. Sixty five crore ninety lakh ninety six thousand nine 
hundred eighty six only). Performance Guarantee to be submitted by the Entity 
within 15 days.  Contract  to be signed by Entity. 
 The space for IBC as identif ied from Hall Nos. 8 -11 at ITPO, Pragati 
Maidan, New Delhi would be handed over to HB by April 1, 2010. Basic facilities like 
uninterrupted power supply, basic air -conditioning, parking, access roads, etc are 
being provided by  OC/ITPO. Funds are being provided to ITPO by Government.    
 
 
3. Event Management for WBM-I:  
 
 After an elongated tendering process, zeroed-in entity was identified. LOA 
(Letter Of Award) was issued on October 21, 2009 to Wizcraft International, 
Mumbai for Rs. 2.70 crore (Two crore Seventy Lakhs only).  
 The entity successfully conducted WBM -I held at New Delhi from October 
26 to 28, 2009. Entity is required to also conduct WBM -II (proposed in April 2010) 
under the HB assignment.  
 WBM –II is scheduled In April 16-18, 2010. 
 
 
 
4. Booking-cum-Information office and HB Website:  
 
 In response to the RFP for Booking cum Information Activity, as per FEC 
the rate quoted by the Entity is considered to be high. 
 NIC has, therefore, been approached for taking up the Booking cum 
Information activity. 
 NIC has agreed to design develop, operate and maintain the Booking cum 
Information Website. 
 HB website having URLs www.hbcwgdelhi2010.org and 
www.hbcwgdelhi2010.com has been disseminating information about HB activities 
since November, 2009. 
 The online Booking facility will be available to the RHBs from third week of 
January, 2010. 
 
5. Broadcasting facilities at Venues: 
 The engaged entity is to provide Broadcast Compounds, Commentary 
Tribunes, Camera positions (around 300 nos), Mixed Zones, etc at all the 
Competition-Venues. Besides this, Presentation Studios would be made at some of 
the identified major venues.  
 EOI for „Provision for Broadcasting facilities‟ at venues was issued in 
August, 2009. EOI could not be taken up further due to insufficient responses. 
 Now, to save the time, single stage two bids (technical and financial bid) 
tender document is ready after incorporating the inputs provided by the actual 
user, i.e., SIS Live on the basis of joint venue survey.  
 The tender was issued on January 18, 2010.  
 Work pertaining to Broadcast facilities at venues is to be completed by 
June, 2010 which will integrate with other venue activities.  
 
 

 
[Ministry of I&B‟s ID No. 2/3/2009- B(Fin) dated 03.02.10] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that under the Information Sector, the Plan 
outlay during  the year 2007-08 at BE stage was Rs.42.55 crore, which was 
reduced to Rs.36.00 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure was 
Rs.35.27 crore. During the year 2008 -09, the allocation at BE stage was 
Rs.51.28 crore, which was enhanced to Rs.75.89 crore at RE stage and the 
actual expenditure was Rs.66.74 crore.  The Ministry was able to fully 
utilize the funds during the year 2007 -08, whereas during the year 2008 -
09 there was under utilization of Outlay. As ana lysed in the earlier para of 
the report, the performance of the Ministry during the year 2008-09 need a 
review. The different projects/schemes being undertaken under the 
Information Sector should be critically analysed and corrective Action 
Taken by the Go vernment so as to utilize the Outlay effectively. The 
corrective Action Taken by the Government  in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee.  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
So far as under utilisation expenditure vis -à-vis  RE 2008 -09 and corr ective 
measures to avoid such under -utilization in respect of  Information Sector is 
concerned it may be stated that the SBG, RE and actual expenditure during 2008 -
09 was as under:- 
              (Rs. in crores) 
 BE   RE  Actual  
 51.53   74.65  72.46 
 
It may be seen from the above statement that the under -utilization was to 
the tune of Rs.2.19 crore under various Schemes of different Media Units.  The 
main shortfall was in respect of Main Secretariat.  This was due to non -acceptance 
of tender  in respect o f construction of Phase -V of Soochna Bhavan by the Work 
Advisory Board of CCW, AIR.   In order to avoid under -utilization of funds, regular 
review meetings are being held at the  level of Special Secretary and AS&FA every 
fortnight. 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 9/7/2010-MUC dated 11.02.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 

 The Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) is an institute of 
repute in the field of communication, teaching, training and research.  
During the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry plan to convert  the IIMC into 
International Media University, which will allow it to award its own 
degrees in place of existing post graduate diploma courses.  Expressing 
their dissatisfaction over the manner of implementation of the project, the 
Committee in their Fifty -fifth Report on Demands for Grants for 2008 -09, 
had desired that the Ministry should draw up a road map for converting 
IIMC into International Media University and resolve all the deficiencies 
pointed out by the Committee.   During the year 2008 -09, Rs.1. 00 crore 
was allocated to the institute at BE stage.  However, not even a single 
rupee could be utilised during the year due to the reasons that `in -
principle’ approval of the Planning Commission was received only in March, 
2009.  The draft SFC memo is now  under consideration in Integrated 
Finance Division of the Ministry.  The Committee further note that the 
Ministry is in the process of preparing a draft cabinet note in consultation 
with IIMC for conversion of the Institute into an International Media 
University which too can be considered only after SFC approval.  
Comparing to the present position with the situation last year, the 
Committee are disappointed to note that the Ministry has been extremely 
slow in moving the project.  As no expenditure was incurred during the last 
year, it re-enforces the Committee’s view about the inability of the Ministry 
to optimally utilize the funds.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should take up the project in right earnest and expedite 
approval of all mandatory clearances paving the way for conversion of 
IIMC into an International Media University.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The 11 th Plan scheme of „Converting IIMC into an International Media 
University‟ is at a cost of Rs. 44.03 crores . However the total cost of the project is 
Rs. 69.21 crore (Direct Budgetary support Rs. 44.03 crore + Internal Resources Rs. 
25.18 crore).  Mandatory „in principle‟ approval of the Planning Commission has 
been obtained. In the current financial, an outlay of Rs. 3.70 crore has been 
earmarked for the scheme. M/s. Ed.CIL, appointed as consultant, has submitted the 

Detailed Project Report (DPR) which has been approved by the Executive Council 
and the General Council of IIMC.  
In depth examination of the draft SFC Memorandum has been done in 
consultation with the Integrated Finance Division of this Ministry. It was decided 
that the Director, IIMC should review the SFC proposal and resubmit it after making 
necessary amendments in areas like staff, curriculum and space. Once the revised 
SFC Memorandum is submitted by IIMC, it shall be ensured, that the required 
approvals are obtained expeditiously and all out efforts would be made for 
implementation in the 11th five year plan itself. 
 
 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 9/7/2010-MUC dated 11.02.2010] 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 The Scheme for setting up the National Press Centre (NPC) was 
initiated in the Eighth Plan (1992 -1997) and is still continuing in Eleventh 
Plan.  Despite the land being allotted at 3 Raisina Road, N ew Delhi initially 
in September, 1994 and at 7 Raisina Road subsequently in 
November/December, 2001 and the foundation stone for the project 
having been laid by two Prime Ministers on 1 st October, 1994 and 5 th 
December, 2001, the project has been moving at  snail pace.  The 
Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2004 -05) and 
Thirty-second Report on Demands for Grants       (2006 -07) had deplored 
the delay in setting up of the National Press Centre having the latest 
facilities at New Delhi.  In all previous replies furnished to the Committee 
while examining Demands for Grants of the Ministry (2008 -09), the 
Ministry have been stating that the progress of the scheme is being 
personally monitored with the executing agencies at the level of Additional 
Secretary.  It was also informed that NBCC has been asked to release the 
notice inviting tender latest by 15 April, 2008 so that the award of work 
could be completed as projected in the PERT chart.  Further, the Committee 
were informed that after appr oval of drawings by NDMC etc. the 
construction of building would start by the middle of 2008.  Now, the 
Committee have been informed that final clearances from NDMC/DUAC 
were received in November/December, 2008.  As such, the construction 
work is expected to start in January, 2010 after tender formalities are 
completed by NBCC.  The Committee have also been informed that the total 
cost of the project has increased from 35.00 crore to Rs. 60.00 crore.  The 

information has come as a rude shock to the Committe e.  Despite the 
existence of monitoring mechanism at the highest level within the Ministry, 
no progress could be achieved.  What has surprised the Committee is the 
fact that the Ministry could not spend a single rupee during the year even 
when funds were available to the extent of Rs.4.37 crore both at BE and RE 
stages.  The clearance of statutory formalities should not have taken such 
a long time when the project was being monitored regularly with all 
agencies.  While placing on record their displeasure, t he Committee hope 
that the construction work would now atleast start without any further 
loss of time with all the clearances in place and the project completed 
within the stipulated period of eighteen months.   
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A Plan sche me for construction of National Press Centreat a cost of Rs. 
35.00 crores was approved on 25 -01-2005.  The work of construction was 
awarded to National Building Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) on ready to 
occupy basis vide MOU dated 16 -02-2006.  The NBCC submitted building plan to 
NDMC for approval on 24-02-2006.  NDMC suggested some modification in plans 
and after modification in Plan it was resubmitted.  The total construction area 
was fixed to 9210 sq. meter.  Later it was decided to utilize fully permissible area 
of 13,867 sq. meter as the norms for the FAR had been revised by the approving 
agencies.  Accordingly, revised drawings and lay out plan were prepared and 
action for obtaining statuary permission from various agencies viz. CPWD, NDMC, 
Fire Department and DUAC etc. was taken.  However, the construction could not 
start as the Urban Design Form was finalized by CPWD/NDMC/DUAC in 
December, 2007.  The revised scheme was submitted to NDMC in January, 2008. 
DUAC remained non functional for some per iod and approved the proposal only 
in October, 2008.   All necessary statutory approvals were received during 2008 
and drawings finally released by NDMC in December, 2008.  Due to increase in 
construction area the estimated cost as well as period of comple tion increased 
from Rs. 35.00 crore to Rs. 60.00 crore and from 24 months to 30 months 
respectively.  The revised cost was approved by the EFC on 15 th September, 
2009.  The fresh contract with NBCC is under finalization, following which the 
construction work will start.   
 
 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 23/9/2009-Press dated 10.02.2010] 
  
 

Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee have also been informed that Rs.7.00 crore was 
released in March, 2006 to NBCC as initial deposit as per MoU.  The 
Committee are unab le to understand the logic for release of amount to 
NBCC in 2006 when drawings/plans etc. were pending clearance from the 
statutory authorities.  In this regard, the Ministry has substantiated that as 
per clause 2 (iii) of Memorandum of Understanding with NBCC, 20% of the 
approved estimated cost was to be released to NBCC as initial deposit.  The 
Committee feel that incorporation of a provision for release of 20% 
(twenty per cent) amount of the approved estimated cost as initial deposit 
to NBCC pending stat utory clearances is not appropriate.  Clearly it is a 
case of bad drafting of MoU wherein NBCC has been benefited by receiving 
the money in 2006 without undertaking any construction activities till 
2009.  The Committee recommend that the matter may be inve stigated 
thoroughly and the Committee apprised accordingly. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
EFC has decided to replace the old MOU and new contract is to be signed 
between NBCC and PIB.  The matter of Rs. 7.00 crores, released in March, 2006 
to NBCC as in itial deposit as per MOU has been taken up with NBCC and it has 
agreed that the interest earned by them till September, 2009 on the amount 
unspent from Rs. 7.00 crores will be deposited in Government Account. 
 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 23/9/2009-Press dated 10.02.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
 The aforesaid programme was started during the Eleventh Plan for 
dissemination of information about the flagship programmes of the 
Government.  As a part of the Government’s efforts to reach out to the 
common man,  nation wide Public Information Campaigns (PICs) are 
organised.  The programme cover schemes like National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (NREGA), National Rural Health Mission, Sarv Shiksha 
Abhiyan, Prime Minister’s New 15 Point Programme for welfare of 
minorities, Integrated  Child Development Services (ICDS), Welfare of 
Scheduled Tribes.  Rural Housing, Rural road connectivity and other 
components of Bharat Nirman and  Right to Information Act etc. With 
allocation of Rs.9.50 crore for the current year, t he Committee hope that 

adequate publicity will be provided for the various programmes concerning 
the upliftment of the weaker sections of the society and the outlay 
earmarked is optimally utilized.  The Committee desire that the findings of 
all the Public Information Campaign, success stories and press tours may 
be evaluated and the inputs utilized to improve the performance of the 
scheme. 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
So far as Media Outreach Programme is concerned, adequate publicity is 
being provided  to  the  various  flagship   programmes of  Central  Government 
as detailed  
below :- 
I. Bharat Nirman-package for development of Rural Infrastructure :- 
II.  
III. 1. Rural Housing 
IV. 2.     Rural Road connectivity 
V. 3. Rural Drinking Water Supply 
VI. 4. Rural Electrification 
VII. 5.     Rural Telephone Connectivity 
VIII. 6.     Rural Irrigation 
 
a. National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) 
 
b. National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 
 
c. Sarv Shiksha Abyhiyan (SSA) 
 
d. Mid Day Meal Programme 
 
e. Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
 
f. Right to Information Act 
 
g. Prime Minister‟s New 15-point Programme for the welfare of Minorities. 
 
h. Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme. 
 
i. Tribal Welfare specially the benefits of Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional 
Forest Dweller (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. 
 
j. Programme for workers in unorganized sector 

 
k. Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy & Law. 
 
l. Backward Region Grant Fund 
 
m. Misc. Programmes like Total Sanitation Campaign, SGSY, Women Empowerment, 
Agriculture, Social Security Measures (old age pension etc.) etc. 
 
 
 During the current financial year efforts are being made to meet the target of 
organizing 100 Bharat Nirman Public Information Campaigns (PICs), 9 Press tours 
and 100 Success Stories. Upto December 2009, Rs. 4.37 crore s have been utilized 
on organizing 49 PICs, 45 success stories and 4 Press Tours. The remaining funds 
will also be fully utilized before the end of this financial year. The suggestion of the 
Committee for evaluation of the scheme has been noted. 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 23/9/2009-Press dated 10.02.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11 &12) 
 
 The  new scheme was initiated during the Eleventh Plan, with three 
components viz. (a) Computerization and Digitalization; (b) Office 
Infrastructure; & (c) Human Resource Development.  It envisages 
modernization of all the wings of DAVP through computerization, 
digitalization, procurement of modern office infrastructure for better 
efficiency of the functioning of DAVP.  Under the scheme, the conference 
hall of DAVP has been  upgraded and hardware/software installed in the 
Digital Library of the exhibition Hall.  So far 140 employees of the 
Directorate have been trained and more training programmes are being 
organised. 
 
 The Committee note that under the scheme Rs.7.95 crore w as spent 
till March, 2009.  For the year 2009 -10, Rs.1.80 crore has been kept for 
this purpose and the balance of Rs.3.94 crore will be spent on 
modernization by the end of Eleventh Plan.  DAVP being the multi -media 
advertising agency of the Government, it  carries policies programmes and 
achievement of various Ministries to masses through media.  Since DAVP is 
instrumental in bringing social -economic changes and development over 
the years, the Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry to 
adopt latest technology, computer literacy and effective use of IT in 
administration and management desire that all the employees of the 

Directorate should be given intensive training to upgrade their skills, which 
will help in better implementation of the scheme. 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Ministry accepts the recommendations of the Committee.  All the 
employees of the Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity would be given 
training to upgrade their skills during the balance period of the Scheme. 
 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 10/2/2010-MUC dated 04.02.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that Song & Drama Division and the Directorate 
of Field Publicity are two very important units of the Information Wing of 
the Ministry. The Song and Drama Division has played an important role in 
creating awareness  amongst general public  on various social and 
economic issues. The Division has played an important role with defence 
forces. Besides, being a mechanism for entertainment for Army ja wans, it 
has played an important role in border areas by creating a sense of 
defence preparedness and cultural integrity with rest of the country. The 
Committee are surprised to note that Expenditure Reform Commission had 
initially recommended for closure of these Divisions.  However, the 
Ministry did not accept the recommendation of the ERC.  Justifying their 
continuance, the Ministry approached the Committee of 
Secretaries/Ministry of Finance not to insist on implementation of the 
recommendation of ERC.  Ultimately, the Ministry of Finance has agreed 
not to implement the recommendations of ERC beyond what has already 
been implemented subject to the advice that a comprehensive review may 
be carried out of the organizational structure to streamline operation .  
During the course of oral evidence, the Committee were informed that the 
decision has finally been taken not to close the Song & Drama Division.  
The Committee note that Song & Drama Division and Directorate of Field 
Publicity are two important mechanis ms for dissemination of information 
with regard to Central policies/programmes to masses particularly in rural 
far-flung and difficult areas besides being the source of entertainment for 
them.  The Committee are happy to note that ultimately the suggestion  of 
Expenditure Reforms Commission has been struck down and these units 

continue to operate.  The Committee also strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should take all the initiatives to revitalize both these media units. 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As mentioned above, M/o Finance conveyed its concurrence to not implement 
the ERC‟s recommendations beyond what has already been implemented.  
However, the said approval was subject to advice that a comprehensive review may 
be carried out of the organization al structure with a view to streamline operations 
and to reduce manpower, where feasible. 
 
Presently, Cadre Review Committee has already been constituted to 
undertake the comprehensive cadre review exercise in respect of all the cadres in 
S&DD as per the g uidelines of DOP&T.   The recommendations of the Committee 
would be examined and placed before the concerned nodal Ministries/Departments 
for seeking their concurrence. 
 
 
[M/o I&B‟s I.D. Note No. 3/18/09-FS dated 27.01.2010] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
  
 
 The animation, Gaming and Visual Effects industry is both technology 
as well as technical intensive.  The rapid technological development has 
pushed growth in the fields of animation, Gaming and Special Visual 
Effects.   The setting up of a National C entre of Excellence for Animation, 
Gaming and Special Effects has been envisaged as a new scheme in the 
Eleventh Plan.  The proposed outlay for this scheme in the Eleventh Plan is 
Rs.52.00 crore and an amount of Rs.1.00 crore has been allocated for the 
scheme in the current financial year.  The Committee in their Fifty -fifth 
Report on DFG 2008 -09 had desired that the Ministry should single -
mindedly pursue the project so that skilled manpower is available in the 
country.  However, the Committee find that the  scheme is awaiting `in -
principle’ approval of the Planning Commission.  The agency engaged by 
the Ministry to conduct a study on human resources for setting up of a 
National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and Visual Effects has 
since submitted  its report recommending setting up of the proposed 
Centre.  The Ministry is now in the process of appointing a Consultant for 

preparing the Detailed Project Report. The Committee have been informed 
that the Ministry will seek `in -principle’ approval of th e Planning 
Commission in the beginning of the next financial year (2010 -11).  
Initially, the Committee were informed that the scheme is proposed to be 
implemented under PPP mode (Private, Public Partnership).  Now, the 
Committee have been informed that no decision has been taken about the 
mode of implementation of the scheme.  The Committee are disturbed with 
the abysmally slow pace of the scheme.  As  the  proposed  Centre  is 
essentially being created to address the issue of shortage of skilled 
manpower in the field of animation, gaming and special visual effects, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should act in right earnest to 
implement the project of national importance.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the specific measures taken abou t implementation of 
the remaining stage of implementation of the scheme. 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In the first place, the Ministry would like to place on record its gratitude to 
the Hon‟ble Committee for underlining the felt need and importance of  such a 
Centre of Excellence. This Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that 
the Scheme is being pursued in right earnest.  In this regard, it is further submitted 
that when approval in-principle was sought earlier from Planning Commission, they 
had directed us to submit to them an Executable Detailed Project Report (EDPR).  
We had been further requested to examine, inter alia, the need for such a Centre in 
the light of existing Film & Television Schools at Pune and Kolkata and the IIMC.  
In-principle approval was sought from Planning Commission on the strength of a 
detailed HR Gap study carried out by a Consultant which had submitted its finding, 
as per which there is a definitive HR Gap between the demand and the supply of 
human resources fo r animation, gaming and special effects.  The Consultant had 
categorically recommended to set up the proposed Centre of Excellence.  The 
Consultant had carried out a study on the requirements of different skill sets for 
this industry at present and changes to come about in future years. 
 
As per the requirement of the Planning Commission and after detailed 
deliberations within the Ministry, Terms of Reference for getting a detailed project 
report have been finalized.  ToR includes, inter alia, the issue whet her the project 
could be set up in PPP mode.  The Consultant would be required to make specific 

suggestions in this regard. M/s PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) have been 
commissioned as Consultant to prepare a Detailed Project Report. 
 
(Ministry of I & B‟s I.D. No. 110/17/09-FI  Dated 4.03.2010) 
 

Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
  Set up under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1852) for the 
purpose of certification of films for public exhibition, the Central Board of 
Film Certification (CBFC) is based at Mumbai . The Committee note that in 
the Eleventh Plan under the scheme `Establishment of Computertized 
Management System’ and `Upgradation of Infrastructure facilities in 
CBFC’, a total provision of Rs.3.50 crore has been approved.  During the 
year 2008-09, under this plan scheme a total expenditure of Rs.19.80 lakhs 
was incurred against BE of Rs.58 lakhs.  About the timelines for completion 
of the work, the Committee have been informed that out of total amount of 
Rs.3.50 crore, Rs.2.97 crore has been approved for  computerization of all 
Regional Offices and the remaining amount of Rs.53 lakh is meant for 
upgradation of infrastructure in CBFC, Mumbai and its regional offices.  The 
revised SFC approval has been obtained on 17 September, 2009 and 
substantial work rela ting to computerization in CBFC, Mumbai and its 
regional offices except at New Delhi, has been completed.  The work at 
New Delhi office is expected to be completed by the end of December, 
2010.  For upgradation of infrastructure in CBFC, Mumbai and its reg ional 
offices, financial sanctions are being issued.  Since India has the largest 
film industry in the world, the networking of CBFC regional offices with 
establishment of computerized management system and up gradation of 
infrastructure are expected to im prove connectivity among the different 
Regional Offices and between the CBFC headquarter and the Ministry.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should expeditiously complete all the 
remaining stages of implementation.  
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
 Committee‟s observations have been noted for compliance. 
 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 812/1/2010-F(C)  dated 09.02.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 
 
 The regional offices of CBFC are located at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati.  

The last three Regional Offices mentioned above, are functioning with the 
help of staff drawn from other media units. Since shortage of manpower 
were adversely affecting the functioning of Regional Offices at Delhi, 
Cuttack and Guwahati, the Committee in their Fifty -fifth Report on DFG 
2008-09 had requested the Ministry to suitably enhance the cadre strength 
of these Regional Offices.  The Committee have now been informed that 
steps have been taken for filling up the p osts of Regional Officers and 
Lower Division Clerks at New Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati Regional Offices 
of CBFC.  Applications for the posts of Regional Officers for the above three 
offices have been advertised and the process of selection is expected to 
start.   As steps have already been initiated to augment the manpower to 
manage its activities, the Committee desire that the process of selection 
should be completed in a time bound manner and incumbents take charge 
of their responsibilities.   
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
The process of selection of a suitable candidate for the post of Regional 
Officer, CBFC, Delhi and Regional Officer, CBFC, Cuttack has been completed.  The 
post of R.O., CBFC, Guwahati was advertised in the Employment News, dated 8 -14 
August, 2009. Since no application was received for this post, this post has  been 
re-advertised in the Employment News, dated 9 -16 January, 2010. The process of 
recruitment to the newly created three posts of LDCs for these three regional 
offices is being expedited.  
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 812/1/2010-F(C) dated 04.03.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 
 
 The Committee also note that the Cinematographic Act is of 1952.  
There have been piecemeal amendments in the Act from time to time.  The 
Committee desire that a thorough review of the whole Act may be 
undertaken in consonance with the present scenario. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
Committee‟s observations have been noted for compliance and a review is 
already underway.  

 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 812/1/2010-F(C) dated 09.02.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 Children’s Film Society of India, an autonomous body under the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, is engaged in the task of 
production, exhibition and promotion of children’s films.  During the year 
2008-09, Rs. 4.00 crore were provided to this Society, out of which Rs.3.86 
crore was utilised.  The Committee note that the physical achievement of 
the Society during the year 2007 -08 was low as no film could be 
completed.  However, during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto August, 
2009) five and three films respectively were completed.  The Committee 
have been informed that CFSI has been working towards making films 
which, besides good marketable quality will be of high standard in terms 
content and quality.  In this context, the Committee may like to take note 
of the success of a commercial movie `Taare Zameen Par’ produced by 
Aamir Khan.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have more 
and more quality films concerning vario us issues related to children.  The 
Committee would like to recommend that taking a cue from the success of 
the movie ‘Taare Zameen Par’ the commercial viability of the films 
produced by the Children Film Society of India should be explored.  The 
concrete Action Taken by the Government  in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
CFSI is taking necessary steps to produce films which are not only 
meaningful and entertaining but also commercially successful/viabl e. Efforts are 
being made to invite reputed film makers to produce quality films with known 
actors and technicians so that these films could be marketed on a bigger scale.  
Further, since 2009, CFSI has earmarked 10% of the total budget of the film for 
publicity purposes so that films produced by them could be marketed in a better 
way. 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. H-11013/01/2010-F(A)  dated 03.02.2010] 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee note that a proposal about digitalization of cable 
services is under consideration of the Ministry.  The Government is in the 
process of laying down a policy framework in consultation with TRAI for 
introduction of HITS mode of delivery to the cable operators.   The 
introduction of HITS would enable satellites to dire ctly link with all cable 
operators which is not possible at present.  Besides enabling the Cable 
Operators to carry digitalized services to the consumers, it would also 
bring down the cost of digitalization.  The Committee have been informed 
that after con sultation with TRAI and other concerned Ministries, a draft 
cabinet note along with the proposed guidelines for HITS was submitted 
for consideration of the previous Cabinet.   However, no decision could be 
taken up.  Now,  a fresh note for referring the ma tter to the Cabinet is 
being finalized.   The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry in regard to digitalization of cable services located in non -CAS 
areas of the country.  The Committee desire that the proposal may be 
finalized and implemented expeditiously. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Cabinet in its meeting on 12.11.2009 approved the proposal of Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting to issue policy guidelines for Headend -in-the-Sky 
operators.  The Government on 26.11.2009 i ssued policy guidelines. The policy 
guidelines provides for a framework within which the HITS Service providers has to 
provide services in the country. The policy does not mandate for either the cable 
operators or subscribers to necessarily obtain signals from a HITS 
platform/network, the subscribers and cable operators can continue with the 
existing system. Hence the cable operators have liberty to switch over to HITS 
provider network if so desired. Thus it has a basic difference from the areas notified 
for CAS (conditional access system) which is mandatory.    
 
HITS serves the whole country providing its signals through satellite to many 
MSO/ cable operators who can further send the signals to the customers using their 
cable network.  The essential differe nce between a HITS operator and a Multi 
System operator (MSO) is that the former transmits the bundle of channels to the 
cable operators using a satellite, whereas the latter does the same through cable. 
HITS  is a digital delivery mode of distribution of TV channel and it would speed up 

the process of digitalization of cable services located in Non -CAS areas of the 
country.   HITS would  not only help increase the penetration of cable market 
further into rural areas where it has been absent because of un -viability but would 
also help in further reduction of prices of Set Top Boxes  and lead to further 
consolidation of the cable market.   
  
HITS would help a subscriber with a wide choice of digital channels, better 
picture quality and value added services at  affordable price.  HITS would provide 
greater channel capacity from the present limited capacity of channels placed in 
prime/non prime band.    Salient features of the HITS policy approved now are:- 
 
 It provides for an enabling regulatory environment for HITS operators. 
The guidelines are exhaustive and provide for complete procedure for obtaining 
permission and conditions thereto. 
 HITS services are allowed in  both „C-Band‟  and „Ku- Band‟. 
 HITS operators can uplink from Indian soil only and will have to install 
SMS and encryption system. 
 They are not permitted to provide signals directly to the subscribers. 
However if HITS operator is also MSO/Cable Operator, he can do so through his 
distribution network. 
 Total direct and in direct foreign investment incl uding FDI is allowed 
upto 74%. Prior FIPB approval will be required if the FDI in beyond 49%. 
 The cross media holding restriction of 20% of total paid up equity has 
been prescribed for various segment of broadcasting services. These restrictions 
have been provided to avoid vertical integration and to promote competition. 
 There is no restriction on number of permissions. All those found to be 
eligible   and fulfill the terms and conditions   can apply for license to the 
Government in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
 
 Existing permission holders of HITS will have to comply and migrate to 
new policy regime within three months failing which their permission shall be 
cancelled. 
 Sufficient provisions exist under the guidelines for monitoring of 
content, inspection and national security related issues etc. 
 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 28.1.2010] 
 
 

 
 
 
Chapter –III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER  IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee note that in the Film Sector, the Plan allocation outlay 
during  the year 2007 -08 at BE stage was Rs.41.98 crore, which was 
reduced to Rs.3 0.00 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure was 
Rs.29.00 crore.  During the year 2008 -09, the allocation at BE stage was 
Rs.67.00 crore, which was reduced to Rs.50.06  crore and the actual 
expenditure was Rs.37.67 crore.  The trend of under -utilization of outlay 
during the year 2008 -09 and the comparative worse performance during 
the said year as compared to the year 2007 -08 as noted in the earlier part  
of the report exists in the film sector also.  It reinforces the Committee’s 
view that there were some problems in implementation of the programmes 
during the year 2008-09.  The issue of under -utilization need to be probed  
and all corrective actions taken in respect of the various projects/schemes.  
The Committee should be kept apprised about the conc rete Action Taken 
by the Government in this regard. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
 The F(PSU) Desk in this Ministry has two Plan Schemes, namely (i) 
Film Production in various regional languages and (ii) Equity Participation in 
NFDC. In the year 2007 -08 Rs.3 crore was provided in BE for the Plan 
Scheme „Film Production in various regional languages‟ whereas Rs.10 lakhs 
was provided for Plan Scheme „Equity Participation in NFDC.  Since Plan 
Scheme „Film Production in various regional languages‟ could not  be 
approved during the financial year 2007 -08, provision of Rs.3 crore in BE 
was revised to nil at RE stage.  Also the provision of Rs.10 lakhs for „Equity 
Participation in NFDC‟ could not be spent as investment in Equity 
Participation required the approv al of the Cabinet and the exercise was 
taken up by the Ministry but no approval could be obtained. 
 

In the year 2008-09 a provision of Rs.6.50 crore was made in respect of the 
Plan Scheme‟ Film Production in various regional languages‟ and a provision of R s.8 
crore was made in respect of the plan scheme „Equity participation in NFDC‟ at BE 
stage.  While the provision of Rs.6.50 crore for Film Production in various regional 
languages could be spent during the financial year the BE provision of Rs. 8 crore 
towards Equity Participation in NFDC was revised to a token provision of Rs.1 lakh 
as it was decided during this year to refer the case of revival of NFDC to Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises  for their consideration and 
recommendation as the  company became sick and approval of the Cabinet to the 
proposal for equity investment in NFDC was not likely to be obtained during the 
year. 
In the year 2009 -2010 so far BE provision of Rs.6.50 crore has been 
provided for the Plan Scheme „Film Produc tion in various regional languages‟ and 
the entire provision has already been released to NFD C.  In respect of plan scheme 
„„Equity Participation in NFDC‟ only a token provision of Rs. 1 lakh has been made 
as it was felt that it may not be possible to get the approval of the Cabinet to the 
proposal for Equity Participation in NFDC during the current financial year as well. 
[Ministry of I&B‟s O.M.No.204/12/2009-F (PSU)    dated 04.03.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 6 of Chapter I ) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 The Committee have been informed that in view of concerns 
expressed by Hon’ble Courts, Parliamentary Committees, civil society 
organizations, viewers, media critiques and State Governments, the 
Government proposes to put in place  the Broadcasting Regulatory 
Authority of India (BRAI) under an Act of Parliament and a new Content 
Code to be issued hereunder.   The Committee have also been informed 
that after consultation with stakeholders, a draft of the Broadcasting 
Services Regulat ion Bill has been re -drafted.  The views of all the State 
Governments have been solicited.  According to the Ministry, so far 15 
State Governments out of 28 States and 6 Union Territories out of 7 UTs, 
have given their recommendations. Now, it is proposed to hold 
consultations with academicians, non -governmental and civil society 
organizations, consumer forums etc.  The Committee are of the opinion 

that there is an urgent need for a proper monitoring mechanism for 
broadcasting industry and, therefore, expec t the Ministry to complete the 
process of consultation with all the stakeholders in a time bound manner.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make 
earnest efforts to introduce the said Bill in the Parliament expeditiously. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry has been consulting States/UTs on the proposed Broadcasting 
Services Regulation Bill . So far 18 States and 6 UTs have submitted their 
comments on the proposed Bill.  
 Ministry has also initiated wide ranging consultations with stakeholders for 
arriving at a consensus on this issue.  The Ministry has already held consultations 
with Indian Broadcasting Foundation, Multi System Operator (MSO) Alliance, News 
Broadcasters Association (NBA), Broadcast Editors Association (BE A) and the Cable 
Operators Federation of India (COFI).   To take the process further, a Task Force 
has been constituted on 27.11.2009 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, I & B 
with two representatives each from News Broadcasters Association, Indian 
Broadcasting Foundation and Broadcast Editors Association. The Task Force would 
interact with different stakeholders to understand their perspective on the need, 
scope and jurisdiction, organizational structure, powers and functions of 
independent Broadcast regu lator and issues relating to regulation of content. The 
Task Force held its first meeting on 29 th December 2009 to discuss the 
methodology, to identify various interest groups, frequency of meetings etc. The 
Task Force proposes to furnish its recommendatio ns to the Government at the 
earliest.   This issue has also been discussed in the 27 th Conference of the State 
Information Ministers held on 5th December 2009 at Vigyan Bhawan.   
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 21.01.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
  
 The Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 contains provisions for constitution of a 
Parliamentary Committee and a Broadcasting Council.  However, the 

Committee note that these provision s have never been put into operation.  
The Committee were naturally curious to know the reasons for non -
constitution of the Parliamentary Committees and the Broadcasting 
Council, as envisaged under the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990.  The Committee 
have been inf ormed that the two Committees of Prasar Bharati (Report 
dated August, 1996 of Sengupta Committee and Narayanmurthy 
Committee report dated May, 2000) had recommended that there was no 
need for these provisions in the light of Standing and Consultative 
Committees of Parliament.  The Ministry has also suggested that over the 
years, since the Standing Committees of Parliament have been performing 
the same role as envisaged for the Parliamentary Committee in the Act, the 
matter regarding constitution of a separa te Committee on Prasar Bharati 
has not been pursued.  However, the CEO Prasar Bharati during the course 
of deliberations was in favour of constitution of a separate Parliamentary 
Committee on Prasar Bharati and the Broadcasting Council  as provided in 
the Act.  However, he submitted that it was his personal view.  The 
Committee fail to understand non implementation of such an important 
provision of the Act i.e. constitution of a Parliamentary Committee and 
Broadcasting Council during almost 19 years that ha ve passed since the 
Act came into effect.  The Committee are unable to accept the views of the 
Ministry that non constitution of these bodies were as per the 
recommendations by the Sengupta Committee and Narayanmurthy 
Committee Report.  The reports of the aforesaid Committees were 
submitted in the years 1996 and 2000.  Since then 13 and 9 years 
respectively have passed and even then the Ministry could not take the 
decision. As a result thereof, the provisions made in the aforesaid Act 
remained without imple mentation.  The Committee take the non 
implementation of these provisions seriously particularly when the word 
`shall’ has been used in the legislation for the purpose of constitution of 
these bodies and would like the Department to take the final decision  on 
the constitution of these bodies. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The matter of constitution of Parliamentary Committee and the Broadcasting 
Council as per the provisions of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 was placed before the last 
GOM but it could not be t aken up.   In the proposal sent to Cabinet Secretariat by 
the Ministry for reconstitution of GOM, this issue has been mentioned  among 
others as one of the reasons for continuation of GOM.  Since the matter requires 

high level inter-ministerial deliberations, a final view is proposed to be taken after 
the reconstitution of GOM and its recommendations on the issue are obtained.  
   
Now that the GOM has been reconstituted, the matter will be placed before it 
for consideration.  
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 21.01.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 
 The scheme for setting up of Museum of Moving Images was started 
in the Tenth Plan and is continuing in Eleventh Plan.  T he scheme is 
intended to depict the history of Indian Cinema through audio -visual 
presentation and display of important artifacts relating to the history of 
Indian Cinema, exhibiting the work of noted Directors, Producers, 
institutions etc.  It would also depict the evolution of Indian Cinema over 
the last hundred years.  In their Fifty -fifth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) the Committee while deprecating the delay in implementation of 
the scheme, had desired that the Ministry should work out definit e 
timelines for implementation of the scheme.  The Committee find from the 
information provided by the Ministry that there has hardly been any 
progress under the scheme other than signing of the MoU with the National 
Building Construction Corporation (NBCC ) for preparation of Detailed 
Project Report.   With regard to the existing status, the Committee note 
that the project is yet to be approved by Expenditure Finance Committee.  
Once the proposal is approved, the Film Division, on behalf of the  Ministry, 
will enter into a contract with NBCC and National Council of Science 
Museum for their respective roles in the project.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that at least now adequate steps should be taken by the 
Ministry to get the clearance of the project.  B esides, the Committee would 
also like that definite timelines regarding the conceptualization and 
implementation of the project should be drawn so that MOMI is set up 
within a definite time frame. 

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The proposal for setting u p Museum of Moving Images (MOMI) has been 
considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting held on 
11.01.2010.  The Committee has recommended the proposal for approval of the 
competent authority, in accordance with the existing guidelines on 
appraisal/approval of EFC.  Timelines regarding implementation of the project have 
also been drawn up in order to set up the said Museum expeditiously.  Broadly, it 
has been proposed to set up the Museum through National Buildings Construction 
Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) while the interactive galleries would be set up by National 
Council of Science Museums (NCSM).  Most of the items to be displayed would be 
procured from the historians, collectors and others through voluntary donation 
basis for the museum.  How ever, some historical items may have to be purchased.  
After approval of the EFC, Films Division would enter into a contract with NBCC 
which is the main executive agency clearly delineating its responsibilities for timely 
completion of the project including coordination with NCSM and other agencies.  
 
 
 [M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. H-11013/01/2010-F(A)  dated 03.02.2010] 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER  V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES 
ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Comm ittee further note that the financial performance during 
the year 2007-08 under the Plan schemes was better than the year 2008 -
09.  During the year 2007 -08 i.e. first year of Eleventh Plan, BE amounting 
to Rs.475.00 crore was reduced to Rs. 400.00 crore at RE stage.  The actual 
utilization was Rs. 398.10 crore which means that the outlay earmarked at 
RE stage was almost fully utilized.  During the year 2008 -09, i.e. the 
second year of the Eleventh Plan, the BE was Rs.700.00 crore which was 
reduced to   Rs. 600.00 crore at RE stage.  The actual utilization was 
Rs.424.66 crore which means  Rs.175.34 crore remained unutilized.  As 
stated in the earlier para of the report, 2 ongoing schemes and 12 new 
schemes are still awaiting requisite approval and the main re ason for 
under-spending has been indicated as pending approval of these schemes 
as acknowledged by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence.  
Even if the delay in finalization of scheme is accepted as the reason for 
under-utilization as stated by t he Ministry, the deteriorating performance 
in terms of percentage of financial achievement during the second year is 
not acceptable.  Certainly there are other reasons for ineffective utilization 
of outlay.  The Committee strongly recommend that the reasons too should 
be probed Scheme/Project-wise under the three sectors of the Ministry viz  
Film Sector, Information Sector and Broadcasting Sector and the corrective 
Action Taken by the Government  so that the outlay allocated is 
meaningfully utilized. 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry has since taken action directing the concerned Administrative 
Unit to probe the reasons of ineffective utilization of funds.  Appropriate measures 

will continue to be taken to improve the performance in plan impleme ntation and 
utilization of funds. 
 
  
 
[Ministry of I & B  O.M. No. 4/18/2009-PC (Vol.V) dated 08.02.2010]    
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Press Council of India was established in 1978 under an Act of 
Parliament.  Press Council is the repository of the trust of the Parliament in 
guiding the press to high standards of its functioning and preservation of 
its freedom against any onslaught.  It acts as an independent quasi Judicial 
Authority with adjudicatory advisory and regulatory functions.    Pres s 
Council of India is mandated to preserve the freedom of the Press and 
maintain and improve the standards of newspapers and news agencies in 
India.   The Secretary of the Ministry during the course of deliberations 
informed the Committee that to give more  powers, a proposal to amend 
the Press Council Act is under consideration.  Presently, PCI is in the 
process of firming up its own views on the matter.    Thereafter, the 
proposal for amendment to the Act would be considered by the Ministry.  
The Committee strongly recommend that the proposals for amendment to 
the PCI Act should be drafted carefully after wider consultations and 
evolving consensus on important issues related to the media. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
The proposal to amend the Press Cou ncil Act, 1978 has been received from 
Press Council of India (PCI) and is under consideration of this Ministry.  The 
recommendations of the Committee in respect of careful drafting of amendment to 
the Press Council Act, 1978 after wider consultations have been noted. 
 
 
[M/o I&B‟s I.D. Note No. 23/9/2009-Press dated 26.02.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The National Film Development Corporation Limited is the central 
agency established by the Government of India to promote the growth of 
the Indian Fil m industry and to foster excellence in cinema.  During the 

year 2008 -09, Rs.14.5 crore were allocated at BE stage.  However, the 
allocation was reduced to Rs.6.51 crore at RE stage.  The Committee note 
that NFDC has been reporting losses for the last few years and therefore, it 
has been decided to refer to the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) for examination and for revival of NFDC.  The 
Committee have also been informed that the Government has approved a 
proposal of NFDC for in troducing voluntary retirement scheme to 
rationalize the manpower of the Corporation to make it clean and efficient 
organization.  The Ministry in their Action Taken by the Government  
Replies in regard to the recommendation of the Committee contained in 
Fifty-fifth Report on DFG (2008 -09) had stated that the blue print to 
revamp the Corporation and improve its financial performance is under 
consideration.  The Committee are unhappy to note that NFDC was unable 
to reverse the trend of loss making over the years despite infusion of funds 
by the Government.  Since a decision has now been taken to refer the 
matter to the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE), the Committee would like to be apprised about the revival 
package for NFDC. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NFDC has submitted a comprehensive revival plan prepared with the 
assistance of SBI Capital Markets Ltd. to this Ministry on 1.1.2010.  The 
revival plan is under examination in this Ministry and the same has been 
sent to BRPSE vide letter No. 202/32/2009 -F(PSU) dated 26.02.2010.  
BRPSE would consider the revival plan and make appropriate 
recommendations in the matter.  Based on the recommendations of the 
BRPSE, a Note proposing measures for revival of NFDC would be moved by 
the Ministry for consideration of the Cabinet.  After the Cabinet considers 
and approves the proposal the same would be implemented. 
 
 
(Ministry of I&B‟s O.M.No.204/12/2009-F (PSU) dated 04.03.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 The Prasar Bharati (Broadcas ting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 
providing for the establishment of Broadcasting Corporation for India, 
known as Prasar Bharati came into effect on 15 th September, 1997.  The 

Committee have been informed that about 80 per cent of the allocation 
goes to Prasar Bharati, which for the current year consists of Rs.646 crore 
and the remaining allocation goes to other sectors of the Ministry viz. 
Information Sector and Film Sectors.  The Committee note that the Plan 
outlay for Prasar Bharati for the year 2009-10 is Rs.657 crore consisting of 
grant-in-aid and loan.  The total Revenue Plan Budget is Rs.250.21 crore 
which the Government will give in the form of grant -in-aid and the Capital 
Plan Budget is Rs.406.79 crore, which the Government will provide in the 
form of loan.  There will be no IEBR support to Prasar Bharati towards Plan 
2009-10.  The Committee note that out of allocation provided at RE stage 
which was Rs.334.00 crore in 2007 -08 and Rs.474.05 crore in 2008 -09, 
Prasar Bharati could spend Rs.333.83 in 2007-08 and Rs.320.25 crore in 
2008-09.  The Committee observe that there were gross under spending 
under the plan schemes of AIR and Doordarshan during the year 2008 -09. 
The reasons put forth by the Ministry for low utilization of allocation by 
Prasar Bha rati were, litigation relating to procurement of transmitters, 
delay in approval of new schemes specially digitalization scheme of 
Doordarshan, lengthy procurement procedure for machinery and 
equipments and re tendering of work due to non compliance of the  
specifications by bidders etc.  The Committee are of the view that large 
projects necessarily requires careful planning so that they can be executed 
in a planned way.  Similarly, the Ministry and the Prasar Bharati have to 
take necessary steps to solve th eir internal management problems to 
streamline the procurement procedure.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that Prasar Bharati should take timely remedial measures to ensure 
achievement of targets.  The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the measures taken by the Prasar Bharati in the above context. 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
It has been observed that the utilization of the BE/RE stage allocation of Plan 
funds for Prasar Bharati has been very low  caused by non-approval of the schemes 
and the long procurement cycle in Prasar Bharati. 
As far as the approval process in the Ministry is concerned, the approval of 
the  Ministry is dependent upon the proposal being received in a comprehensive 
manner from Prasar Bharati so that the formal process of approval of the SFC 
(Standing Finance Committee) or the EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee) or the 
CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs) is obtained.  Therefore, the onus of 

fulfilling the initial task i.e. submission of a complete proposal to the M inistry is of 
Prasar Bharati. 
 The Ministry of I&B has two levels of monitoring of progress of 
implementation of the scheme/projects – (i) Media Unit Level and (ii) Ministry 
Level.  To monitor the pace of expenditure of plan funds release to Prasar Bharati , 
regular plan review meetings are being held at the Ministry level on a weekly basis 
to expedite approval/implementation of plan schemes.  The progress is being 
monitored both in terms of financial and physical parameters also. With regard to 
the level of  utilization of plan outlay the Ministry has continued to emphasis the 
need for expeditious development process and addressing the bottlenecks affecting 
implementation of schemes/programmes.  
  
One major reason for slow pace of expenditure in Prasar Bharat i is on 
account of the long drawn procurement procedure for machinery and equipment 
etc. Discussion with Prasar Bharati officials reveals that the actual timeline for 
capital procurement of equipment as per DGS&D manual starting from publication 
of NIT til l placement of advance/final AT (Acceptance of Tender) after sanction by 
competent authority and replying to queries, is 52 weeks. However, an ideal 
timeline for each stage of activity involved in the procurement of equipment could 
be reduced to 32 weeks. 
 
 The Broadcasting Wing of the Ministry of I&B has already advised Prasar 
Bharati to examine in detail various bottlenecks and impediments that stand in the 
way of a long drawn capital procurement cycle for machinery/equipment.   
 
 Prasar Bharati in its re ply has stated that for streamlining the procurement 
procedure, efforts are afoot to cut short the timelines involved in the procurement 
process while diligently following the established codal procedures.  In addition, 
both the Directorates (AIR & DD) hav e been advised to sort out the discrepancies 
pointed out by the concurring / approving authorities across the table forthwith so 
that the delay in exchange of information / clarification could be averted. 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 2/3/2009-B(Fin)  dated 23.02.2010] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 

 The Committee have persistently been recommending measures to 
the Government for restructuring of Prasar Bharati in their Reports.  The 
Committee note that National Productivity Council (NPC) had been 
engaged by th e Prasar Bharati to suggest suitable measures for 
organizational restructuring.  The NPC has given the Report to Prasar 
Bharati.  The Committee have also been informed that NPC made a 
presentation on its recommendations to the Board of Prasar Bharati.  The  
recommendations of the Board are still awaited in the Ministry. The 
Committee also note that restructuring of Prasar Bharati was being 
deliberated upon by the previous Group of Ministers (GoM) which could not 
gave their recommendations.  A proposal to re -constitute the Group of 
Ministers has already been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on    1 st July, 
2009 with reminder issued in September, 2009.  Since the matter 
pertaining to Prasar Bharati is pending consideration of Group of Ministers, 
the Committee, at this stage, only urge the Government for early decision 
on the proposal so that the issues relating to organizational restructuring 
and other matters could be sorted out expeditiously. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
The Group of Ministers on Prasar Bh arati has been re -constituted on 10 th 
February 2010. 
 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 21.01.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee in their Forty -seventh Report had recommended 
Capital and Financial restructuring of Prasar Bharat i.  The same was 
reiterated in the Fifty -fifth Report.  Pursuant to the Committee’s 
recommendation, the matter was placed before the previous Group of 
Ministers constituted for Prasar Bharati.  However, the Group of Ministers 
could not give its recommendat ions during its tenure. The Cabinet 
Secretariat is examining the request to re-constitute the Group of Ministers 
to consider all the issues, including Capital and Financial Restructuring of 
Prasar Bharati. The Committee hope that the Group of Ministers whe n 
constituted, will examine the functioning of Prasar Bharati in its entirety 
with a view to restructure the Corporation from financial, organisational 
and technological aspect so that the Corporation play an effective role in 
the discharge of its responsibilities.  

 

 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As the GOM has now been re -constituted, the matter of capital and financial 
restructuring will be placed before the GOM for consideration. 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 21.01.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 was enacted with a 
view to regulate the operation of cable television network in the country to bring 
uniformity in their operation and to avoid undesirable programmes from being 
made available to the viewers and optimal utilization of this technology.  The 
Government now proposes to restructure the above Act.  The Committee have 
been informed that the recommendations of TRAI on `restructuring of Cable TV 
services’ have been received and the same are being examined by the Government 
with concerned Ministries/Departments.  Based on the inputs given by TRAI and 
other Ministries/Departments of the Government, the Ministry is examining these 
recommendations.  Since the proposal is under cons ideration of the Government, 
the Committee at this stage, can only request the Ministry to complete the process  
of consultation with all the stakeholders at the earliest.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the definite timelines for completion of the proposal. 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Government has been examining the recommendations of TRAI. Once the views 
of the Government are finalized on these recommendations, TRAI will be informed for 
further comments /recommendations as per pr ovisions of TRAI Act.  After receipt of the 
final recommendations on the views of the Government, the final action for amendment in 
the Act will start.  The whole process is likely to take some more time. 
 
[M/o – I&B‟s I.D. No. 5/01/2009-BP&L  dated 21.01.2010] 
 
 
 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman 
    May, 2010 Standing Committee on 
    Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 
Confidential  
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2009-10) 

 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4 th May, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1615 hours in Committee Room „62‟, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi.  
P R E S E N T 
 
 Shri Rao Inderjit Singh - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Shri Charles Dias 
5. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
8. Shri Abdul Rahman 
9. Shri Prem Das Rai 
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
11. Dr. Bhola Singh 
12. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya  
15. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
16. Shri P. Rajeeve 
17. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
S E C R E T A R I A T 
  
  18. Shri T. K. Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
  19. Smt. Sudesh Luthra, Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration and adopted the same without any modifications:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained i n their First Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 

(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Second  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting. 
 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in their Third Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) relating  to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Information Technology). 
 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Fourth Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) rel ating to  the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above  
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. The Committee also decided to undertake on -the-spot study tour 
during the month of June, 2010. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 

ANNEXURE 
 
ANALYSIS OF  ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/  
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SECOND REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No.5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Paragraph Nos:- 1,2, 4, 5,6, 7, 8, 9 ,10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 22 & 23 
 
 Total 18 
 Percentage 62.06 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Paragraph No:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not  been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Paragraph Nos:- 15, 16, 27 & 28  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 13.80 
   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
are of interim nature:- 
 
 Paragraph Nos:-  3, 14, 21, 24, 25, 26 & 29  
 Total 07 
 Percentage 24.14 
 