STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
  
 
28 


 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2011/ Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1-13 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
14-28 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
29 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
30-34 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
35-37 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I* Comments of Department of Posts on the recommendations of the Expert 
Committee set up to review NSSF and Small Savings Schemes by Ministry of 
Finance…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
II* Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held on 20 th December, 
2011…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
 
III Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Twenty -fourth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  Matter not appended with the soft copy of the Report updated online. 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2011-12) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Shri  Charles Dias 
*7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
14. Shri  Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Executive Officer 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
 

 
 
(ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -eighth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Demands for 
Grants (2011 -12)’ of the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications and Inform ation 
Technology). 
 
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/l aid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 4 August , 201 1. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty -fourth Rep ort on 21 November, 2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
20 December, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience , recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-III. 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi;                    Chairman, 
21   December, 2011                                                                               Standing Committee on 
 30  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology  deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
of the Committee contained in their  Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
relating to Demands for Grants  (2011-12) of the Department of Posts (Ministry 
of Communications & Information Technology).  
 
2.  The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 4 August, 2011. It  contained                                             
18 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as under: 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
 Para Nos: 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 & 16 
 
 
 Total: 11 
 Chapter: II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government: Nil 
 
   
 Total: Nil 
 Chapter: III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration: 
 
 Para Nos: 2, 5, 9 & 18  
 Total: 04 
 Chapter: IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government are of interim in nature: 
 
 Para Nos:  7, 12 & 17  
 Total: 03 
 Chapter: V 
 
 
 

 
 
4.  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given  to 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the  Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit  for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee  with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire  that Action Taken Notes 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I and Final 
Action Taken replies to the  Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the  Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
 
I. LONG PENDING ISSUES 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2 & 18) 
 
  
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the recoveries received by the 
Department of Posts from Postal Life Insurance, Western Union 
Money Transfer and other Departments/organizations have been 
slowly increasing.  The recoveries in 2007-08 were Rs.266.32 crore 
which increased to Rs.438.94 crore in 2009 -10.  Du ring 2010-11, 
the recoveries at BE stage was Rs.436.55 crore which at RE stage 
was Rs.566.58 crore i.e. an enhancement of Rs.130.03 crore.  The 
actual recoveries upto January, 2011 was Rs.66.99 crore which 
according to the Department would increase when th e recoveries 
on PLI and customs would be booked by PAO, Kolkata as Annual 
Adjustment in March, 2011. Regarding introduction of new products 
under Postal Life Insurance, the Secretary of the Department 
during the course of oral evidence stated that the Mini stry of 
Finance was not allowing Postal Life Insurance to introduce 
different kinds of policies. In this context, the Committee note that 
the issue of providing autonomy to the Department of Posts to 
extend their clientele and introduce new products on the ir own has 
been long pending with the Ministry of Finance.  In this connection, 
on the directions of the Committee, a meeting was held on 19 th 
April, 2010 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary (FS) to 
sort out various issues raised by the Department of Posts.  The 
Committee have now been informed that the Ministry of Finance 
has agreed to delegate some powers relating to Small Savings 

 
 
Schemes.  Now it has been reported that the panel set up by the 
Government has recommended new rates for Small Savings  
Schemes and the new rates are likely to be notified shortly. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the recommendations 
made and follow up action taken in this regard.” 
  
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
“The Committee note that some of the issues on which the 
Committee had recommended in their various reports have long 
been pending with the Ministry of Finance. These issues include 
providing autonomy to the Department of Posts on the issues of 
rates of interest provided under various Small Savings Sch emes, 
increasing the ceiling of Deposits in Single and Joint Accounts of 
the Postal Savings Bank, starting of new schemes under Small 
savings schemes, in terms of policy matters with regard to 
insurance activities of DoP and positive consideration in fixin g the 
rate of remuneration provided to DoP for various agency services, 
etc.. The Committee in its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) had recommended that these issues should be sorted 
out without any further delay. A year later, the Committee find that 
no tangible progress has been achieved as all the issues are yet to 
be resolved.  Expressing its displeasure over undue delay in sorting 
out the long pending issues, the Committee again emphasize that 
these issues should be vigorously pursued by th e Department of 
Posts with the Ministry of Finance for early settlement of these long 
pending issues.” 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 
 7. The Department in the Action Taken Note has stated as under:- 
 
“The issue of extension of clientele and introduction o f new 
products in PLI/RPLI, was under correspondence with the Ministry 
of Finance for a long time. On reference of Ministry of Finance to 
Ministry of Law  regarding insurance business  of Department of 
Posts, the Ministry of Law was of the view as under: 
 
 “ In view of the above factual and legal position, since PLI and 
RPLI are covered by the exemption under Section  44(d) of LIC Act 
and admittedly there is no change in the legal status it can be 
safely concluded that the DoP  can sail with life insurance by 
proposing  new schemes according to the need. Hence, it would be 
advisable to  allow DoP to carry out insurance  business with the 
proposed new schemes as a Government Department  by  making  
use  of the exception accorded under section 118 ( c ) of the  
Insurance Act, 1938…”   
 
On receipt of legal opinion from Ministry of Law as communicated 
by Ministry of Finance, the Department has i nformed its intent to 

 
 
introduce new products/schemes wherever required. 
Views/Instructions of Ministry of Finance have been solicited. Views 
of Ministry of Finance have since been received and Ministry of 
Finance has expressed disagreement with the advice of Ministry of 
Law. As per direc tions received from the Ministry of Finance, vide 
their letter No. H -12013/01/2010-Ins.I dated 17 th October, 2011 
no expansion of insurance activity by the Department of Post can 
be permitted and the present operations of Department of Posts 
will have to b e supervised by IRDA.  This issue will be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance afresh for allowing PLI/RPLI to expand 
its business to new clientele group and introduce new 
products/schemes as per market requirement. 
 
In case of Post Office Small Savings, the Ministry of Finance has 
agreed in principle to delegate some powers relating to  operational 
matters of Small Savings Schemes but written communications 
having details of powers delegated is still awaited  from them. As 
regards, recommendations of the Committee set up to review 
National Small Savings Funds  (NSSF) and Small Savings Schemes 
by the Ministry of Finance , major recommendations of the 
Committee and comments sent by  DoP against each  are enclosed 
as Annexure –I. The Government has yet to take final decision on 
the recommendations of the said Committee.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 2) 
 
“……………………..In Post Office Small Savings side, the Department is 
continuously pursuing the pending issues at the highest level with 
Ministry of Finance as a result of which one long pending issue of 
removal of ceiling of deposits in Single as well as in Joint Accounts 
of Post Office Savings Bank has  been settled with a Notification 
dated 15.09.2011 from Ministry of Finance (Department  of 
Economic Affairs) to remove the limit. As regards other issues  
relating to Small Savings Schemes, Ministry of Finance  has not 
agreed  to give autonomy to the Department of Posts to fix rate of 
Interest but on the basis of the recommendation of the Ex pert 
Committee headed by the Dy. Governor of RBI has agreed to link 
Interest Rate of Small Savings Schemes with the Auction of 
Government Securities of similar maturity  in the Market which will 
be reviewed  at the end of every Financial Year  and new rate s will 
be notified before 1 st April of that Year. Revised interest rates 
(likely to be effective from 1.12.2011) are being notified by the 
Min. of Finance. As regards starting of new schemes, the Expert 
Committee recommended that at this stage there is no need to 
start any new scheme except start of 10 Years Savings Certificates 
in place of Kisan Vikas Patras and this recommendation has also 
been accepted by  Ministry of Finance.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 18) 
  

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
8. The Committee have consistently been raising some of the 
important issues related to insurance and banking activities of the 
Department of Posts on which the decision by the Ministry of Finance 
has been long pending.  The issues were again pursued while examining 
the Demands for Grants of the Department during the year 2011 -12.  
The Action Taken Notes in this regard have been analyzed and the 
comments of the Committee issue wise are given as under:- 
(i) Expanding insurance activities by the Department of Posts  
 
The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the Department of Posts that there is some 
progress on some of the issues.  With regard to the issue of 
extension of clientele and introduction of new products in 
PLI/RPLI, a reference was made to the Ministry of Law and 
as per the legal decision, Department of Posts can sail with 
life insurance by proposing new Schemes according to the 
need.  As per the opinion given by the Ministry of Law, it 
would be advisable to allow Department of Posts to c arry 
out insurance business with the proposed new Schemes as a 
Government Department by making use of the exception 
accorded under Section 118 (C) of the Insurance Act, 1938.   
It is surpris ing to note that the Ministry of Finance sought 
the legal opinion and when the opinion given by the Ministry 
of Law did not find any legal issues on extension of clientele 
and introduction of new insurance products, the Ministry of 
Finance has now stated that  no ex pansion of insurance 
activity by the Department of Posts  can be permitted and 
the present operations of Department of Posts will have to 

 
 
be supervised by IRDA.  The Department of Posts has 
further stated that the issue would be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance afresh.  In this connection, the 
Committee may  like to refer to Recommendation Nos. 48 
and 49 made in the Thirteenth Action Taken Report on 
‘Management of Funds by the Department of Posts  through 
Banking and Insurance activities ’ whereby the Committee 
deliberated on the inten t of the Ministry of Finance and 
IRDA to create a corporate entity under the Companies Act 
which would handle the Postal Life Insurance which could 
be regulated by IRDA to which the Secretary, Department of 
Posts had candidly admitted that they are not against it, if it 
is inevitable.  In this connection, the Committee had 
emphasized that before taking any decision on the 
regulatory mechanism, it should be ensured that the identity 
of the Department of Posts is maintained.  The Committee 
had also recommended  that the Government should st udy 
various models of regulator  with regard to postal activities 
available internationally.  The Committee while emphasizing 
to settle the issue at the earliest would like the Department 
to take note of the aforesaid cautionar y recommendations 
made by the Committee in their Thirteenth Report. 
 
(ii) Autonomy to be provided to the Department of Posts with 
regard to Small Saving Schemes  
 
With the continuous pursuance of the issue with 
regard to providing autonomy to the Department of Posts 
relating to Small Saving Schemes, the Committee find that 
although the Ministry of Finance has agreed in principle to 

 
 
delegate some powers relating to operational matters of 
Small Saving Schemes, written communication having 
details of powers delegated is still awaited.  The Committee 
find that there is no further progress with regard to the 
status of issue as indicated during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants three months bac k.  
While reiterating the earlier recommendation, the 
Committee would like the Department of Posts to pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance to finalize and issue 
orders on the issues which have long been agreed in 
principle by the Ministry of Finance.  
 
(iii) With regard to other issue of providing autonomy in respect 
of Small Saving Schemes, the Committee find that at last 
one long pending issue of removal of ceiling of deposits in 
Single as well as in Joint Accounts of Post Office Saving 
Bank has now b een settled and a notification has been 
issued on 15.9.2011 by the Ministry of Finance to remove 
the said limit.  The Committee appreciate that their long 
pursuance has at last made the Ministry of Finance to agree 
to the issue.  With regard to giving auto nomy to the 
Department of Posts to fix the rate of interest, the Expert 
Committee headed by the Deputy Governor of RBI has 
agreed to link interest rate of Small Saving Schemes with 
the auction of Government Securities of similar maturity in 
the market  which will be reviewed at the end of every 
Financial Year .  In pursuance of the aforesaid 
recommendation, revised interest rate (likely to be effective 
from 1.12.2011) is being notified by the Ministry of Finance.  

 
 
The Committee while analyzing Annexure-I to A ction Taken 
Notes find that the Department of Posts still feels that 
interest rate on Small Saving Schemes should be market 
linked in line with the recommendation the Standing 
Committee. The Committee endorse the stand of the 
Department and would like the Department of Posts to take 
up the issue again with the Ministry of Finance.  
(iv) Introduction of New Schemes 
With regard to the consistent ly pursued recommendation of 
the Committee for starting new schemes, the Committee 
note that the Department of Posts has indicated the 
recommendation made by the Expert Committee whereby it 
has been stated that there is no need to start any new 
scheme except start of 10 years Saving Certificates in place 
of Kisan Vikas Patras.  The said recommendation of the 
Expert Committee has been accepted by the Ministry of 
Finance.  In this regard, the Committee may like to refer to 
the Recommendation 9 of the Sixty -second Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Management of 
Funds by the Department of Posts through Banking and 
Insurance activities’, whereby the Committee had 
recommended for starting new schemes for girl child, 
working women, rural women, etc.  as pe r the proposal of 
DoP in the light of direction of the Ministry of Finance on 
gender budgeting . The Committee understand from the 
Action Taken Note that the recommendation made by the 
Expert Group relating to not initiating new schemes at this 
stage inten d to schemes in general.  The specific 

 
 
recommendation of the Committee based on the proposal of 
the Department of Posts was meant to address to the 
gender specific issues.  In view of this, the Committee while 
reiterating their recommendation would like the Department 
to convey their concerns to the Ministry of Finance and 
initiatives should be taken to start new schemes for girl 
child, working women, rural women etc. so as to address 
the gender specific concerns.   
 
The Committee would like the Department of Posts to take desired 
action on the suggested lines as per their comments given above.   
II. UTILISATION OF PLAN OUTLAYS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that as against the total outlay of Rs. 4000 
crore for the Eleventh Plan, the actual allocation was Rs. 2195 
crore. The allocation was further reduced to Rs. 1515 crore at RE 
stage by the Ministry of Finance, out of which, Rs. 1172.34 cr ore 
has been utilized upto February, 2011, which is just 29.30 per cent 
of the total allocation. The Committee further observe that there is 
massive gap between the proposed allocation by the Department 
and the amount allocated by Planning Commission at BE  stage. 
During 2010 -11, as against the proposed allocation of Rs. 1270 
crore, the allocation at BE stage was Rs. 660 crore which was 
further reduced to Rs. 480 crore at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure upto January, 2011 was Rs. 258.52 crore. Besides, 
inability of the Ministry to utilize the outlay, delay in approval of the 
schemes is an area of concern to the Committee. The Committee 
note that under some of the important schemes like opening of 
Branch Post Offices, Establishment of Print Mail System in major 
cities, upgradation of IT infrastructure in Post Offices, Centralised 
Banking for POSB, Development of Centralized Banking Software, 
Setting up of AMPCs, Upgradation and Modernization of SPCCs the 
physical achievements during each year of the Elevent h Plan has 
been nil. The aforesaid scenario indicates that there is serious 
problem in implementation of the plan schemes of the Department. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should 
make concerted efforts to streamline the approval syst em so that 

 
 
the schemes are approved expeditiously and the fund s allocated 
are fully utilized.” 
 
10. The Department in the Action Taken Note has stated as under:- 
 
“A proposal for opening of 400 new EDBOs by creating equal 
number of new GDS posts under the sub-scheme”. Opening of 
Branch Post Offices -Rural)” is under process. However, under the 
sub-scheme-„Relocation of Branch Post Offices‟, 213 Branch Post 
Offices  have been opened during the 11th plan period. 
 
In connection with upgradation and modernizatio n of Speed Post 
Concentration Centres ( SPCC ), it is submitted that  109 SPCCs 
have been identified for upgradation during the eleventh plan 
2007-2012.  Out of which 63 SPCCs have been upgraded during 
the year 2010 -11. Upgradtion of remaining 46 SPCCs are  under 
process for the current financial year ie.2011-12. 
 
In Post Office Small Savings Work, introduction of Centralised 
Banking for Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) and development of 
Core Banking Solutions (CBS) software is part of the over all IT 
project, 2010 of India Post. The Request for Proposal for supply, 
installation and implementation of CBS and centralized data base 
has already been floated and evaluation of tenders is in progress. It 
is expected that the project will be implemented in the identified 
120 pilot offices from March,2012 and completed by September,  
2012.  
 
The utilization of Plan Funds towards computerization and   
Networking Project  in XI Five Year Plan, Phase –I,  year wise,  are 
as under: 
                                                                         (Rupees in Crore) 
Sl. No. Year BE RE Expenditure 
1 2009-10 284.2000 148.7300 240.4907 
2 2010-11 328.7600 198.4100 177.5295 
Under the category of mail Operations, the funds allocated for the 
Plan Scheme relating to Wet lease of freighter aircraft have been 
fully utilized. Orders have been placed for setting up Automated 
Mail Processing Systems at Delhi & Kolkata. The Sorting Ma chines 
for Delhi are under installation and the same for Kolkata are 
expected to be installed by the end of the current financial year. 
Funds allocated for Plan Schemes on setting up of Mail Business 
Centres, National Database Management and Publicity for 
Redesigned PIN Codes have also been utilized. All efforts are being 
made to achieve the physical and financial targets set for these 
schemes.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
11. The Committee had observed that the delay in approval of the 
Schemes during Eleventh Plan had resulted in Nil physical achievement 

 
 
under some of the important Schemes of the Department of Posts and as 
such emphasized to streamline the approval system.  The Department 
instead of reviewing the system of approval of var ious Schemes has 
simply tried to update the Committee about the status of finalization of 
some of the schemes as referred to in the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee are unhappy to note that even when the 
Eleventh Plan is going to close withi n three months, the Department is 
still struggling to complete the process of finalization of some of the 
important schemes.  The Committee disapprove the system of approval 
of the schemes for Five Year Plans.  The Committee again would like to 
emphasize t hat with the aforesaid approach, there is no meaning of 
long-term plans.  The Committee again exhort the Department to 
address to the issue so as to ensure that the position of long delay in 
approval of schemes is not repeated in the Twelfth Plan.   
 
III. REVIEW OF RATE OF REMUNERATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Posts receive agency 
charges for the services rendered by them on behalf of other 
Departments/ organizations like Postal Life Insurance Pension 
Payments/Western Union Money Transfer etc. The Committee in 
their Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in their Sixty -second Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on „ Management of funds by the 
Department of Posts through banking and insurance activities‟ has 
recommended that the Expert Committee constituted by the 
Ministry of Finance should give its report within the stipulated time 
followed by expeditious decision by the Finance Ministry to settle 
the long pending issue. Now, the Committee have been informed 
that the Expert Group constituted by the Ministry of Finance is 
likely to submit its Report by 30th April, 2011. The Committee hope 
that by now the above Report wo uld have been submitted to the 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the recommendations made in the above Report and follow up 
action taken by the Department of Posts/Mini stry of Finance in this 
regard.” 

 
 
13. The Department in the Action Taken Note has stated as under:- 
 
“The Expert Group set up by Min istry of Finance on review of rate 
of remuneration submitted  its report to Finance Minister on 
19.5.2011. The Committee has recommended the following rates of 
remunerations:- 
 
Particulars Live 
Account 
(Rupees 
per 
Account) 
MGNREGS 
Accounts, 
(Rupees 
per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees 
per 
certificate, 
issue+disch
arged) 
Indira Vikas 
Patra 
(Rupees per 
IVP paid) 
Rate for 
the year   
2009-10 
159.24 165.59 48.65 12.87 
 
(ii)  The Expert Group recommended escalation formula for rate of 
remuneration to be fixed  every year after 2009 -10. As per the 
formula, the rate of remuneration will be increased  by adding % of 
annual increase in DA (average) and decreased  by 1/3 rd of overall 
growth rate (in %) in total number of Live Accounts during this 
period. 
 
(iii)  The  Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has 
conveyed on 20th October2011 that after examination of the report 
of Expert Group, the Finance Minister has   approv ed following rate 
of remuneration:- 
 
Particulars Live 
Account 
(Rupees 
per 
Account) 
MGNREGS 
Accounts, 
(Rupees 
per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees per 
certificate, issued  
+ discharged) 
Indira 
Vikas 
Patra 
(Rupees 
per IVP 
paid) 
 Rate for the 
year 2009-10 
133.62 Not yet 
approved 
45.10 11.94 
 
(iv)  Other recommendations of the Group regarding remuneration 
on Zero Deposit/Balance Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate 
of remuneration are still under consideration in the Min. of  
Finance.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
14. The Department of Posts has updated the Committee about the 
status of implementation of the recommendation made by the Expert 
Group set up by the Ministry of Finance and the decision taken by the 
Ministry of Finance thereto on the review of rate of remuneration.  With 

 
 
regard to the rate of remuneration  in respect of Live Accounts, Saving 
Certificates and Indira Vikas Patra , the rate s approved by the Finance 
Minister are on a little lower side as compared to the rates 
recommended by the Expert Committee.  The Committee would like to 
have the comments of the Department of Posts on the agreed rates.  
With regard to MGNREGA accounts , remuneration on Zero 
Deposits/Balance Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate of 
remuneration, the Committee note that the issues are not yet approved/ 
still under the consideration of the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee 
would like the Department of Posts to pu rsue the  matter with the  
Ministry of Finance so that early decision in this regard is taken which 
would be a help to the Department of Posts in increasing their revenue 
and reducing the deficit.        
 
IV. ENHANCING THE RATE OF COMMISSION UNDER FRANCHISEE 
OUTLETS AND PANCHAYAT SANCHAR SEWA KENDRA 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Since both Franchisee outlets‟ and „Panchayat Sanchar Sewa 
Kendra‟ are commission based schemes, the Committee desire that 
the Department should urgently look into the proposal to enhance 
the rate of commission under both the above schemes.”  
 
16. The Department in the Action Taken Note has stated as under:- 
 
“Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras (PSSKs) under the „Panchayat 
Sanchar Sewa Yojna‟ scheme are opened at the Gram Panchayat 
Head Quarters‟ which are without Post offices.  Opening of 
Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra is an ongoing process. This is also 
subject to receipts of applications from the Heads of the Gram 
Panchayats.  Recent ly, PSSKs Agents have been authorized  as 
Direct Agent  of PLI  business to make the scheme popular, 
remunerative  to agents as well as to increase  revenue earning of 
the Department.” 
 
 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
17. The Committee are concerned to note that the Department has not 
understood to one of their recommendation to enhance the rate of 
commission under Franchise Outlets and Panchayat Sanchar Sewa 
Kendra which are commission based schemes.  Instead of addressing  
the issue of enhancement in the rate of commission, the Department has 
enumerated the details of functioning of Panchayat Sanchar Sewa 
Kendras unde r Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Yojna. While reiterating the ir 
earlier recommendation, the Committee would like a categorical 
response of the Department on the issue of enhancing the rate of 
commission under the aforesaid schemes.    
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Analysis 
  
Gross Expenditure 
 
The Committee note that the Gross Expenditure of the Department of Posts 
has been increasing over the years.  The Gross Expenditure of the Department which 
was Rs. 7272.66 crore in 2007 -08 has increased to Rs.  13346.94 crore in 2009 -10.  
During 2010-11, the Gross Expenditure at BE stage was Rs.  11328.78 crore, which 
at RE stage increased to Rs.  13427.83 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs.  
11308.93 crore upto January, 2011, which might have increased with th e closing of 
financial year.  According to the Department, the rise in expenditure  is mainly due 
to payment of enhanced salary to regular employees and pension to retirees, and  
payment of 60 per cent arrears of Time Related Continuity Allowance (TRCA) to  
Gramin Dak Sewaks.  Taking note of increasing Gross Expenditure of the 
Department, the Committee in its various Reports have persistently been 
recommending the Department to contain the growing expenditure.  In this context, 
the Committee would emphasize that computerization of various activities and 
prudent utilization of resources would help the Department in reducing the working 
expenses.  Further, the Department should also identify new areas of business 
opportunities to earn more revenue to supplement  the growing expenditure.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
It is submi tted that the major components of working expenses of the 
Department are salaries to the working employees  and pensionary charges to the 
retirees. These expenses are mandatory in nature and are subjected to go higher 
year to year due to grant of normal annual increment ( in salary) and hike in 
Dearness Allowance. Expenditure in other heads of accounts are marg inally upward 
with the passage of time on account of escalation in market  price of the articles and 
services. However, the fund controlling authorities in the Department are time and 
again issued with the instructions to observe austerity measure in spend ing the 
money with them and thereby to contain the expenditure of the Department. 
 
           As regards increase in revenue earning, it is submitted that the Department 
has taken a number of steps through its  Business Development & Marketing to 
boost revenue. It has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) on 30.04.2010 for printing and 
dispatch/delivery of Aadhaar Cards. As on 28.09.2011, 1.74 crores of Aadhar Cards 
have been printed and dispatched.   The revenue earned by the Department up to 
28.09.2011 is Rs.30.8 crores. Logistics Post Business has shown growth as given 
below:- 
 
Year Logistics Post Revenue (in Crore of  ` ) % growth 
2008-09 8.49 - 
2009-10 14.47 70.44 

 
 
 
 
As a result of initiative taken in the Business Development & Marketing, the revenue 
has grown up as under:  
 
Year Business Development (  `  in lacs.) 
2007-08 133596 
2008-09 143499 
2009-10 162503 
2010-11 188407 
 
             Improving the service quality of mail operations is also crucial for revenue 
generation and growth in market share of the Department of Posts in the mail 
market. In order to improve the quality of mail operations, the Department has 
taken up new initiatives as part of the 11th plan, which includes the following: 
 
i. Setting up automated mail processing  centres in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Chennai, Bangalore, and Hyderabad with a view to increasingly automate mail 
sorting. The Letter Sorting Machine  is currently under installation in Delhi. It 
is expected that the sorting machine would also be installed in Kolkata by the 
end of the current financial year. 
ii. Induction of dedicated freighter aircraft for carriage of mail between  Major 
Metro cities as well as in the North-East Region.  
iii. Setting up of mail Business Centres through redesign of the existing mail 
network. 
iv. Popularisation of the Pin Codes with a view to expedite mail sorting, 
transmission and delivery. 
v. Creation of National Address Database Management System. 
 
These initiatives are  expected to result in better quality of service and, which 
in turn, would help the Department in increasing mail traffic and  revenue. 
        
         In Postal Life Insurance Sector, all Sales and after sales operati ons (including 
Rural PLI) has been computerized. Further enhancements to existing software are 
continuing. Software  for computerization of PLI Account Office, O/O Director, PLI 
Kolkata, is also being developed by NIC. In order to enhance products portfoli o of PLI 
and RPLI, Group Life Insurance Schemes are being designed commensurate to 
customers‟ requirements. To ascertain the market trends vis -à-vis PLI/RPLI, a 
market survey is being conducted by the Department.  
 
          Moreover, with a view to levera ge the existing network to improve  revenue  
generation, Department of Posts has tied up  with Money Gram Payment Systems 
Inc. to offer International Inward Money Transfer Service through  selected Post 
Offices. The service was launched on 29 th September,2011  and was initially 
launched in 100 Post Offices  across Delhi, Punjab and Tamilnadu Circles. This 
service will be rolled out to other selected Post Offices in all Circles in due course and  
definitely help in generating additional revenue for the Department.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
2010-11 20.04 38.49 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Revenue Reciepts 
 
 The Committee note that the revenue receipt of the Department has been 
gradually increasing.  The revenue receipts of the Department of Posts during 2007 -
08 was Rs.5494.90 crore which increased to Rs.6266.70 crore in 2009 -10.  During 
2010-11, the revenue r eceipts at BE stage was Rs.6955.54 crore which at RE stage 
reduced to Rs.6814.59 crore and the actual has been Rs.5332.54 crore upto January, 
2011.  The Department is hopeful that its revenue would enhance considerably in 
case the Committee set up for cons idering the Savings Bank/Cash Certificates 
Remuneration-Rate revision recommends an enhancement in the rate of 
remuneration and the same is implemented during the year.  The item -wise analysis 
of the Revenue Receipts indicates that under the heads „Sale of  Postage Stamps‟ and 
„PRC-Sale of Postage Stamps‟, the Revenue Receipts of the Department has been 
sharply declining.  The Secretary during the course of the oral evidence conceded 
that regarding ordinary mail, first class mail, there has been some neglige nce for 
quite some time as the Department of Posts was concentrating only on Speed Post.  
The Committee have persistently been recommending that the working expenses of 
the Department should be met from the revenue earned by the Department.  
However, as per the data furnished by the Department indicates that under some of 
the items the revenue of the Department has declined.  The Committee desire that 
the Department should take steps to increase its revenue receipts to meet the 
growing working expenses. The Committee are of the view that to maximize revenue 
with a view to supplement the increasing expenditure, the Department should take 
steps to enhance its revenue and reduce working expenses to bridge the increasing 
deficit. The Department should pay focuse d attention on ordinary mail and identify 
areas where the revenue has been declining. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the steps taken in this regard.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
 Remotely Managed Franking System based on next generation  technology 
and eliminating human intervention in uploading the credits in the machines has 
been introduced.  These machines will eliminate chances of leakage of revenue.  The 
system will facilitate bulk mailing and streamline the franking system thereby 
ensuring reduced costs and increase in revenue. 
 
               In order to enhance revenue and reduce working expenses to bridge the 
increasing deficit, the department has formulated plan Schemes for effectively 
marketing the products/services of the Depar tment in order to expand its business 
activity. The growth of revenue is  in increasing trend as shown below: - 
 
1099.09
1335.96 1434.99 1625.03
1884.07
0.00
500.00
1000.00
1500.00
2000.00
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
Revenue in Crores
Financial Years
Growth of BD Revenue 

 
 
           During the 11 th Plan,  the Plan schemes in respect of mail operations  have 
been formulated  with a view to improve the quality of mail operations . The 
initiatives planned/ in pipeline with respect to first class mail include: 
 
i. Restructuring of existing first class mail network through consolidation of mail 
offices and optimization of network, 
ii. Streamlining of processes  followed at mail offices, 
iii. Introduction of tracking facility for registered post, 
iv. Quality measurement system for first class mail, 
v. Installation and Commissioning of sorting machines in Delhi and Kolkata for 
sorting of first class mail. 
 
        These initiatives are exp ected to result in improved quality of  mail operations, 
which in turn, may lead  to increase in mail volumes and corresponding  revenue. 
          
In Financial Services Sector, the Department of Posts has tied up with Money 
Gram Payment  Systems Inc. to offer International Inward Money Transfer  Service 
through selected Post offices. The service was launched on 29 th September,2011 
initially in 100 Post Offices which will be rolled out to other selected Post Offices in all 
Circles in due course of time. Th e scheme will  help in generating additional revenue 
for the Department. 
           As regards to Rate of Remuneration for Savings Bank Business, the  Expert 
Group submitted its report to Finance Minister on 19.5.2011 recommending the 
following rate of remunerations:- 
 
Particulars Live Account 
(Rupees per 
Account) 
MGNREGS 
Accounts, 
(Rupees per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees per 
certificate, 
issue + 
discharged) 
 
Indira 
Vikas Patra 
(Rupees 
per IVP 
paid) 
Rate for 
the year 
2009-10 
159.24 165.59 48.65 12.87 
 
         The Expert Group recommended escalation formula for rate of remuneration to 
be fixed  every year after 2009 -10 by adding % of annual increase in DA (average) 
reduced by 1/3 rd of overall growth rate (in %) in total number of Live Accounts 
during this period. Ministry of Finance has, however, conveyed on 20th October,  
2011,  the following rate of remuneration as approved by the Finance Minister:- 
 
Particulars Live Account 
(Rupees per 
Account) 
MGNREGS 
Accounts, 
(Rupees per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees per 
certificate, 
issued+discha
rged) 
Indira 
Vikas Patra 
(Rupees 
per IVP 
paid) 
Rate for 
the year 
2009-10 
133.62 Not yet 
approved 
45.10 11.94 
 

 
 
         Other recommendations of the Group regarding remuneration on Zero 
Deposit/Balance Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate of remuneration are still 
under consideration. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
Revenue Deficit 
 
The difference between the gross expenditure and revenue receipts is the 
deficit of the Department.  The revenue deficit of the Department in 2007 -08 was 
Rs.1511.44 crore which increased to Rs.6641.30 crore in 2009 -10.  In 2010 -11, the 
revenue deficit at BE stage was Rs.3936.59 crore which at RE stage was increased to 
Rs.6046.66 crore.  The actual deficit upto January, 2011 was Rs.5909.40 crore.  
During the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of the Department informed the 
Committee that the Department h as been able to stabilize its deficit which has been 
growing considerably in the last two years on account of Sixth Pay Commission and 
payment of arrears to Gramin Dak Sewaks.  Appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department to reduce the deficit, the Committee hope that the Department would be 
able to contain the deficit during 2011 -12 also.  The Committee desire that the 
Department should expand its business activity by adopting aggressive marketing 
strategy.  Further, the Department should also explore t he possibility of using the 
land available with the Department for earning revenue to reduce revenue deficit.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
The Department of Posts has formulated the following Plan Schemes for 
effectively marketing the products/service s of the department in order to expand its 
business activity:  
 
Sl.No. Plan Scheme 
1 Promotion, publicity & brand visibility 
2 Creating brand identity of  India Post 
3 Product enhancement & Marketing of enhanced 
products 
4 Marketing plan for financial services 
5 Marketing plan for Philately 
 
Comprehensive marketing activities are being carried out under the plan 
scheme on annual basis based on the funds received under plan schemes. 
 
The financial achievements with reference to funds allotted  under the said 
plan schemes up to the year 2010-11 are as under: - 
 
Sl. 
No 
Plan Scheme Funds alloted 
`  in crores 
Funds utilized 
`  in crores 
1 Promotion, publicity & 
brand visibility 
8.23 8.44 
2 Creating brand identity of  
India Post 
14.93 13.46 

 
 
3 Product enhancement & 
Marketing of enhanced 
products 
1.20 1.97 
4 Marketing plan for financial 
services 
2.20 1.99 
5 Marketing plan for Philately 2.29 2.21 
6. Total 28.85 28.07 
 
As regards the utilization of land available with the Department  for earning 
revenue, it is submitted that as per decision taken by the Cabinet, the Committee of  
Secretaries considered the proposal of the Department of Posts to have a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for optimum development management of Postal estates and 
in turn decided that the Department of Posts  will take up this task by entering  into 
Public Private Partnership (PPP). The Department is making all possible efforts to 
complete the procedural formalities of entering into Public Private Partnership. The 
Model conce ssion Agreement drafted for the purpose is under examination  in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Law & Justice  and the Planning 
Commission. Efforts are also on to appoint a Consultant as, keeping in view the 
intricate nature of job,  it may be difficult to make headway in the matter, without a 
hardcore professional. Here, it would also be imperative to mention that while the 
Department of Posts is of the considered view that it has got the mandate to manage 
its lands  and buildings , quite often the question is raised about the legal provision 
that allows it  to undertake projects on PPP basis. The Department has recently 
clarified  the position  to the Department of Economic  Affairs, Ministry of Finance in 
the light of entries appear ing in  Allocation of Business  Rules and also the fact that 
the management of lands and buildings pertaining to the Department of Posts  has 
not been allocated to any other Ministry/Department. Nevertheless  this is a priority 
project of the Department  a nd all possible  efforts are being made to ensure that 
the process of earning  non tariff revenue through the lands available with the 
Department is expedited. 
      
In Insurance activities, the Department has  taken the following                                            
measures to popularize the PLI and RPLI products amongst the clientele: 
 
i. The process of empanelment of  Direct Agent of PLI and RPLI has been 
simplified and decentralized at Postal Division level. The focus is on engaging  
more Agents fro m amongst Aagan wadi workers, Self Help Group for selling 
PLI and RPLI policies. More than 19000 Agents have been engaged so far. 
ii. The incentive structure for Agents has been made attractive and  is now 
based on premium income in conformity  with industry standards. 
iii. All out efforts are being made to carry out an aggressive publicity campaign 
through print, electronic and outdoor media and local media in rural areas, 
such as RPLI Wall painting, publicity through mobile  van, posters and 
pamphlets etc. 
iv. Market intelligence units  at Circle level  and Regional levels have been set up 
for mapping up  the uncovered segment wise clientele. 
v. Market intelligence units  at Circle level  and Regional levels have been set up 
for mapping up  the uncovered segment wise clientele. 
 
 

 
 
 However, all this is subject to revocation of ban  “no expansion of insurance 
activity  by Department of Posts can be permitted”  by the Ministry of Finance ( as 
mentioned in reply to recommendation No.2) 
         
Further, with a view to leverage  the existing network to improve  revenue  
generation, Department of Posts has tied up  with Money Gram Payment Systems 
Inc. to offer International Inward Money Transfer Service through  selected Post 
Offices. The service was launched on 29 th September,2011  initially in 100 Post 
Offices  across Delhi, Punjab and Tamilnadu Circles. This service will be rolled out to 
other selected Post Offices in all Circles in due course. This will definitely help in 
generating additional revenue for the Department.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
Rate of Remuneration for Agency Services 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts receive agency charges for 
the services rendered by them on behalf of other Departments/ organizations like 
Postal Life Insurance Pension Payments/Western Union Money Transfer etc. The 
Committee in their Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in their Sixty -second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Management of funds by the Department of Posts through banking and insurance 
activities‟ has recommended that the Expert Committee constituted by the Ministry 
of Finance should give its report within the stipulated time followed by expeditious 
decision by the Finance Ministry to settle the long pending issue. Now, the 
Committee have been informed that the Expert Group constituted by the Ministry of 
Finance is likely to submit its Repo rt by 30 th April, 2011. The Committee hope that 
by now the above Report would have been submitted to the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the recommendations made in the above 
Report and follow up action taken by the Depar tment of Posts/Ministry of Finance in 
this regard.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
         The  Expert Group set up by Min. of Finance on review of rate of remuneration  
submitted its report to Finance Minister on 19.5.2011. The Committee has 
recommended the following rates of remunerations:- 
 
Particulars Live 
Account 
(Rupees 
per 
Account) 
MGNREG
S 
Accounts
, 
(Rupees 
per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees per 
certificate, issue  
+ discharged) 
Indira Vikas 
Patra 
(Rupees 
per IVP 
paid) 
Rate for the 
year   
2009-10 
159.24 165.59 48.65 12.87 

 
 
 
(ii) The Expert Group recommended escalation formula for rate of remuneration 
to be fixed every year after 2009 -10. As per the formula, the rate of 
remuneration will be increased by adding % of annual increase in DA 
(average) and decreased by 1/3 rd of overall growth rate (in %) in total 
number of Live Accounts during this period. 
 
(iii) The  Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has conveyed on 
20th October2011 that after examination of the report of Exp ert Group, the 
Finance Minister has   approved following rate of remuneration:- 
 
Particulars Live 
Account 
(Rupees 
per 
Account) 
MGNREGS 
Accounts, 
(Rupees 
per 
account) 
Savings 
Certificates 
(Rupees per 
certificate, 
issued + 
discharged) 
Indira 
Vikas 
Patra 
(Rupees 
per IVP 
paid) 
 Rate for 
the year 
2009-10 
133.62 Not yet 
approved 
45.10 11.94 
 
 (iv) Other recommendations of the Group regarding remuneration on Zero 
Deposit/Balance Accounts and yearly escalation in the rate of remuneration are still 
under consideration in the Min. of Finance. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
Franchisee Outlets 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Posts have been implementing 
two commission based schemes i.e. „Franchisee Outlets‟ in the urban and upcoming 
urban areas and „Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra‟ in the rural area for expanding 
the postal netw ork. Franchisee Outlets are opened where a Post Office cannot be 
opened as per departmental norms. The Committee note that the proposal for 
opening of 10,000 Franchisee Outlets during the Eleventh Plan was reduced to 8100 
Franchisee Outlets as per the SFC memo.   The Department could not achieve the 
target for opening 8100 Franchisee Outlets since, no plan funds were allocated 
during the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2011 -12.  However, without plan support, 
the Department was able to open 506, 272 & 191 Franch isee Outlets during 2008 -
09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11 respectively.  During 2011 -12, the Department proposes 
to open 100 Franchisee Outlets without plan support.  The Committee are of the view 
that the concept of Franchisee Outlets is a novel idea for the expan sion of postal 
network in the expanding urban areas.  As Franchisee Outlets do not add to the 
establishment cost of the Department, all initiatives should be taken by the 
Department to open more Franchise Outlets in upcoming urban townships, new 
industrial centres, colleges etc. for expansion of postal network. 

 
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
Opening of Franchise Outlets  under the Franchise Scheme is an ongoing 
process. These Outlets are opened in urban  and upcoming urban areas  where there 
is justification for opening of a Post Office subject to receipt of an application  from 
suitable candidates. At present, 1155 Franchise Outlets (as on 31.03.2011) are in 
operation in the country. 
 
Despite vide publicity of the scheme, eligible persons do not come  forw ard  
to apply for obtaining the permission to open Franchise Outlets. The scheme is, 
therefore, being reviewed  to make it  more attractive to prospective franchisees. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
Mail Operations 
 
The Committee note with concern that the Ministry of Defence has not been 
able to allocate the desired tonnage to the Department of Posts for airlifting of mails 
for Leh and Ladakh Sector.  As against the requirement of 130 tonnage during 2010 -
11, the Ministry of Defence has allocated only 50 tonnes for airlifting of mails for Leh 
and Ladakh Sector.  The reduced tonnage allocation has led to inordinate delay in 
the delivery of mail to the people living in these areas.   Despite taking up the matter 
at the appropriate level, no assurance has been received by the Department of Posts 
from the Ministry of Defence in this regard.    The Committee desire that the 
Department should make effo rts to manage the tonnage requirement independently.   
The Committee desire the Department to explore the feasibility of acquiring the small 
aircraft like SARAS for airlifting of mail for Leh and Ladakh Sectors.  Further, 
engaging the services of Private a irlines should also be explored.   The Committee 
desire the Department to examine the above suggestions and respond to the 
Committee. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
              The problem regarding transmission of mail in Leh and Ladakh region 
occurs d uring winter months (November to April) due to closure of the National 
Highway. The Department, along with other Ministries/Departments, utilizes the 
services of Indian Air Force  aircrafts (for carriage of mail from Chandigarh to 
Leh).Since the tonnage al location by Ministry of Defence  was not adequate, the 
Department  had made arrangements for air Transmission of such mails from Delhi 
point by Air India flights as well as  that of private airlines  to Leh and Jammu. This 
helped the Department in minimizi ng the delay in transmission of mails meant for 
Leh and ladakh Region. The Department has been using the services of private 
airlines  for carriage of mails across the country for many years. The option of 
acquiring an aircraft is not feasible as the Depar tment does not have the requisite 
expertise to run aviation business. However, the Department would be open to use 
of SARAS aircraft as and when it is operational, provided that it operates on the 
routes used for carriage of mail and is operationally advan tageous  and financially 
viable. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
Banking and Money Trasnfer Operations 
Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) and Post Bank of India 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that two important schemes of 
the Department viz. Centralized Banking for Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) and 
Post Bank of India which could have revolutionized the banking and money transfer 
operations of the Department are yet to be implemented. The Committee have been 
informed that the Department plan to implement Core Banking Solution (CBS) in 120 
of the indentified pilot Post Offices by March 2012.  On the setting up of Post Bank of 
India, the Secretary during the course of the oral evidence stated that a roadmap on 
Post Bank of India will be sent to the Ministry of Finance for its view.  With regard to 
Core Banking Solutions, the Committee feel that the scheme can be made 
operational only when the P ost Offices have been fully computerized.  However, the 
computerization of Post Offices, as discussed in the subsequent part of the Report, is 
far lagging behind the schedule. Observing delay in computerization of Post Offices, 
the Committee in their Fifte enth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Modernisation of 
Post Offices‟ has recommended for the speedy computerization of post offices 
followed by the introduction of banking operations of the Department.  Since, 
computerization of Post Office is prerequisite  for implementation of CBS, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should make sincere effort for 
computerization of Post Offices so that the CBS in 120 Post offices could be made 
functional by March 2012.  Further, all the formalities connec ted with setting up of 
Post Bank of India should be completed within definite timelines in consultation with 
concerned authorities so that the Post Bank of India could be set up at the earliest.  
The Committee may be informed about the outcome of the effor ts made by the 
Department.  
Action taken by the Government 
 
            Introduction of Centralised Banking  for Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) 
and development of Core Banking Solution (CBS) software is part of the overall IT 
Project,2010 of India Post. The Request for Proposal for supply, installation and 
implementation of CBS and centralized data base  has already been  floated  and 
evaluation of tender is in progress. It is expected that the Project will be 
implemented  in the identified 120 pilot offices from March,2012 and completed by 
September,2012. 
            
             As regards Post Bank Of India, Department has sent Road Map devised by 
the consultant  to Ministry of Finance for their comments  which are awaited. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
IT Induction – Postal Operation  
Computerization of Post Offices 
 
The Committee are disappointed at extremely slow pace for computerization 
of Post Offices.  As per the Annual Report (2009 -10) of the Department of Posts, 
12604 Post Offices were stated to have been computerized up to 31 st March, 2009.   
Now, as per the Outcome Budget (2011 -12) of the Department, the same figure 

 
 
about computerization of Departmental Post Offices has been provided.  It im plies 
that during the year 2009 -10, not even a single PO was computerized.   The 
Committee have now been informed that under EFC Phase II, out of 13420 Single 
Handed Post Offices, 10196 such Post Offices have been computerized and the 
remaining single handed Post Offices would be taken up in 2011 -12. The Department 
have not furnished the information about computerization of Branch Post Offices 
under EFC Phase -II.  With the existing pace, the Committee feel that it will take 
considerable time for the Departm ent to computerize all the Post Offices in the 
country.  Emphasizing the need for computerization of Post Offices, the Committee in 
their Fifteenth Report on „Modernisation of Post Offices‟ had pointed out that 
availability of power, broadband connectivity  and training of personnel who would be 
using the devices are some of the big challenges before the Department. Since, 
many core activities of the Department viz. Core Banking Solution, Post Bank of 
India, Mail and Insurance Operation are related to comput erization, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should give utmost priority to computerization of 
Post Offices and earnest efforts should be made to achieve the target envisaged 
under Eleventh Plan.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
Under EFC Phase-I, `  628.66 Crore was approved by CCEA for  computerising  
all double handed and higher Post Offices, engagement of IT Consultant for 
preparing DPR for EFC Phase –II etc. The status of computerization of Post Offices up 
to 31.07.2011 is as under: 
 
Sl No. Category of Post Offices Achievement 
1 Head Post Offices 839 
2 Above double handed Sub Post  Offices 6762 
3 Double Handed Sub Post Offices 6218 
4 Single Handed Sub Post Offices 10196 
 Total 24015 
 
 The approval under EFC -Phase II was to provide  the required hardware and 
devices to 2223  Double handed Post Offices  which were left over as not 
computerized during the EFC -Phase I and computerization of 10943 Single Handed 
Post Offices. 
 
The  Government  has  approved  IT Modernisation  Project Phase -2 o f 
Department of Posts to be implemented by 2012 -13. It will establish  IT 
Infrastructure of Data Centre and Disaster Recovery Centre  and networking of all 
Post Offices including Branch Post Offices in rural areas. The Project envisages 
development of inte grated modular  scalable applications for Mail, Banking, Postal 
Life Insurance, Advanced Financial Services and ERP Solutions  for accounts and HR 
Operations of the Department. The Rural Post Offices will be provided with  Rural ICT 
devices with required a pplications  for performing  Postal, Banking, Insurance and 
retail operations. The Rural ICT solution will be enable  electronic networking of 
129497 rural Post Offices. 
 
As a measure of course of action in this regard, IT consultant has been 
appointed to help in designing and implementation of the Project. Eight RFPs have 
been floated  and it is in the process of finalization at various stages to select the 

 
 
vendors to develop integrated and modular  software which will cover all the 
operations. Due to comp lex nature of RFPs, a few of them had to be sent to the DIT 
for vetting where there was delay in vetting of the RFPs. 
 
RFP for Rural ICT Solution for computerization of 129497 Extra Departmental 
Post Offices  through  Rural ICT Solution is under evaluation  stage. It  will be 
implemented in phases. In pilot phase, selected Branch Offices will be deployed and 
the solution will be approved  and finalized. After successful implementation in pilot 
Branch  Post Offices, the Rural ICT  will be implemented in all t he Rural Post offices 
of the country by 2012-13. 
            
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
Marketing Research and Product Development 
Expansion of Speed Post and Logistic Post 
  
 The Committee note that revenue earnings from Speed Post and Logistic Post 
have constantly been increasing over the years. Under Speed Post, the Department 
has earned a revenue of Rs. 455.24 crore in 2007 -08, Rs. 515.27 cror e in 2008-09, 
and Rs. 613.76 crore in 2009 -10.  Under Logistic Post, the revenue earnings was Rs. 
5.53 crore in 2007 -08, Rs. 8.49 crore in 2008 -09, Rs. 21.38 crore during 2009 -10 
and Rs. 60.63 crore during 2010 -11 (upto February, 2011). The Committee have 
been informed that the Department of Posts had conducted a study in 2003 to 
ascertain the market size of Logistic and Parcel Post in India. The study revealed that 
the Logistic and parcel business in India is to the tune of Rs. 75000 crore and has 
been growing at an impressive rate of 8 to 10 per cent per annum since 2002. Since, 
Logistic Post and Speed Post hold tremendous opportunities for generating revenues, 
the Committee desire that a roadmap to tap the market potentials under Logistic and 
Speed Post may be prepared which may help the Department to earn more revenue.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
  
            Department of Posts is operating Speed Post service in a highly competitive 
environment in the express industry where a large number of couriers, national and 
international, are operating. The Department is initiating steps to improve the Speed  
Post service performance on par with the international standards, in order to provide 
excellent service to the customers.   With the investments made under the Plan 
Scheme of “Business Expansion of Speed Post”, the traffic and revenue has 
consistently grown as under:  
 
Year Traffic 
(in lacs) 
Revenue 
(` in 
crores) 
Percentage 
increase in 
revenue 
2007-08 1773 455.24 - 
2008-09 2114 515.27 13.19% 
2009-10 2408 613.96 19.15% 
2010-11 2729 748.82 21.96% 
 

 
 
Speed Post service is thus, growing every year both in terms of traffic and 
revenue.  During the year 2010 -11, Speed Post Service earned revenue of ` 748.82 
crores which is higher than the previous year. 
 
 Road Map for Logistics Post Business Development:  
          We have recently entered into Logistics Business. As a part of distribution 
solution provider, India Post can play a major role in the area of Logistics and supply 
chain management, by providing distribution channel, packaging services, 
warehousing, and transportation with time definite distribution programs and can be 
the customers‟ first choice for the logistics solution. In order to grow in this segment 
of the business and to retain the existing customers, Logistics Post Centers will be 
fully c omputerized with Track and Trace facilities and properly equipped so that 
services are provided with Speed and reliability and customers can get value for 
money. Such a service will enable Logistics Post to get large volumes for retail 
distribution and at the same time, will provide supply chain management solutions to 
large volume business customers. 
 
2. As the Department of Posts is new in the Logistics Business, we have to build 
up this business potential by opening new centers and linking them by operat ing 
„less than truck load‟ routes. In order to get more revenue and business from 
logistics services, it is planned to establish Logistics Post Centers in more cities and 
provide proper infrastructure at these centers. With the boom in the retail market, 
the demand for logistics services will be on the rise. With adequate investment, India 
Post will be establishing Logistics business as a key driver for business growth.  
 
3. With the investments made under the Plan scheme of „Development of 
Infrastructure for Logistics Post‟, during 11 th Plan period, Logistics Post Business has 
shown growth as given below:- 
Year Logistics Post  Revenue (in Crore 
Rupees) 
% 
growth 
2008-09 8.49 - 
2009-10 14.47 70.44 
2010-11 20.04 38.49 
 
4. In order to make the Logistics Post business grow, the existing Logistics Post 
Centers will be upgraded with equipments, technology, operational infrastructure etc. 
and will be modernized to make them look sleek and customer friendly. Also in order 
to increase the business, Logistics Po st network will be expanded by establishing 
more Logistics Post Centers and warehouses etc and by increasing the range of 
services offered. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
Estates Management 
 
The Committee note out of 1871 vacant plots available with the Department, 
403 plots are located in prime locations. Further, a total of 232 plots have been 

 
 
encroached upon and Department have initiated leg al action for eviction of only 62 
plots. The Committee are surprise to note that the Department has conducted no 
study so far to ascertain the market value of the land. The Department now intend to 
enter into a Public Private Partnership to develop estates  in the commercial locations 
for revenue generation. In this regard, an Inter Ministerial Group has been formed 
which is likely to submit its report by October, 2011. The Committee find that the 
number of plots available with the Department are quite large  and these are not 
being fully utilized to earn revenue.  In fact the real estate management is not being 
utilized in a fruitful manner.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
possibility of commercial utilization of land, which may earn reasonable r evenue for 
the Department should be explored.  This would enable the Department to reduce its 
revenue deficit. Further, vigorous efforts should be made to get the land vacated 
which have been encroached upon by unauthorized people.  The Department have 
taken legal action for eviction of only 62 plots. As such, the Committee desire that 
the Department should take assistance of the Law Enforcing Agencies for vacation of 
the remaining 170 plots which have encroached upon. The Committee recommend 
that the vacant plots should be protected by fencing/erecting of boundary walls and 
deployment of security guards. The Committee desire that the Department should 
ensure that its officials are not involved in encroachment of plots. In case of 
encroachment under the juri sdiction of an officer, the concerned officer should be 
held accountable for encroachment. The specific steps taken in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
      With regards to utilization of land available  with the Department  for earning 
revenue it is submitted that as per decision taken by the Cabinet, the Committee of  
Secretaries considered the proposal of the Department of Posts to have a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for optimum development management  of postal estates and 
in turn decided that the Department of Posts  will take up this task by entering  into 
Public Private Partnership (PPP). The Department is making all possible efforts to 
complete the procedural formalities of entering into Public Pri vate Partnership. The 
Model concession Agreement drafted for the purpose is under examination in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Law & Justice  and the Planning 
Commission. Efforts are also on to appoint a Consultant as, keeping in v iew the 
intricate nature of job, it may be difficult to make headway in the matter, without a 
hardcore professional. Here, it would also be imperative to mention that while the 
Department of Posts is of the considered view that it has got the mandate to ma nage 
its lands  and buildings , quite often the question is raised about the legal provision 
that allows it  to undertake projects on PPP basis. Nevertheless this is a priority 
project of the Department  and all possible  efforts are being made to ensure t hat 
the process of earning  non tariff revenue through the lands available with the 
Department is expedited. 
 
        As regards vacation of lands which have been encroached upon by 
unauthorized people, all Heads of Circles have  been advised  to take suit able legal 
action  by taking the assistance of law enforcing agencies with a stipulation to bring 
the affidavits filed by the Department  on its web site  for close monitoring. Further, 
in order to avoid any further encroachment  of Postal lands , the Head s of Circles 
have been advised to take immediate action for fencing/erecting  of boundary walls 
in all cases of vacant plots of lands. Here, it would also be pertinent to mention that 
this issue was discussed  at length in the Building Coordination Meeting  held on 

 
 
28.09.2011 under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Posts). In the said meeting , the 
issue of protecting the Department‟s plots from any further encroachment,  
particularly in the context of recommendations of Standing Committee on 
Information Technology, was highlighted  and the Heads of Circles  were advised to 
send the revised proposals  regarding requirement of additional funds, if any, so that 
the process of fencing/erecting boundary walls  could be completed  before the close 
of current financial year.  
  
       The information gathered from the Circles reveals that in no case of 
encroachment any official is involved and in case any such incident  comes to the 
notice, the official concerned will be held accountable for it.    
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
  The Committee are surprised to note that the data of land records are 
maintained by the Department in manual form.  This is a sor ry state of affairs.  
During the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of the Department has assured the 
Committee that the work of computerization of all the data relating to land available 
with the Department would be completed within eight months. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should have a centralized computerized system of 
land records and the computerization work should be completed within a definite 
timeframe. A proper satellite mapping of the land available with the Department 
should also be done through application of GIS technology.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
         In compliance to the recommendations of the Committee, the Heads of Circles 
have been directed to  have the Market value of the lands available with the 
Department, assessed. Haryana and Himachal Pradesh Circles have already  
furnished the „market value‟ of all the 38 Departmental plots. The Circles namely 
Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamilnadu, North East, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, 
Karnataka and Orissa  have i ssued the instructions  to all their field units  to conduct 
survey  and ascertain the market value of each plot of land. 
        
 Further, the Sale/Lease Deeds of these lands  have also been asked to be 
brought on the Department‟s Web site.  
 
(Ministry of  Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 

 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
Recoveries 
 
 The Committee note that the recoveries received by th e Department of Posts 
from Postal Life Insurance, Western Union Money Transfer and other 
Departments/organizations have been slowly increasing.  The recoveries in 2007 -08 
were Rs.266.32 crore which increased to Rs.438.94 crore in 2009 -10.  During 2010 -
11, the recoveries at BE stage was Rs.436.55 crore which at RE stage was Rs.566.58 
crore i.e. an enhancement of Rs.130.03 crore.  The actual recoveries upto January, 
2011 was Rs.66.99 crore which according to the Department would increase when 
the recoveries o n PLI and customs would be booked by PAO, Kolkata as Annual 
Adjustment in March, 2011. Regarding introduction of new products under Postal Life 
Insurance, the Secretary of the Department during the course of oral evidence stated 
that the Ministry of Financ e was not allowing Postal Life Insurance to introduce 
different kinds of policies. In this context, the Committee note that the issue of 
providing autonomy to the Department of Posts to extend their clientele and 
introduce new products on their own has bee n long pending with the Ministry of 
Finance.  In this connection, on the directions of the Committee, a meeting was held 
on 19th April, 2010 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary (FS) to sort out 
various issues raised by the Department of Posts.  The  Committee have now been 
informed that the Ministry of Finance has agreed to delegate some powers relating to 
Small Savings Schemes.  Now it has been reported that the panel set up by the 
Government has recommended new rates for Small Savings Schemes and t he new 
rates are likely to be notified shortly. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the recommendations made and follow up action taken in this regard.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
         The issue of extension of clientele  and introduction of new products in 
PLI/RPLI, was under correspondence  with the Ministry of Finance  for a long time. 
On reference of Ministry of Finance  to Ministry of Law  regarding insurance business  
of Department of Posts, the Ministry of Law was of the view as under: 
 
 “ In view of the above factual and legal position, since PLI and RPLI are covered by 
the exemption under Section  44(d) of LIC Act and admittedly there is no change in 
the legal status it can be safely concluded that the DoP  can sail with life insurance 
by proposing  new schemes according to the need. Hence, it would be advisable to  
allow DoP to carry out insurance  business with the proposed new schemes as a 
Government Department  by  ma king  use  of the exception accorded under section  
118 ( c ) of the Insurance Act, 1938…”   
 
On receipt of legal opinion from Ministry of Law as communicated by Ministry 
of Finance, the Department has informed its intent to introduce new Products/ 
schemes wherever required. Views/Instructions of Ministry of Finance have been 
solicited. Views of Ministry of Finance have since been received and Ministry of 

 
 
Finance has expressed disagreement with the advice of Ministry of Law. As per 
directions received from t he Ministry of Finance, vide their letter No. H -
12013/01/2010-Ins.I dated 17 th October,2011 no expansion of insurance activity by 
the Department of Post can be permitted  and the present operations of Department 
of Posts will have to be supervised by IRDA.   This issue will be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance afresh for allowing PLI/RPLI to expand its business  to new 
clientele group  and introduce new products/schemes as per market requirement. 
 
           In case of Post Office Small Savings, the Mini stry of Finance has agreed in 
principle to delegate some powers relating to  operational matters of Small Savings 
Schemes but written communications having details of powers delegated is still 
awaited  from them. As regards, recommendations of the Committe e set up to 
review National Small Savings Funds  (NSSF) and Small Savings Schemes by the 
Ministry of Finance , major recommendations of the Committee and comments sent 
by  DoP against each  are enclosed as Annexure –I. The Government has yet to 
take final decision on the recommendations of the said Committee. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Utilisation oF Plan Outlays 
 
 The Committee note that as against the total outlay of Rs. 4000 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan, the actual allocation was Rs. 2195 crore. The allocation was further 
reduced to Rs. 1515 crore at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance, out of which, Rs. 
1172.34 crore has been utilized upto February, 2011, which is just 29.30 per cent of 
the total allocation. The Committee further observe that there is massive gap 
between the proposed allocation by the Department and the amount allocated by 
Planning Commission at BE  stage. During 2010 -11, as against the proposed 
allocation of Rs. 1270 crore, the allocation at BE stage was Rs. 660 crore which was 
further reduced to Rs. 480 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure upto 
January, 2011 was Rs. 258.52 crore. Besides, i nability of the Ministry to utilize the 
outlay, delay in approval of the schemes is an area of concern to the Committee. The 
Committee note that under some of the important schemes like opening of Branch 
Post Offices, Establishment of Print Mail System in major cities, upgradation of IT 
infrastructure in Post Offices, Centralised Banking for POSB, Development of 
Centralized Banking Software, Setting up of AMPCs, Upgradation and Modernization 
of SPCCs the physical achievements during each year of the Elevent h Plan has been 
nil. The aforesaid scenario indicates that there is serious problem in implementation 
of the plan schemes of the Department. The Committee strongly recommend that 
the Department should make concerted efforts to streamline the approval syste m so 
that the schemes are approved expeditiously and the funds allocated are fully 
utilized.  
Action taken by the Government 
 A proposal for opening of 400 new  EDBOs by creating equal number of new 
GDS posts under the sub -scheme  ”Opening of Branch Post Offices -Rural)” is under 

 
 
process. However, under the sub -scheme-„Relocation of Branch Post Offices‟, 213 
Branch Post Offices  have been opened during the 11th plan period. 
 
 In connection with upgrad ation and modernization of Speed Post 
Concentration Centres ( SPCC ), it is submitted that  109 SPCCs have been identified 
for upgradation during the eleventh plan 2007 -2012.  Out of w hich 63 SPCCs have 
been upgraded during the year 2010 -11. Upgradtion of remaining 46 SPCCs are 
under process for the current financial year ie.2011-12. 
          
          In Post Office Small Savings Work, introduction of Centralised Banking for 
Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) and development of Core Banking  Solutions (CBS) 
software is part of the over all IT project, 2010 of India Post. The Request  for 
Proposal for supply, installation and implementation of CBS and centralized data 
base has already been   floated and evaluation of tenders is in progress. It is 
expected that the project will be implemented in the identified 120 pilot offices from 
March,2012 and completed by September,2012.  
 
             The utilization of Plan Funds towards computerization  and  Networking 
Project  in XI Five Year Plan, Phase –I,  year wise,  are as under: 
(Rupees in Crore) 
Sl.No. Year BE RE Expenditure 
1 2009-10 284.2000 148.7300 240.4907 
2 2010-11 328.7600 198.4100 177.5295 
 
              Under the category of mail Operations, the funds allocated for the Plan 
Scheme relating to Wet lease of freighter aircraft  have been fully utilized. Orders 
have been placed  for setting up Automated Mail Processing Systems at Delhi & 
Kolkata. The Sorting Machines for Delhi are unde r installation and the same for 
Kolkata are expected to be installed by the end of the current financial year. Funds 
allocated for Plan Schemes on setting up of Mail Business Centres, National Database 
Management  and Publicity for Redesigned PIN Codes hav e also been utilized. All 
efforts are being made to achieve the physical and financial targets set for these 
schemes. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 Since both Franchisee outlets‟ and „Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra‟ are 
commission based schemes, the Committee desire that the Department should 
urgently look into the proposal to enhance  the rate of commission under both the 
above schemes.  
Action taken by the Government 
 
         Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras (PSSKs) under the „Panchayat Sanchar 
Sewa Yojna‟ scheme are opened at the Gram Panchayat Head Quarters‟ which are 
without Post offices.  Opening of Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendra is an ongoing 
process. This is also subjec t to receipts of applications from the Heads of the Gram 

 
 
Panchayats.  Recently, PSSKs  Agents have been authorized  as Direct Agent  of PLI  
business to make the scheme popular, remunerative  to agents as well as to increase  
revenue earning of the Department. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
Long Pending Issues 
 
 The Committee note that some of the issues on which the Committee had 
recommended in their various reports have long been pending with the Ministry of 
Finance. These issues include providing autonomy to the Department of Posts on the 
issues of rates of interest provided under various Small Savings Schemes, increasing 
the ceiling of Deposits in Single and Joint Accounts of the Postal Savings Bank, 
starting of new schemes under Small savings schemes, in terms of policy matters 
with regard to insurance activities of DoP and positive consideration in fixing the rate 
of remuneration provided to DoP for various agency services, etc.. The Committee in 
its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) had recommended that these 
issues should be sorted out without any  further delay. A year later, the Committee 
find that no tangible progress has been achieved as all the issues are yet to be 
resolved.  Expressing its displeasure over undue delay in sorting out the long 
pending issues, the Committee again emphasize that t hese issues should be 
vigorously pursued by the Department of Posts with the Ministry of Finance for early 
settlement of these long pending issues.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
      
           The issue of extension of clientele  and introduction of new products was 
under correspondence  with the Ministry of Finance  for a long time. On reference of 
Ministry of finance  to Ministry of law  regarding insurance business  of Department 
of Posts, the Ministry of Law was of the view as under: 
“ In view of the above factual and legal position, since PLI and RPLI are covered by 
the exemption under Section  44(d) of LIC Act and admittedly there is no change in 
the legal status it can be safely concluded that the DoP  can sail with life insurance 
by proposing  new schemes according to the need. Hence, it would be advisable to 
allow DoP to carry out insurance  business with the proposed new schemes as a 
Government Department  by  making  use  of the exception accorded under section 
118 ( c ) of the Insurance Act, 1938…”   
          
On receipt of legal opinion from Ministry of Law as communicated by Ministry 
of Finance, the Department has informed its intent to introduce  new 
products/schemes wherever required. Views/Instructions of Ministry of Finance have 
been solicited. Views of Ministry of Finance have since been received and Ministry of 
Finance has expressed  disagreement  with the advice of Ministry of Law. As per 
directions received from the Ministry of Finance, vide their letter No. H -
12013/01/2010-Ins.I dat ed 17 th October,2011,  no expansion of insurance activity 
by the Department of Post can be permitted  and the present operations of 

 
 
Department of Posts will have to be supervised by IRDA.  This issue will be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance afresh for  allowing PLI/RPLI to expand its business  to 
new clientele group  and introduce new products/schemes as per market 
requirement. 
 
            In Post Office Small  Savings side,  the Department is continuously pursuing 
the pending issues at the highest lev el  with Ministry of Finance as a result of which 
one long pending issue of removal of ceiling of deposits in Single as well as in Joint 
Accounts  of Post Office Savings Bank  has been settled with a Notification dated 
15.09.2011 from Ministry of Finance  (Department of Economic Affairs) to remove 
the limit. As regards other issues  relating to Small Savings Schemes, Ministry of 
Finance  has not agreed  to give autonomy to the Department of Posts to fix rate of 
Interest but on the basis of the recommendatio n of the Expert Committee headed by 
the Dy. Governor of RBI has agreed to link Interest Rate of Small Savings Schemes 
with the Auction of Government Securities of similar maturity  in the Market which 
will be reviewed  at the end of every Financial Year  a nd new rates will be notified 
before 1 st April of that Year. Revised interest rates (likely to be effective from  
1.12.2011) are being notified by the Min. of Finance. As regards starting of new 
schemes, the Expert Committee recommended that at this stage there is no need to 
start  any new scheme except start of 10 Years Savings Certificates in place of  Kisan 
Vikas Patras and this recommendations has also been accepted by  Min. of Finance. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications &  IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
Access to Postal Network 
 
 The Committee note that there was a proposal for opening of 400 Extra 
Departmental Branch Post Offices (EDBOs) by creating equal number of new Gramin 
Dak Sewaks (GDS) posts, open 700 Sub Post Offices (SPOs) by 
relocation/redeployment of staff and open 300 more Extra Departmental Branch Post 
Offices (EDBOs) by relocation/redeployment in the Eleventh Plan.  The proposal for 
opening of 400 Extra Departmental Branch Post Offices (EDBOs) by creating equal 
number of Gramin Dak Sewak posts is under consideration w ithin the Integrated 
Finance Division of the Department.  The Committee observe that instead of opening 
new Branch Post Offices and Sub -Post Offices, the Department is resorting to 
relocation and redeployment of the existing Post Offices.  The data provide d by the 
Department indicates that not even a single Branch/Sub - Post Office was opened 
during the last three years i.e. from 2007 -08 to 2010 -11.  The Committee feel that 
there is a need for opening of more Post Offices as out of 620515 inhabited villages,  
only 138889 inhabited villages have Post Offices. The Department have been laying 
more emphasis on relocation/redeployment of Post Offices taking the plea of 
congestion in the area.  Since relocation/redeployment of Post Office affect the 
access to postal  facilities in an area, the Committee would like to caution the 
Department to first assess the implications of relocating a Post Office so that people 
do not have to walk long distance for availing basic postal service. The Committee 
further desire that th e proposal for opening 400 BOs by creating equal number of 
GDS employees should be processed at the earliest so that the equal number of 
Branch Post Offices could be made functional.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
            There are four sub -schemes, namely (i) Opening of Branch Post Offices -
Rural; (ii) opening of Sub Post Offices; (iii) relocation of Branch  Post Offices and (iv) 
relocation of Sub Post Offices, for opening of Post Offices under the Plan Scheme - 
“Access to the Postal Network”. It is  a fact that under the sub scheme -“Opening of 
Branch Post Offices -Rural” no Branch Post Office could be opened during the 11 th 
Plan period. A proposal for opening of 400 new EDBOs by creating equal number of 
GDS posts under the said sub -scheme is under exami nation of the Integrated 
Finance  Wing of the Department.  
 
            However, under the sub -scheme- “Relocation of Branch Post Offices”, 213 
Branch Post Offices  and under sub schemes -“Opening of Sub Post Offices and 
Relocation of Sub Post Offices”, 224  Sub Post Offices have been opened  during the 
11th Plan period.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
Insurance Operations 
 
 The Committee have been informed that entire operation of PLI/RPLI have 
been computerized. The facility would enable the customers to pay premium from 
any Post Office in the Country. However, the facility to view and pay the premium 
online is still under development and is likely  to be completed soon. The Committee 
are disappointed to note that the Department of Posts have not been able to provide 
the facility of viewing and paying online premium of PLI/RPLI, whereas, the new 
entrants in insurance sector has been providing the fac ility to the customers. Since, 
the insurance sector is technological driven and customer desire more and more 
facility online, the Committee strongly recommend that the facility of viewing and 
paying the premium online should be made functional at the earl iest.  The specific 
steps taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee. 
Reply-PLI- 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
           The Software for online deposit of PLI and RPLI premium  and facility for 
viewing  the policy credits for custome rs has now been developed by NIC and 
PLI/RPLI  customer interface  has been  integrated  to ePO. The facility will be rolled 
out by the end of November, 2011. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
Regulatory Mechanism for Private Courier Services 
 
 The Committee have been informed that private courier service is de -facto 
open for all operators and there are no entry barriers. About the need for a regulator 
for the sector, the Department have informed there is no proposal to have a 
regulator for priva te courier service. Further, no reliable data is available about the 
number of couriers operating in the Country. The Committee find the response of the 
Department surprising especially taking into account that when all commercial 
activities are regulated under certain laws and rules, the Department do not feel the 
need to have a regulator for private courier services in the country. The Committee 
feel that the Government is losing money as it can raise revenue by way of 
licence/entry fee etc. for running t he courier services. The Committee strongly 
recommend that a regulatory body for private courier services should be set up at 
the earliest. The specific steps taken in this regard may be communicated to the 
Committee.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
 In view of changing requirements of the market, the  Department of Posts is 
proposing to bring a Post Office Bill which,  upon en actment will replace the Indian 
Post Office Act, 1898.  Couriers though not visualized in the Act of 1898, have 
flourished in the market but there are no sectoral provisions regarding regulating 

 
 
their activities or mail carried by them and this issue is being looked into in the Draft 
Bill. 
  
 At this stage the draft Post Office Bill has been circulated for inter -ministerial 
consultation. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.20 -2/2011-BGT(PA)/ 
24th Report  dated 18.11.2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH, 
New Delhi;                    Chairman, 
21   December, 2011                                                                               Standing Committee on 
 30  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                                                Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-
FOURTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos: 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 & 16 
 
 
 Total 11 
 Percentage 61.12 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 Para Nos.:- 2, 5, 9 & 18  
 Total 4 
 Percentage 22.22 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of 
interim nature 
 Para Nos.:- 7, 12 & 17  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 16.66 
 
 
 