STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Shravana,1933 (Saka) 
  
 
23 


ii 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-11) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2011-12) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4 August, 2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 August, 2011 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Shravana,1933 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  Pg 
No 
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE ii 
ABBREVIATION iii 
INTRODUCTION iv 
 REPORT  
 PART I  
   
I. Introduction 1 
II. Implementation status of the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Information Technology 
2 
III. DIT Budget for the Eleventh  Plan period and for the year 2011-12 2 
 Eleventh Plan Outlay and Utilisation 2 
IV. Position of IEBR of the societies/offices under the jurisdiction of DIT 4 
V. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates 4 
VI. National e-Governance Programme (NeGP) 5 
 (i) State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 5 
 (ii) Common Service Centre (CSCs) 5 
 (iii) State Data Centres (SDCs) 7 
 (iv) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) 7 
  (a) E-District and e-Bharat 7 
  (b) Impact Assessment of e-Governance Projects 8 
VII. Infrastructure Development 8 
 (i) National Informatics Centre (NIC) 8 
 (ii) National Knowledge Network (NKN) 9 
 (iii) Software Technology Park of India (STPI)/Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTP) 10 
 (iv) Promotion of Electronics/IT hardware manufacturing 11 
 (v) Cyber Security (incl. CERT-in, IT Act) 13 
VIII. Human Resource Development 14 
 (i) Manpower development (incl. Skill Development in IT) 14 
 (ii) Department of Electronics Accreditation of Computer Courses (DOEACC) Society 15 
IX. Research and Development 15 
 (i) Centre for Development and Advanced Computing 15 
 (ii) IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) 16 
X. New Technology 16 
 (i) Cloud Computing 16 
    
  Part-II  
  Recommendations/Observations 18-
35 
  APPENDICES  
I. Proposal for Eleventh Plan (2007-12) Scheme-wise – Budgetary Support 36 
II. Details of the Financial Allocation for the Schemes/Programmes and its utilisation for each year of the Eleventh 
Plan 
37 
III. Budget allocation of the Department for different Schemes under Plan and Non-Plan 38 
IV. The proposed and allocated outlays for NKN, Skill Development in IT, Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing and e-Governance during the year 2011-12 
39 
V. Status of CSCs functional in various States/UTs 40 
VI. A comparative chart of States for Land Records, Property Registration, Transport , and Commercial Taxes and 
JNNURM 
41 
VII. G2C Services provided by CSCs in the States/UTs 42 
VIII. Total outlay for National Knowledge Network (NKN) for 10 year period is Rs. 5990 crore and the year-wise 
requirement  
43 
 The year-wise allocation and utilisation pattern for National Knowledge Network  43 
IX. Incidence of Cyber Crimes Cases Registered during 2009 (IT Act, 2000) 44 
X. Targets and achievements of DOEACC during the year 2010-11 (upto 31.12.2010) 48 
XI Minutes of the  Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 20 April, 2011 49 
XII Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 15 June, 2011  52 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Vacant ** 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri Rajen Gohain 
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
12. Shri Abdul Rahman 
13. Shri Prem Das Rai 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti 
17. Dr. Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
20. Shri C. Sivasami 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
*23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
24. Shri Salim Ansari 
*25. Shri  Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
27. Shri  Prabhat Jha 
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
29. Shri  Ravi Shankar Prasad 
30. Shri  P. Rajeeve 
31. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
**      vice Shri Milind Deora, ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent on his 
appointment as Minister of State for Communications and IT on 12.07.2011. 
 
  

v 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CBI  - Central Bureau of Investigation 
CCA  - Controller of Certifying Authority 
C-DAC   -  Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CERT-In  -  Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
CSC   -  Common Service Centres 
DOEACC  -  Department of Electronics Accreditation of Computer Courses 
DTC  - Direct Tax Code 
EFC  - Empowered Finance Committee 
EHTP  - Electronics Hardware Technology parks 
FTP  - Foreign Trade Policy 
IaaS  - Infrastructure as a Service 
IEBR   -  Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource 
ICTE  - Information and Communication Technology 
ICTE  - Information, Communication Technology and Electronics 
ITeS   -  Information Technology enabled Services 
JnNURM -  Jawaharlal Nehru National urban Renewal Mission 
MMPs   -  Mission Mode Projects 
NCRB  - National Crime Records Bureau 
NeGD  - National e-Governance Division 
NeGP   -  National e-Governance Plan 
NIC   -  National Informatics Centre 
NKN   -  National Knowledge Network 
PaaS  - Platform as a Service 
PoPs  - Point of Presence 
SaaS  - Software as a Service 
SCA  - Service Centre Agency 
SDC   -  State Data Centre 
SIPS   -  Special Inventive Package Scheme 
SMEs  - Small and Medium Enterprise 
STQC   - Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification 
STPI   - Software Technology Park of India 
SWAN   - State Wide Area Network 
UCs  - Utilisation Certificates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty-third Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology). 
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2010-11) was constituted 
on 31st August, 2009. One of the functions of the Standing Committee, as laid down in 
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is to 
consider Demands for Grants of the concerned Ministry/Department and to make a 
Report on the same to the House. 
3. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology) 
for the year  2011-12 which were laid on the Table of the House on 9 th March, 2011. 
The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Information Technology on 20th April, 2011. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 15th June, 2011. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Information Technology for appearing before the Commit tee and furnishing the 
information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the 
Demands for Grants.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
           RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi               Chairman 
22 July, 2011                                                  Standing Committee on 
31 Sravana, 1933 (Saka)                    Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  
 
 

PART – I 
 
REPORT 
 
I. Introductory 
 
 The Information, Communication Technology and Electronics (ICTE) is the world‟s 
largest and fastest growing industry. ICTE is increasingly finding applications in all sectors of 
the economy and thus is a key growth driver for the Indian economy.  The national policies in 
the field of Information Technology are formulated, impl emented and reviewed by the 
Department of Information Technology (DIT), in the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology. All policy matters relating to silicon facility, computer based 
information technology and processing including hardware a nd software, standardisation of 
procedures and matters relating to international bodies, promotion of knowledge based 
enterprises, internet, e-commerce and information technology education and development of 
electronics and coordination amongst their vario us users are also addressed by the 
Department. In order to operationalise all the policies and objectives of the Department of 
Information Technology various schemes are formulated and implemented directly by the 
Department and through the organizations/institutions under its jurisdiction. 
 
 
 Department of Information Technology are implementing various schemes and 
programmes for technological development in the field of information technology and for 
creating critical infrastructure for the development of information technology in the Country.  
Some of the major Schemes/Projects/Programmes carried out by the Department are (i) e - 
Governance (ii) Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing (M. Fab) (iii) National 
Knowledge Network (NKN), (iv) Cyber Security (including CERT -In, IT Act, CCA)  (v) 
Manpower Development (incl. Skill Development in IT) (vi)  IT for Masses (Gender, SC/ST) 
etc. To make the technology robust and state –of–the-art, the Department obtains 
collaboration of the academia and the private/public sector besides being assisted  by two 
attached Offices viz. STQC and NIC, four Statutory Organisations and seven Autonomous 
Societies besides three section 25 companies. 
 
 For the financial year 2011 -12, the Demands for Grants of `3048.61 crore was laid in 
Lok Sabha on 9 March, 2011, w hich have been already passed on 17 March, 2011 by the 
Parliament after suspension of Rule 331 G of Rules of Procedure and the Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha. However, as per the ruling of the Hon‟ble Speaker Lok Sabha, the Committee 
may examine the Demands and make Report thereon. 
 
 
 

2 
 
II.  Implementation status of the recommendations contained in the Seventh 
 Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the 
 Department of Information Technology 
 
 Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology on „Demands 
for Grants‟ of the Department of Information Technology for the year 2010-11 was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21 and 22 April, 2010 respectively. The 
Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Seventh Report on DFG (2010 -11) was 
presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 November, 2010. Out of the 32 
recommendations made by the Committee, 2 3 recommendations were accepted by the 
Government. Replies to 8 recommendations were not accepted by the Committee and were 
reiterated in their Seventeenth Report.  Besides, in view of the reply of the Government, the 
Committee did not desire to  pursue one of the recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report. 
 
Under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister concerned shall 
make once in six months a statement in the House regarding the status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the Report of Departmentally Related Standing Committees of 
Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry.  The  requisite statement under Direction 73A on the 
Seventh Report has not been made even though the Report was presented to the House in 
April, 2010.   
 The Committee in this Report have inter-alia analysed the position of Outlays and the 
expenditure, particularly the performance of the Plan Schemes in the context of examination 
of Demand for Grants (2011-12). 
 
 
III.  DIT Budget for the Eleventh Plan period and for the year 2011-12 
 
Eleventh Plan Outlay and Utilisation 
 
 
 The total budgetary support to the Department of Information Technology, for the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012), is `12496 crore (as provided in Appendix-I) against the 
proposed allocation of `21835.89 crore. For the financial year 2011 -12, the allocation 
provided for the Plan Schemes at BE stage is `3000 crore as against the proposed Outlay of 
`8404.84 crore. The details of the Schemes/Programme -wise financia l allocations and its 
utilization status upto February, 2011 in each year of the Eleventh Plan is given at     
Appendix-II and the details of the allocation provided for the year 2011 -12 is enumerated at 
Appendix-III. The year -wise proposed and allocated P lan Outlay along with the actual 
expenditure (till 31 March, 2011) are as follows:            
      

3 
 
     
                                (` in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
 
Proposed BE RE Actual % of 
utilization 
w.r.t BE 
% of 
utilization 
w.r.t RE 
2007-08 2092.08 1500 1400 1252.06 83.47 89.43 
2008-09 2500 1680 1450 1516.72 90.28 104.60 
2009-10 3021.50 2530 1700 1652.46 65.31 97.20 
2010-11 5817.47 2660 3468.40 3024.01@ 113.68@ 87.18@ 
2011-12 8404.84 3000 8404.84# -- -- -- 
Total 21835.89 11370 8018.40^ 7462.07@ 65.62@ 93.06@ 
    @  Expenditure upto 31.03.2011 provided during evidence (PPT pg. 4)  
^ Excluding the RE for the year 2011-12      
 
 In view of the above, the Department was asked about reasons for the gaps between 
proposed outlay and allocation approved for the Eleventh Plan, and also the gaps between 
allocation made at Revised Estimate stage and at Budget Estimate stage. In reply, the 
Department has informed that Ministry of Finance decides the RE provision with reference to 
the expenditure made during the first two quarters of the corresponding financial year  and 
the gap is mainly due to the less allocation for the Schemes NKN, Skill Development in IT, 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing and  e-Governance as provided at 
Appendix-IV. 
 
          
 Observing that the actual expenditure, up to 31.3.2011, is `7462.07 crore which is 
only 59.71 percentage of the entire budgetary allocation for the Eleventh Plan, the 
Department was asked to elaborate on their strategies and measures to have more realistic 
Demands for Grants as well as to have proper utilization of fund. To this, the Department has 
stated that to utilise the available resources optimally, efficiently and judicio usly they will be 
reviewing all the Schemes/Projects keeping in view the priorities and objectives which will be 
defined in the coming Twelfth Five Year Plan. Elaborating further, the Department stated that 
the Zero Based Budgeting will be stringently used  for demanding realistic and proper 
utilization of funds. 
 
 
 Justifying the low level of utilisation of outlay during the initial three years of the 
Eleventh Plan, the Department has cited reasons which include non -receipt of utilization 
certificates from State implementing agencies, non -release of State share by State 
Governments in case of „e -Governance‟ Programme and delay in obtaining approval of the 
competent authority for implementation of the „National Knowledge Network‟ (NKN) 
Programme. 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
IV. Position of IEBR of the societies/offices under the jurisdiction of DIT 
When asked for the position of IEBR of the societies/offices under the jurisdiction of 
DIT, for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Department has provided the following data.  
 
       ( ` in crore) 
Year Approved Actual* 
Eleventh Plan 2225.56 1133.79 
2007-08 248.79 177.27 
2008-09 272.14 332.82 
2009-10 272.14 314.90 
2010-11 406.61 308.80 
2011-12 619.07 -- 
    * Actuals as on 28.02.2011 
V. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates 
 
 The Committee have been repetitively raising concern over the huge pendency of 
Utilization Certificates (UCs). In this regard, the Committee have been emphasising for 
strengthening the monitoring system. In Seventh Report the Committee desired that urgent 
steps be taken to recover the money along with strict action against those implementing 
agencies that have not spent even the first installment. While examining Demands for Grants 
(2011-12), the Committee have found that the total unspent balances lying with the 
States/implementing agencies, as on 31 December, 2010 , is `2534.87 crore and 1000 UCs 
are pending.  Further, 569 UCs amounting to `1840.36 crore, are not due as these would 
become due as on 1 April, 2011 and 1 April, 2012.  Thus, 431 UCs amo unting to `694.51 
crore are still pending with the States/implementing agencies.  
 
 With regard to the measures being taken to liquidate the UCs expeditiously, the 
Department has submitted that all Group Coordinators/Heads of all Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies have been informed about the Committee‟s recommendations made in the 
Seventeenth Report and DIT is also taking measures for liquidating pending UCs/unspent 
balances like one to one meetings between PAO and concerned Programme Divisions of DIT, 
etc. 
 
 The Department has further submitted that from 1 April, 2001 to 31 March, 2008 there 
were 72 agencies that have been issued only one installment and have neither demanded the 
subsequent installments nor have bothered to furnish the Utilisation Certificates. H owever, 
the coordinated efforts with the Programme Divisions resulted in reducing the number of such 
UCs. As on 22 March, 2011, only 35 UCs (single installment) for `32.92 crores are pending 
when compared to  the position of outstanding 72 UCs amounting to `46.95 crore as on        
31 December, 2009.  
 
 
 

5 
 
VI. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PROGRAMME (NeGP) 
 
 The total budgetary support for „National e -Governance Plan‟ Scheme during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan is `4992 crore. BE allocation for the 5 years is `4617.31 crore and 
the RE allocation during the last four years is `2170.88 crore.  The actual expenditure, till      
31 March, 2011, during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan is `1794.82 crore, which 
comes to 35.95 per cent of the total budgetary allocation  approved for the Eleventh Plan . 
Justifying the under utilisation, the representative of the Department, during evidence, stated 
that in many cases, the State Governments could not utilise the money released to them and 
therefore the Department could not u tilise the entire outlay which had been allocated for       
„e-Governance‟. In addition, the representative of the Department, submitted as under: 
“...x..x..x...the entire implementation is with the State Government and we do not 
have control over the State  Governments.  We can only cajole and persuade them.  
We can put some kind of a fear.” 
 
 When asked about the hindrances being faced in the implementing NeGP, especially in 
Uttar Pradesh the representative of the Department during evidence, submitted as under: 
“As per our experience, Southern States are very pragmatic and proactive. X...X...X…X…X. 
That kind of passion is not observed there………….”  
 
             
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
The Government has approved this Scheme for establishing State Wide 
Networks (SWANs) across the country in 29 States and 6 UTs, with a total Outlay of `3,334 
crore, over a period of five years, to provide technical and financial assistance to States for 
establishing SWANs from State Headquarters upto the Block level with a minimum 
bandwidth capacity of 2 Mbps. So far, SWAN in 2 6 states/UTs rolled out. The Committee 
learn that a fter repetitive deferment of deadlines, the Department has again changed the 
timeline for setting up of SWANs from August to December 2011. Justifying the repetitive 
extension of timeline, the Department has stated that implementation process has been 
very much delayed at the State / UT level due to various reasons like delay in engagi ng 
consultant, delay in the entire bid process, court case, non -availability of power and leased 
line connectivity at remotely located Block areas etc.  
 
Common Service Centre (CSCs) 
 
The Common Service Centres (CSCs) are intended to be one of the three infrastructure 
pillars of the National e-Governance Plan and to serve as the physical front end for delivering 
Government and private services at the doorstep of the citizen. CSC Scheme was approved in 
2006, with a total cost of `5742 crore, with an initial target of establishing of one lakh CSCs 

6 
 
by 2008. However, as on 31 March, 2011, only 93,163 CSCs has been rolle d out, that too 
after shifting the deadline repetitively. The new deadline set by the Department is June, 
2011. Further, out of 31 States/UTs, on ly in 10 States  and one UT, 100 per cent rollout has 
been completed.   
 
In this background, the Department was asked to provide reasons for the rep etitive 
lapse in the deadlines. In response, the Department has  replied that the rollout of CSC s are 
affected in difficult and naxal affected areas of Chhattisgarh, Assam, Bihar, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Orissa and West 
Bengal. The other challenges as enumerated  by the Department are availability of power 
supply, ensuring broadband connectivity for all CSCs and lack of adequate G2C services by 
the State Governments and line Ministries / Departments under the Central Government. 
 
 
 When asked to provide details about the CSCs that are functional and are providing 
services to the citizens , the Department has provided a list of CSCs  which are actually 
functional, as given at Appendix -V.  The analysis of the data revealed that in Haryana the 
number of CSCs actually functional is „zero‟ and in few States like Andhra Pr adesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, and West Bengal there is a mis match between the 
number of CSCs that are to be set up and the actual CSCs functional. In total, out of 93,163 
CSCs established, only 8,5287 are found to be functional as on February, 2011.   
         
 When the Committee desired to know whether the Departm ent has carried out any 
survey to get the feedback from the users of CSCs, the Department has stated that an 
independent evaluation of the CSC Schemes had been entrusted to M/s IMRB International in 
November, 2009 which was conducted on 1727 CSCs selected across 19 States covering 
activities of 15 Service Centre Agencies (SCAs).  The key findings of the study revealed that 
58 per cent CSCs were found to be fully operational out of a sample size of 1727; 10 per cent 
CSCs w ere closed after some time; in few c ases, the SCAs contracts were terminated by 
State Governments; whereas in some cases, CSCs were found to be non -operational due to 
Naxalite problems, law and order and problems of difficult terrain; and only 68 per cent of the 
CSCs have Internet availability. Some of the challenges/problems affecting the CSC schemes, 
as cited by the Department, are non -availability of the G2C services, non -reliable broadband 
connectivity and irregular supply of electric power.  
 
 
 Further, when asked about the details of the services made available to the citizens by 
CSCs in various States/UTs, the Department provided a list  of G2C services provided in 

7 
 
various States/UTs  (Appendix V). Analyzing the same it reveals that there are only 20 
States/UTs where G2C Services are av ailable compared to other States and there is non -
uniformity even in number of services provided by CSCs. 
State Data Centres (SDCs) 
 
State Data Centres has been identified as one of the important elements of the core 
infrastructure for supporting e-Governance initiative of NeGP. Pursuant to that, it was 
proposed to create data repositories/data centres in various States/UTs so that common 
secured data storage could be maintained to serve a horde of e-Governance applications. The 
time frame, to operationalise State Data Centres (SDCs), was set for March, 2008 and since 
then the Department has been deferring the deadline. Till 31 st March, 2011, just 11  SDCs 
could be made operational. When asked about the reasons for the failure of the Department 
in meeting the re -revised deadline of March, 2011, it has been stated that there had been 
delays in implementation of the SDCs by the States due to finalization of the RFP, longer time 
taken for bid process management and placement of orders on the successful b idder by the 
States. Other connected issue, quoted by the Department, is non -availability of suitable site 
for the SDC.  
 
Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) 
 
 e-District and e-Bharat 
 From the data furnished by the Department, it has been observed that „e -District‟ Pilot 
scheme in 16 States (41 Districts) has already been sanctioned. National Scheme of            
„e-District‟ MMP for `1663.08 crore has been concurred by EFC on 23 Septem ber, 2010 and 
„e-District‟ pilot scheme has gone live in only UP, Assam,  Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Bihar, 
Mizoram and Kerala. As per the projected timeline, the implementation of „e -District‟ Scheme 
in 14 States was to be completed by March, 2011, however, only in U.P and Assam the 
projects could be sanctioned and implementation has been initiated. Till date only 
implementation guidelines are being circulated to States to invite pilot proposals.  
   During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous year, the 
Committee had noted that to support „e -Bharat‟ MMP, Government of India have been 
carrying out a dialogue with World Bank for possible programme management and financial 
support, hence, had recommended to pursue the issue with the World Bank. When asked for 
an updation about the same, the Department has submitted that during their negotiations 
with the World Bank, a loan for an amount of US $ 150 million has been agreed, with a  
maturity period of 18 years, including a 5 years‟ grace period.  The proceeds of this loan are 

8 
 
likely to become available on its becoming effective, soon after approval by the Bank‟s Board 
of Executive Directors which is slated by end March 2011.  
Impact Assessment of e-Governance Projects 
 
When asked whether any survey has ever been conducted to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the „e -Governance‟ programmes in various States, the Department has 
stated that they have done an „Impact Assessment of e -Governance Projects‟ both at State 
and National level with the help of independent market research agencies. The Department 
has also provided a comparative chart of the outcome of the assessment of the various       
„e-Governance‟ projects viz. Land Records, Property Registration, Transport, Commercial  
Taxes and Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission  (JnNURM) (Appendix-VII). The 
Committee have been informed that the Department is in the process of empanelling 
agencies in the categories of Knowledge Partners, Research Institutions and Market Res earch 
Agencies. The process is expected to be completed in next three months and after 
empanelment the next round of assessment would commence. 
 
 As per the information furnished by the Department, one of the important parameter 
for impact assessment is „percentage users paying bribes‟.  Under Land Records (for issue of 
RoR) the bribe has declined from average of 39 per cent to 23 per cent. Under Property 
Registration, it has been mentioned that 23 per cent of all transactions in 11 States reported 
payment of bribe.  Under Transport it has been mentioned that only 1 State reported 
significant impact on bribe.  In the Commercial Taxes, it has been mentioned that the bribe 
has significantly been lesser. Not only that the aforesaid data indicate that there has been 
considerable reduction in the average number of trips for availing services, average waiting 
time and total elapsed time in availing services. 
  
VII.  INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
(i) National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
 The total budgetary support to National Informatics Centre (NIC) for Eleventh plan is 
`2300 crore. The allocation and utilisation for during each year of the Eleventh Plan is as 
under: 
                                                                                                                (` in crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
 
2011-12 
Proposed 427 560 845 800 800 
BE 320 400 550 700 754 
RE 325 400 550 700 - 
Actual 
Expenditure 
321.04 462.82 526.54 700* - 
*Tentative.  

9 
 
In the background that inspite of optimal utilization of outlays, the fund allocated at BE 
stage is always less than the proposed outlay, t he Department was asked to explain the gap 
between the projected and the allocated outlay. To this, the Department has replied that due 
to the reduced budget, the ICT infrastructure is increased in a gradual and optimal way and 
some of the ICT infrastructure was even supported by user Departments.  
 
 
 When asked about the constraints faced by NIC to execute its projects efficiently , the 
Department, in their written note, has submitted as under: 
 
“…………The manpower has been big constraint. As NIC manpower was sanctioned 
during 80s‟ as per the IT requirement of the State/District that time, it has 
become difficult to sustain the number of projects with same manpower now. 
NIC has only two persons per district and around 15 -20 per state. This has to be 
increase p roportionately to support around 30 -40 projects in the district and 
below. There is no support mechanism at Block level, where majority of Social 
Sectors schemes are being implemented. States are asking NIC to set up centre 
at Blocks to provide technical s upport and build the capacities of staff at grass 
root level so that services can be provided up to Gr am Panchayat and Village 
Level.”  
 
 
 (ii) National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
  
The „National Knowledge Network‟ (NKN) project was approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) on 25th March, 2010 with an outlay of `5990 crore over a 
period of 10 years. The year-wise allocation and utilisation pattern for NKN, for the last three 
years and the financial requirement for 10 years , as provided by the Department, has been 
given at A ppendix VIII (A) and (B) .  At Plan discussion stage for the year 2011 -12, the 
Department had requested for allocation of `2300 crore, however, a sum of `250 crore only 
has been allocated. As per t he Department this allocation would be inadequate to meet the 
projected physical targets for the Financial Year 2011 -12 and hence, they would make 
request for more grants at the first stage of supplementary grants. 
 
 The Department during evidence informed the Committee that the targets for the year 
2011-12, are all core links of NKN backbone to be upgraded from 2.5 G to 10 G, NKN links to 
reach all the districts and secondary Point of Presence (PoPs) to be set up in all the districts, 
1000 Institutes to be connected to NKN, NKN Data Centres to be set up, Call-Centre to be set 
up as front-desk for the users and facility management support to be established. In light of 
the reduced allocation for the year 2011 -12, the Committee  during evidence expressed 
apprehensions about the achievement of the set targets.  In response, the representative of 
the Department, during evidence deposed as under:- 
“…….Sir, the proposal for `2300 crores for NKN for the year 2011 -12 was a part of 
the total proposal of the DIT for `8400 crores.   The Planning Commission after 
getting the overall picture of the gross budgetary support required from all the 

10 
 
Ministries in the Government of India put a cap of `3000 crores for the DIT in the 
year 2011-12.  The option before DIT in consultation with Planning Commission is if 
you allocated `2300 crores out of `3000 crores you have `700 crores left for all the 
other schemes of the DIT and after discussion a view was taken to put `250 crores 
for NKN and informally it was stated that during the first supple mentary based on 
the utilisation done the remaining amount would be given by the Ministry of Finance 
in consultation of the Planning Commission.  This was also the system done last 
year where our gross budgetary support was also limited.  In NKN nearly `1400 
crores was required and only `100 crores was made in the last year‟s Financial Year 
for NKN and based on the utilisation.  The Expenditure Department in consultation 
with the Planning Commission gave an additional `112 crores and NKN was able to 
utilise that amount because that release was given based on the understanding that 
they would be able to properly utilise it.  This is the informal arrangement made 
and we are hopeful that they would continue this year and we would get more.  
NKN was a project approved in March last year.  The total component in the NKN is 
around `6000 crores nearly 50 per cent of the Five Year Plan Budget of DIT and 
therefore the component of NKN would necessarily have to be provided as an 
additionality in this year also.” 
 
 
(iii) Software Technology Park of India (STPI)/Electronics Hardware 
 Technology Parks (EHTP) 
 
 STPI was established on 5th June, 1991 for promotion of exports and providing facility 
to Indian Small and Medium organizations for participation in export promotion  events in the 
software and electronics sector.  The exports by STPI registered units rose to more than 90 
per cent of the total software exports from the country from a meagre 8 per cent when it 
started, in 1991. Pursuant to its objective, STPI has been s et up in 52 centres spreading 
across the country. 
 
 Considering that from 1 April, 2011 the tax holiday for STPI units was to be withdrawn, 
the Committee during evidence enquired about the Department‟s plan to support these IT 
units and the roadmap ahead for STPI for post -tax holiday period. In this regard, the 
Secretary of the Department has submitted as under: 
“…..we felt that it was necessary for this scheme to be extended because that had 
very great beneficial effect in terms of promoting the growth of this sector and in 
making them competitive overseas and more importantly in making more 
investments coming to India. So, all of these have undoubtedly produced very good 
impact over the last 10 to 15 y ears. But the request, although it was made at all 
the possible levels including myself to my counterpart and from the Minister to the 
Finance Minister, a view was taken in the Finance Ministry which we had to accept 
that this will not be extended partly b ecause they felt that now the sector has 
grown and partly because the Direct Tax es Code (DTC) is likely to come in from 1 st 
April, 2012. But we still feel that the absence of such support would have a 
detrimental effect and I can certainly say this in respect of the smaller and medium 
sized companies and in respect of the smaller and medium sized towns where I 
think we should try to spread this industry. These are, I think, our views but I am 
sure the Finance Ministry also had to look at the revenue mobilisation.” 
 

11 
 
 The Department has further stated that they would support these IT units  by allowing 
the approved units to import goods required by them for carrying on software export 
activities as per the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP). STP scheme would continue to play a key role 
in supporting the small and medium IT units through a single window mechanism and the 
other benefits as per FTP.  DIT is also preparing a non -profit linked incentive scheme for STP 
registered units to ensure accelerated growth of IT/ITES exports and the dispersal of IT/ITES 
industry to the Tier II and Tier III cities across the country. In view of the withdrawal of the 
tax benefits for STP units, STPI is also working out a road map to facilitate the IT sector in 
the changed scenario.  The D epartment has also stated that t he present incubation 
programme of STPI would be further strengthened for Business Incubation and 
entrepreneurial development for start up units and STPI is working with DIT for establishment 
of a National Productivity Netwo rk which would create capacity and necessary IT 
infrastructure across STPI centres to provide support primarily to SMEs across the country. 
 
 When asked as to whether has calculated the quantum of withdrawal of tax benefit to 
STPI units, the Department has stated as under: 
 
„The Department has not conducted any study recently on the impact of 
withdrawal of the tax benefits to STP units. However, there has been gradual 
decline in the IT/ITES exports growth rate of STP Units, reduction in the number 
of new registration of STP units and increase in debonding of the STP units. The 
details of impact of withdrawing the tax benefits to STP units are given below. 
 
Sl.No: Description 2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-11 
(Apr -
Dec) 
1 Export Performance  (`in crore  ) 180155 207358 205505 144157 
2 New STP Unit Registrations 844 572 521 253 
3 No. of STP Units debonded  170 165 250 214‟‟ 
          
(iv) Promotion of Electronics/IT hardware manufacturing  
 
 The Information Communication Technology and Electronics (ICTE) is increasingly 
finding applications in all sectors of the economy, however, Indian electronics hardware 
production constitutes around 1.3 per cent of global electronics production . The Committee 
have been informed that the demand of electronics hardware i n the country during 2009 -10 
was `2,18,031 crore, out of which  `1,10,720 crore worth of demand was met by indigenous 
production and `1,07,311 crore was met by imports.  
 To boost up electronics/IT hardware manufacturing sector, the total budgetary support  
provided for the Eleventh five year plan is `1100 crore, however till 31 March, 2011, the 
Department has utilised only `2.66 crore. Hence, the Department was asked to justify the 

12 
 
meagre utilisation of only 0. 24 per cent of the total budgetary support as w ell as to explain 
the reduced allocation of `2.83 crore against the proposed amount of `1455 crore for the year 
2011-12.  To this, the Department has stated that the allocation of `1100 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan was made to meet the capital subsidy requi rement under Special Incentive 
Package Scheme (SIPS) based on the anticipation that there would be significant interest by 
the investors. However, due to the subsequent global economic slowdown, many of the 
potential investors deferred their investment dec isions and hence, the allocation has been 
kept at a token amount of `2.83 crore. The Department has, further, stated that based on the 
eligibility of approved units under SIPS,  necessary amount would be sought in the 
Supplementary Demand for Grants. 
 Agreeing to the need for stepping up allocation for this priority sector, the  
representatives of the Department, during evidence, has stated as under: 
“…………….In 2007, the Government tried to get a Semi -Conductor Fab to India. We 
announced a scheme called t he Special Incentive Package Scheme in which we 
agreed to provide 20 to 25 per cent capital subsidy for attracting a fab. 
Unfortunately, despite this attractive financial incentive, no company came forward 
to set up a fab in India. Basically, two reasons a re there. One is that it is a very 
closely-held technology. Second, it is a very high capital intensive project. Third, 
there was a global recession in terms of electronics in the last two or three years. 
So, the overall supply of chips in the global market was more than the requirement. 
No one was interested in setting up a fab.  
To progress in Electronic sector it is essential to have a fab. For this, we are taking 
necessary steps to attract leading Technology investors and formulate a special fab 
Scheme under which High Empowered Committee will talk with these investors and 
bring this technology in this country . And the decision for this is suppose d to be 
taken in the Cabinet meeting to be held today (20 April, 2011) after which the 
possibility of having a fab in our country would increase. 
The Secretary, Department of Information Technology, further stated that: 
.......here are several disabilities apart from the lack of duty protection which I will 
leave aside for a moment. But if we just take the cost o f manufacturing, we have 
problems on the infrastructure front compared to China. China is pouring money 
into infrastructure.  It does not try to recover the cost of that infrastructure 
whether you take the cost of power or water. Then, if you take their ha rd 
infrastructure in terms of ports and airports, there is absolutely no comparison in 
terms of roads, etc. If you take the cost of finances also, there are again 
differences. So, in fact, the industry has made a comparison. Several of our 
delegations from the industry have gone and studied in China as to what is the 
difference between China and India. So, all these recommendations which have 
been made have been made after very careful study and analysis. 
In fact, the Task Force had made 198 recommendations  and out of them 5 are 
identified by a committee and those 5 really high priority areas are, fab, modified 
chips, preferential market access to domestically produced goods, research and 
development and setting up of National Electronics Mission. On each of  these 5 
elements, the work is being done. On Fab, the proposal to set up an Empowered 

13 
 
Committee is going before the Cabinet today. All the others are in various stages of 
progress.” 
(v) Cyber Security (incl. CERT-in. IT Act) 
 
 The total allocation for Eleventh Five Year Plan under this programme is `600 crore. Till 
date the Department has utilized `122.98.89 crore. The year -wise allocation and utilisation 
for this sector is as under: 
          (` in crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
 
2011-12 
Proposed 75 39.10 40 49.3 46 
BE 33 33 33 40 45.20 
RE 31 33 33 40 - 
Actual Expenditure 22.73 30.61 29.64 40* - 
*Tentative 
 The Committee have been informed that a total of 106, 201 and 315  Government 
websites were hacked during the  years 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively and these attacks 
were directed from countries like USA, UK, Mexico, Spain, Brazil, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, 
China, Lebanon, Peru, Morocco, Japan, Korea, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Nigeria etc.  
 With regard to the cyber crime cases registered, till date, under IT Act, the Department 
has provided few data (A ppendix-IX). Analysing the same it was found that there are no 
cyber crimes cases registered in States like Haryana, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,  
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim , Tripura, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,                      
D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, whereas  in Karnataka, that too 
only in Bangaluru, highest number of cases of hacking during 2009 was regis tered. Further, 
regarding the disposal status of the registered cyber crime  cases, the Department has stated 
that at present National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) is not maintaining any such data. 
 
 In light of the increasing cyber crime, the Committee desi red to know about the 
estimated loss, due to e -fraud cases. Responding to this, the Department has stated that 
compilation of data relating to cyber crimes and frauds is undertaken by National Crime 
Records Bureau (NCRB). However, Reserve Bank of India (RB I) and Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) too compile similar data for the cases registered by them.  The 
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance has reported online banking frauds 
worth `590.49 lakhs in the year 2009 and Central Bureau of  Investigation (CBI) has 
registered 6 cyber crime cases causing financial loss of `2,70,650 to the Government/private 
person.  In th is context, the Committee desired to know whether there is a measure to 
compensate the financial loss occurring due to cyber  fraud. To this, the Department has 
informed that Section 43 and 43A of Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000 provides for 

14 
 
compensation for the damages suffered by the victims of computer crimes and frauds and 
section 66 and section 72A provides for punish ment in the form of imprisonment and fine to 
the perpetrator. However, the mechanism to insure against financial loss through e -fraud is 
an emerging field and no such facility is in vogue at present. 
 
 
 When enquired about the adequacy of number of IT Auditors in the country, the 
Department has stated that CERT -In has empanelled  51 IT auditors till date and the critical 
sector organization are mandated to implement Information Security best practices  as  per    
ISO-27001 and they are also advised to undertake the audit of the system atleast once in a 
year.  
           
  
 The Committee, further, desired to know about the practical constraint and lacuna 
witnessed in the IT Act and about the sections which attracts most of the Cyber crime cases. 
To this, the Department has stated that The IT Act is technology intensive and ap plication 
motivated legislation, hence, changing technologies and applications pose several challenges 
such as collection of digital evidence, attribution of attacks to particular systems, anonymous 
and borderless nature of cyber space etc. The tools and t echniques to detect and analyse the 
crimes also need to be updated.  
 
The Department was asked about the training/education provided to the personnel 
from different States to create awareness about „Cyber Crime‟. To this, the Department has 
submitted that: 
 
“At the Department level, we have the nomination from the State Governments and 
all the large organisations.  There are 800 nomination contact points. Every 15days, 
we invite people to attend the exposure programme in cyber security and breaches.  
The response is very good. Every 15 days, we invite people to join the programme 
on the exposure part of it.” 
 
VIII. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(i) Man power development (incl. Skill development in IT) 
 
 Under National Skill Development Policy, the Department of Information Technology 
has been given a target of skill development of 10 million persons in IECT by 2022. The 
proposed outlay for this project, for the year 2010 -11 was `460 crore, whereas the BE,  RE 
and actual expenditure remained „Nil‟. Even this year the allocation at BE stage remained „Nil‟ 
against the proposed amount of `717.75 crore.  With regard to the reasons for nil allocation, 
the Department has stated that the draft EFC Note has been cir culated to 
Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments and after obtaining the 
recommendations of the EFC the proposal would be submitted to the Cabinet for obtaining 

15 
 
approval for implementation of the programme and once the proposal is approved by  the 
Cabinet the requisite funds would be sought through Supplementary Grants.  
 
    Considering the importance of skilled workforce in the information technology and the fact 
that this year there is a poor budgetary allocation for Infrastructure, e -Governance, HRD, 
etc., the Committee during the course of deliberation, desired to know as to how the 
Department is prepared to achieve the set target under Skill development. The 
representatives of the Department has stated as under:  
“…….with regard to the nat ional skill development initiative, as per the Planning 
Commission‟s 500 million target, we had been assigned a target of 10 million to 
be trained in the IT sector by 2022. We decided that in order to ensure that we 
are able to meet this 10 million target we need to have a reality check of our 
institutions C-DAC and DOEAC.” 
 
 
 
(ii) Department of Electronics Accreditation of Computer Courses (DOEACC) 
 Society 
 During the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 the DOEACC has been provided with almost the 
entire proposed amount, of which DOEACC has utilised 100 percent of the allocation. 
However, a perusal of the budget document reveal that except for the formal sector long 
term courses, DOEACC has fallen short in all its targets  as observed in Appendix-X. In view 
of the above, the Department was asked to explain as to why inspite of receiving the 
proposed allocation and utilizing the entire amount, the Society did not achieve  even 50 per 
cent of the set  target. In response, the DIT explained that the proposed allocation is mainly 
for the DOEACC Centres for augmenting/renewal and replacement of the infrastructure for 
offering long term formal courses, where the target has been a chieved. However, in case of 
non-formal and short -term courses, the target could not be achieved as it depends on the 
growth of the industry and the market requirements, which got affected by economic 
slowdown in the recent past.   
 
 
IX. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
(i) Centre for Development and Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
 
 C-DAC is the premier R&D organisation of the Department for carrying out research 
and development in IT, Electronics and associated areas.  Taking into account the importance 
of C-DAC, the Committee have been consistently drawing the Department‟s attention towards 
the attrition of manpower in C -DAC. The Committee, in their Eleventh Report, had 
emphasized on the outcome of the issue of performance incentive which was being taken with 
the Ministry of Finance. The Department, in this regard, has stated that t he proposal for 
service conditions including various beneficial schemes, which may be applicable to all the 
Societies under administrative control of DIT including C-DAC, is under active consideration. 

16 
 
 
(ii) IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) 
 
 The total allocation for IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) programme, for the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan is `156 crore, whereas the BE for the entire plan period is  `55.94 crore as 
against the proposed amount of `85.03 crore. The actual expenditure under this scheme has 
been `41.46 crore as against the Revised Estimate of `43.67 crore. The Department has 
submitted that they are facing challenge s in capacity building of wom en and SC/ST such as 
Low enrollment rate/High drop -out rate, Connectivity issues, Naxalite problem, Project 
Sustainability after completion and scaling down of the project due to financial constraints. 
The Department has also informed that approximately 2.5 lakh women and 30,000 SC/ST are 
benefitted under this programme. Further, when asked about the methodology being used to 
select these beneficiaries the Department has submitted that, based on their interest they 
were randomly selected from 10 different States and once this pilot project is successful they 
would extrapolate it to the entire nation.  
 
X. New Technology 
 
 Cloud Computing 
 
 A perusal of the Budget document revealed that the Department has taken cognizance 
of the emerging concept of „Cloud computing‟ and it is learnt that „National e -Governance 
Division‟ (NeGD) is planning to implement the concept of „Shared Platform‟ (Cloud 
Computing) for quick implementation and rol l out of citizen centric „e -Governance‟ services. 
Hence, the Departments was asked about their initiative to study the suitability of „Cloud 
computing‟ for „e -Governance‟ applications. In response, they have stated that NeGD is not 
aware of any specific st udy undertaken to assess the suitability of „Cloud Computing‟ for the 
„e-Governance‟ project.  
 The Department has also informed that  almost all large IT organizations are investing 
heavily in R&D and development of tools, technology and software for „Clou d Computing'. 
Major Indian IT companies have Cloud Infrastructure to address the Indian market. Within 
the Government, NIC and CDAC have done exploratory work on the implementation of Cloud 
Computing and major institutes like IITs are also undertaking majo r academic exercises in 
R&D for Cloud Platform.  However, currently there are no legal framework in India to tackle 
the issues which could arise from the use of „Cloud Computing‟ technology.   The Department 
also added that the IT Act 2000 may need to be amended to take care of such issues. 
 
 Further, when asked about the security and sustainability of the concept of „Cloud 
computing‟, the Department has highlighted some issues like risk of scale on performance 
and availability; Technology risks and Manageme nt of Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 
Software as a Service (SaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) are likely to introduce 

17 
 
complexity in configuration and operation management. The Department has also expressed 
some apprehensions pertaining to the use  of „Cloud computing‟ viz. Vendor Lock -in, 
Standards and interoperability, Technology obsolescence and Security. Further, some of the 
legal challenges as projected by the Department are Contract and SLA Management; Exit 
options available to the organizatio n; data retention or transfer by the provider; Data 
security; Retention and recovery of data in case of disaster; and Intellectual Property issues. 
  

18 
 
PART – II  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
 Introductory 
 
1. The Information, Communication Technology and Electronics (ICTE), 
the world’s largest and fastest growing industry is increasingly finding 
applications in all sectors of the economy and is a key growth driver for the 
Indian economy. As a part of the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology, the Department of Information Technology (DIT) is responsible 
for formulation and implementation of national policies in the Information 
Technology sector. The domain of the Department includes all matters 
relating to silicon facility, computer based in formation technology and 
processing including hardware and software, standardisation of procedures 
and matters relating to international bodies, promotion of knowledge based 
enterprises, internet, e -commerce and information technology education and 
development of electronics and coordination amongst their various users are 
also addressed by the Department. In order to operationalise all the policies 
and objectives of the Department various Schemes are formulated and 
implemented either directly by the Depart ment or through the 
organizations/institutions under its jurisdiction. Myriad aspects of the 
policies/plan schemes and issues related to the allocation and utilisation of 
fund allocated to the Department have been dealt upon in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
II. Statement of the Minister under Direction 73A of the Directions by the 
Speaker 
 
2. The Seventh Report of the Committee, on ‘Demands for Grants      
(2010-11)’, was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 21 and 22 April, 2010 respectively. Under Direction 73A of the Directions 
by the Speaker, the Minister concerned sh all make once in six months a 
statement in the House regarding  the status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the Report of Departmentally Related Standing 
Committees with regard to his Ministry.  In the present case, the Minister has 
not made a statement although more than one year has passed since the  
report was presented to the House.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
the statement in this regard should be made expeditiously to the House in 
pursuance of the aforesaid Direction.    

19 
 
III.  DIT Budget 
(i) Eleventh Plan Outlay and Utilisation 
 
3. The data furnished by the Department indicates that out of the 
proposed allocation of `21835.89 crore, the budgetary support provided to 
the Department for the Eleventh Plan period  was for `12496 crore.  The 
allocations under Budget Estimate Stage during the five years of Plan Period 
have been made for `11370 crore which were reduced to `8018.40 crore at 
Revised Estimate stage.  The actual expenditure up to 31 March, 2011 i.e. 
during the first four years of Eleventh Plan is `7462.07 crore which comes to 
59.71 per cent of the total allocation of the Department for the Eleventh Plan.  
If the level of expenditure during the first four years of Eleventh Plan is 
compared to the total proposed alloca tion of the Department it comes to just 
34.17 per cent.   
 During the year 2010 -11, the allocation made at Budget Estimate stage 
was for `2660 crore which was enhanced to `3468.40 crore at RE stage.  The 
Department could spend only `3024.01 crore.  Thus , the underspending is to 
the tune of `444.39 crore.  While justifying the gaps between the proposed 
outlay and allocations approved, the Department has stated that such gaps 
are due to less allocation s for the schemes viz. National Knowledge Network 
(NKN), S kill Development in IT, Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware 
Manufacturing and e-Governance.  
 The Committee note that the Department itself is responsible for cut in 
allocation at RE stage during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan for 
various sche mes.  The allocations made at BE stage were not fully utilized 
resulting into cut at RE stage.  The Department itself has acknowledged that 
the Ministry of Finance decides the RE provision with reference to the 
expenditure met during first two quarters of the corresponding financial year.  
During the year 2010 -11 even when the allocations made available at BE 
stage were enhanced at RE stage, the Department do not seem to have spent 
the allocations fully resulting into under spending to the tune of `444.39 crore 
as stated above.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department 
need to gear up its machinery to implement the various programmes 
effectively with effective monitoring mechanism.    

20 
 
4. The Committee ha ve enumerated various reasons for the under  
spending during first three years of the Eleventh Plan which include non -
release of State share by the State Governments, obtaining approvals of the 
competent authority for NKN programme and non -receipt of utilization 
certificates from State/implementing agencies.  With regard to non-release of 
State share by  the State Governments under e -Governance programme, the 
Department need to take proactive action and coordinate with the State 
Governments.  In respect of obtaining approval of the competent authority for 
implementation of NKN Programme, again there seems to be procedural 
hurdles for which the Department itself is responsible. The issue of non -
receipt of utilization certificates from State implementing agencies is 
continuously being highlighted in the various reports of the Committee.  The 
Committee may like t o stress here that IT is an emerging sector and very 
important schemes are being visualized/implemented.  As such, there is an 
urgent need to address to the various bottlenecks being faced in 
implementation of various schemes.  The Committee recommend that  a 
review of all the schemes/projects should be taken well before finalization of 
priorities and objectives of the forthcoming Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee hope that zero based budgeting would be stringently followed 
which would help in making re alistic projections and ensuring proper 
utilization of funds. The concrete action on the suggested lines should be 
taken and the Committee informed accordingly.    
(ii) Position of IEBR of the societies/offices under the jurisdiction of DIT 
5. Apart from the Plan Outlay of `3000 crore, the Department has shown a 
sum of `619.07 crore as IEBR to be generated by the societies/offices under 
them through their R&D programmes/activities  during the year 2011-12. The 
Committee note that, barring the year 2008 -09 and 2009-10, the actual IEBR 
is found to be lesser than the approved. Hence, the Committee recommend 
the Department to stick to their targets of IEBR generation.  
 
IV. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates 
6. The Committee have consistently been exhorting the  Department to 
take concrete action to liquidate the pending Utilization Certificates/unspent 
balances with various States/implementing agencies.  As indicated in the 
Outcome Budget 2011 -12, total unspent balances with States/implementing 

21 
 
agencies as on 31  December, 2010 is `2534.87 crore and 1000 UCs are 
pending.  In respect of 569 UCs amounting to `1840.36 crore, are not due as 
these would become due as on 1 April, 2011 and 1 April, 2012.  Thus, 431 UCs 
amounting to  `694.51 crore are still pending with th e States/implementing 
agencies.  Now when 1 April, 2011 has already passed, the number of UCs due 
may have increased considerably.     
 Another issue consistently being raised by the Committee in  its various 
reports is the fact that some of the implementing agencies after taking one 
installment are neither furnishing UCs nor demanding the next installment.  
In this context, as informed by the Department, there were 72 such agencies 
during the year 201 0-11 and with the consistent efforts made by the 
Department in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, the said 
number has decreased to 35 UCs amounting to `32.92 crore.   In this 
connection, the Committee would also like to be informed as to how the issue 
of non -furnishing of UCs in res pect of the 37 defaulter agencies was 
addressed by the Department.   
7. The Committee note that although there is some progress with regard 
to furnishing of UCs, there is an urgent need to have structured mechanism 
whereby the implementing agencies furnish the UCs regularly.  Stringent 
guidelines should be formulated whereby the accountability for not furnishing 
the UCs is fixed.  The Committee in this regard had strongly recommended in 
their Seventh Report to recove r the money from such implementing agencies 
who after getting the first installment neither demand the next installment 
nor furnish the UCs.  When the recommendation was reiterated in the Action 
Taken Report, the Department do not seem to have implemented the 
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee.  While reiterating the stand of 
the Committee in this regard, the Department is again exhorted to take 
stringent action against the defaulter agencies and recover the money from 
these implementing agencies.  T he concrete action on the suggested line 
should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.   
V. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PROGRAMME (NeGP) 
 
8. The Committee observe that NeGP is one of the flagship programme of 
the Department for which substantial part o f the Plan allocation is being 
provided.  The analysis of the data furnished by the Department in the various 

22 
 
documents reveal that during the Eleventh Plan `4992 crore were provided.  
BE allocation for the 5 years is `4617.31 crore.  RE allocation during the said 
years is `2170.88 crore.  The actual expenditure met so far during the first 
four years of the Eleventh Plan is `1794.82 crore which comes to 35.95  per 
cent of the total budgetary allocation approved for the Eleventh Plan.  The 
under utilization of outlay is the persistent problem with the Department and 
the Committee in various reports have  been highlighting the issue.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that instead of analyzing the reasons for 
under spending under one of the important schemes, the Department has 
tried to shift the responsibility to the State Governments.  One of the reasons 
for low level of utilization of outlay under NeGP as stated by the Department 
is non-release of State share by State Governments.  In this connection, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the name of the States who have 
not released their share.   
9. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed 
that Southern States are very pragmatic and proactive in implementation of 
NeGP.  In case of Uttar Pradesh, the representative particularly mentioned 
that the State is not pragmatic and the implementation is very slow.  Here the 
Committee may like to emphasize that besides appreciating the proactive 
approach of Southern States, there is an  urgent need of motivating the poor 
performing States like UP and Bihar which are one of the BIMARU status 
States.  The Union Department need to take up the matter at the level of Chief 
Secretary of the States. Besides, there is an urgent need to replicate  the best 
practices initiated by the States where the implementation of NeGP is really 
good.  The Department should analyse the implementation of various 
components of NeGP State/UT wise and take the desired initiatives in this 
regard.  The Committee shoul d also be informed about the name of the best 
performing and the poor performing States with regard to NeGP.  The 
concrete initiative s as suggested should be taken and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
10. The Committee have consistently been expressing concern over the 
shifting of deadlines of various components of NeGP viz. SWAN, CSCs, SDCs 
and MMPs.  The latest information furnished by the Depa rtment indicates that 
in 26  States/UTs SWAN has been rolled out.  After continuous change of 
timelines, the la test deadline is to set up SWAN in all States/UTs by 

23 
 
December, 2011.  Coming to Common Service Centres (CSCs) , out of the 
target of 1 lakh CSCs as on 31 March, 2011, 93163 CSCs have been rolled out 
that too after shifting the deadline repetitively.  In respect of State Data 
Centres (SDCs) the deadline has again repetitively been deferred.  Till          
31 March, 2011 only 11 SDCs could be made operational.  Under e -District 
(MMPs) as per the projected timeline, the implementation of e -District in 14 
States was to be completed by March, 2011.  However, only in 2 States, the 
project could be sanctioned and implementation has been initiated.  With 
regard to e -Bharat with pursuance of the issue by the Committee in their 
reports, a loan of US $ 150 mill ion has been agreed to by the World Bank 
during the negotiations with a maturity period of 18 years including a 5 years 
grace period.  The Committee strongly emphasize that e -Governance is an 
important programme which is expected to change the entire conce pt and 
governance of the country.  Keeping in view the importance of the programme 
there is an urgent need to address the various hindrances encountered in 
implementation of the programme so that various components of NeGP are 
rolled out expeditiously.  In  this connection, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that the implementation of various components of NeGP should be 
reviewed individually and all the corrective action should be taken after 
identifying the grey areas in the implementation of the programme.    
11. The Committee observe that the Government has approved the Common 
Service Centres (CSCs) Scheme which provide support for establishing one 
lakh Common Service Centres in six lakh villages of India.  The Scheme 
envisions CSCs as the front -end delivery points for Government, pri vate and 
social sector services to rural citizens of India in an integrated manner.  
Besides, CSCs would be suitably repositioned to be a network of Panchayat 
level Common Service Centres to provide Government services to the citizens 
in rural areas.  CSCs  are to be leveraged for various services under Bharat 
Nirman and flagship Schemes like NREGA, NRHM and SSA.   
  
 As stated above, after repetitive shifting of deadline, out of the target of 
establishing one lakh CSCs, so far 93163 CSCs could be rolled out .  What is 
disturbing to the Committee is that out of 93163 CSCs set up, 85287 CSCs 
could be made functional as on February, 2011.  As per the information 
furnished by the Department not only that only 68 per cent of the CSCs have 
internet availability as revealed by an independent evaluation of CSCs done by 

24 
 
M/s IMRB International in November 2009.  The study also reveal that only 
58 per cent of CSCs were found to be fully operational  out of a sample size of 
1727. Non-availability of the G2C services and a reliable broadband 
connectivity besides regular supply of electric power are considered as some 
of the main challenges/problems affecting the CSCs Scheme by the aforesaid 
survey.  The Department’s own data in respect of only 20 States/UTs, as 
furnished to the Committee, further indicates that there is no uniformity in 
the number of services provided by CSCs.   
 
 The Committee understand that besides roll out of the CSCs it is utmost 
important that the CSCs are made functional.  Various services can be 
provided to the users only when CSCs have the proper internet connectivity.  
Regular power supply is another issue which need to be addressed to make 
the CSCs fully functional.  In this connection , the possibility of using non -
conventional energy source can be explored. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should formulate some sort of mechanism to 
get the regular feedback from the State Governments about the functioning of 
CSCs.  Periodic information with regard to internet availability, service  
rendered through CSCs and the actual users of CSCs should be obtained from 
the various States/UTs.  Besides, all the initiatives should be taken so that 
the real objective of setting up of CSCs that is, as the front -end delivery 
points for Government, pri vate and social sector services to rural citizens of 
India in an integrated manner is really achieved.  The Committee also feel 
that the Department should formulate guidelines with regard to number of 
services to be provided by CSCs so that some sort of un iformity can be 
maintained.  
 
12. The Department has informed that impact assessment of e -Governance 
project both at State as well as national level is undertaken.  The Department 
in the written replies has furnished a comparative chart of States having 
impact of various services made available through e -Governance. The 
important parameter of its impact has been given as ‘percentage users paying 
bribes’.  It has been shown that the bribe has declined from average of 39 per 
cent to 23 per cent under Land Rec ords (issue of RoR, mutation).  Under 
Property Registration, it has been mentioned that 23 per cent of all 
transactions in 11 States reported payment of bribe.  Under Transport it has 
been mentioned that only 1 State reported significant impact on bribe.  In the 
Commercial Taxes, it has been mentioned that the bribe has significantly been 

25 
 
lesser. Not only that the aforesaid data indicate s that there has been 
considerable reduction in the average number of trips for availing services, 
average waiting time an d total elapsed time in availing services.  The 
aforesaid findings clearly indicates the usefulness of National e -Governance 
Programme for the masses.  More so, recent series of scams reported under 
different fields further highlight the importance of Nati onal e -Governance 
Programme which would make the various services of Government more 
transparent and accountable.  As such there is an urgent need to make the 
various components of e -Governance Programme functional by addressing 
the various issues as indicated above.    
VI. INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
(i) National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
13. The total budgetary support for the Eleventh Plan to NIC is for `2300 
crore.  However, during the 5 years of Eleventh Plan the projections were 
made by NIC to the tune of `3432 crore against which allocations at BE stage 
were made to the tune of `2724 crore.  The RE allocation during each year of 
the Eleventh Plan barring the year 2007 -08 is same as proposed at BE stage . 
As regards the expenditure position, the outlay earma rked at RE stage has 
almost been fully utilized by NIC.  The Committee here would like to strongly 
recommend that adequate allocation  as projected by NIC should be provided 
in view of the importance of the mandate given to NIC particularly in light of 
the spectrum of activities it has been carrying out.   
 
14. The Committee during the course of deliberations have been apprised 
that manpower in NIC has been a big constraint. As informed by the 
Department, NIC has only two persons per district and only 15-20 persons per 
State.  It has been suggested that the existing strength of two persons per 
district should be doubled.  Besides, the Committee have also been informed 
that the re is no support mechanism at block level where majority of social 
sector schemes are being implemented.  States are asking NIC to set up 
Centres at blocks to provide technical support and build the capacities of staff 
at grass root level so that services can be provided up to Gram Panchayat and 
Village Level.  The Committee have also been apprised that NIC manpower 
was sanctioned during 1980s as per the IT requirement of the States/UTs at 
that time and it has become too difficult to sustain the number of s chemes 
with the same manpower now.   

26 
 
 
 The Committee totally appreciate the concerns of NIC and particularly in 
the context of the important role NIC is playing in providing support 
mechanism at District, Block and Village Panchayat level.  The Committee 
emphasize that the gaps between the required and the existing strength at 
various levels should be worked out in consultation with the Department of 
Information Technology and placed before D epartment of Personnel and 
Training and Ministry of Finance for ge tting the requisite approvals.  The 
concerns of the Committee in this regard may be communicated to the 
Ministries/Organizations who would be clearing their proposals.   
 
(ii) National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 
15. The NKN project was approved in 2010 with an outlay of `5990 crore for 
10 years. Till March, 2011, `1912 crore have been allocated and  `1242 crore 
have been spent by the Department. The Committee learn that during Plan 
discussion for the year 2011 -12, the  Department had made a request for 
allocation of `2300 crore, however, only a sum of `250 crore has been 
allocated at BE stage. Further, the Committee are concerned to note that this 
allocation is inadequate to meet the projected physical targets set for 
Financial Year 2011-12. The analysis of the data furnished by the Department 
further indicate s that during the y ear 2010 -11 also the allocation  of `100 
crore only was made against the proposed allocation  of `2318 crore.  
However, the allocation was enhanced  at RE stage to `1362 crore and the 
entire amount was spent.  The Department during the year 2011 -12 is also 
optimistic that the desired allocation would be provided at supplementary 
grant stage. 
 The Committee find that the National Knowledge Network is a backbone 
for e-Governance.  Under the programme 1500 premier institutes would get 
cover across multiple sectors and would include 400  universities.  The 
Committee disapprove the adhocism  of the Government with regard to 
providing allocations for such an important programme.  As such, the 
Committee strongly recommend to provide the allocations for NKN at the BE 
stage, so as to avoid uncertainty about the allocations of outlay at 
supplementary grant stage/RE stage.  Besides, the Committee also emphasize 
that during the current year i.e. 2011 -12 the desired allocations should be 
made available at the supplementary grant stage so that the programme do 

27 
 
not suffer due to want of resources. However, during the year 2012 -13 the 
adequate allocations should be allocated at BE stage itself.   
(iii) Software Technology Park of India (STPI)/Electronics Hardware 
 Technology Parks (EHTP)   
16. The Committee have repetitively been recommending to further e xtend 
the tax holiday made available to STPI units. Inspite of Department of 
Information Technology taking the issue of providing the physical benefit to 
the IT units under STPI scheme at par with the units under the SEZ scheme 
with the Ministry of Finance, the tax holiday has been withdrawn from 1 April, 
2011.  The Department has acknowledged the adverse impact on ending tax 
holiday available to STPI units.  Not only that, the Department has stated that 
an increase in Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) would adversely affect small and 
medium size players.  With regard to the strategy of the Department to tackle 
the situation, the Committee have been informed that a non -profit link 
incentive scheme for STPI registered units is being prepared.  Besides, the 
present induction programme of STPI units would be further strengthened for 
business incubation and entrepreneurial development for start up units.  
Besides, STPI is working with DIT for establishment of a National Productivity 
Network.  The Committee understand t hat all these initiatives are in the right 
direction and need to be continued.   
 
17. The Committee further observe that STPI was established on 5 June, 
1991 for promotion of exports and providing facility to Indian small and 
medium organizations for parti cipation in export promotion events in the 
software and electronic sector.  Today, the exports by STPI registered units 
are more than 90 per cent of the total software exports from the country from 
a meagre less than 8 per cent when it started in 1991.  ST PI has been set up 
in 52 centres spread across the country out of which 45 centres are in Tier -II 
and Tier -III locations.  During the year 2010 -11 for the period April to 
December for which the data has been made available by the Department, the 
declining impact on exports seems to be more visible.  Against the export of 
`205505 crore during the year 2009-10, the export performance is reduced to 
`144157 crore, during the year 2010-11.  More adverse impact seems to be on 
new STPI units registration.  The number of registration  were 521 during 
2009-10 which declined to just 253 during the year 2010 -11 up to December.  
Now when the tax holiday has been withdrawn w.e.f. 1 April, 2011 and MAT 

28 
 
has been increased the decline in performance of STPI units may furt her be 
more visible.  The Committee as such strongly recommend the Department to 
keep a vigilant watch on the performance of STPI units.  All the proposed 
initiatives visualize d by the Department to fill the gap should be taken 
expeditiously.     
 
(iv) Promotion of Electronics/IT hardware manufacturing 
 
 18. The Committee note with concern that, though Information 
Communication Technology and Electronics (ICTE) is increasingly finding 
applications in all sectors of the economy, yet Indian electronics hardwa re 
production hovers around 1.3 per cent of global electronics production. It is 
also disturbing to learn that the demand of electronics hardware in the 
country during 2009 -10 was `2,18,031 crore, out of which  `1,10,720 crore 
worth of demand was met by indigenous production and  `1,07,311 crore was 
met by imports.  The analysis of the budgetary allocations made for the sector 
indicates that allocation of `1100 crore was made for the promotion of 
electronics/IT hardware manufacturing during Eleventh Plan.  Against the 
allocation of `1100 crore, the expenditure met so far is just `2.66 crore.  As 
per the Department, the allocations were made particularly for improving the 
capital subsidy requirement under Special Incentive Package Scheme (SIP S), 
and due to gl obal economic slow down many of the potential investors 
deferred their investment decisions. The Committee also note that it is due to  
very high capital intensive  nature of the project and  closely-held technology, 
no company has come forward to set up a ‘fab’ in India.  
 The Committee have repetitively been emphasizing to have the concrete 
strategy for promotion of electronics and IT hardware manufacturing sector.  
Inspite of the fact that more than 50 per cent of our hardware requirement 
are dependent upo n imports, nothing concrete was done in this regard.  Not 
only that, the decisions on as many as 198 recommendations made by the 
Task Force were being delayed particularly when report was submitted on    
11 December, 2009.  The Committee have been apprised  during deliberations 
that at last some action is being taken on 5 high priority areas viz.  fab, 
modified chips, preferential market access to domestically produced goods, 
research and development and setting up of National Electronics Mission.  The 
Secretary of the Department during the course of deliberations , held on 20 
April, 2011 , informed that the proposal to set up an empowered group is 

29 
 
going before the Cabinet that day i.e. on 20 April, 2011.  The Committee hope 
that the aforesaid proposal would hav e been cleared by now and the 
empowered group would be constituted expeditiously followed by concrete 
initiatives on the desired lines at last in respect of five identified high priority 
areas. Keeping in view the fact that importing chips and electronic 
equipments pose security threat, the Committee emphasize to take all the 
desired initiatives to attain the level of self -sufficiency in respect of 
electronics and IT hardware equipments.    
(v) Cyber Security (including CERT-In, IT Act, CCA)  
19. The Committee  have been informed that a total of 106, 201 and 315 
Government websites were hacked during the year s 2008, 2009 and 2010 
respectively and these attacks were directed from the countries like USA, UK, 
Mexico, Spain, Brazil, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan,  China, Lebanon, Peru, Morocco, 
Japan, Korea, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Nigeria etc. Further, w ith regard to the 
cyber crime cases registered, the Committee have been provided information, 
analysing which it is found that in States like Haryana, Bihar, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands,  D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and 
Puducherry, there are no cyber crimes registered.  The analysis of the data 
further reveal that in Karnataka that too o nly in Bangaluru highest number of 
cases of hacking during 2009 w ere registered.  The Committee have further 
noted that the Department of National Crime Records Bureau is not 
maintaining data regarding disposal status of the registered cyber crime 
cases.  The data State/UT wise with regard to hacking in the country during 
the year 2009 as provided by the Department do not seem to be realistic.  The 
Committee feel that either the attacks on the sites are not being reported or 
the system with regard to reporting of the cases is not user friendly.  There is 
an urgent need to make the people aware of the system of reporting of cyber 
attacks.  Besides, equally important is to maintain the data with regard to 
disposal status of the registered cyber crime cases.  T he Department should 
take the desired initiatives and the Committee apprised accordingly.   
20. With regard to e -fraud cases, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) has reported online banking fraud worth `590.49 lakh in 
the year 2009 a nd Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has registered 6 
cyber crime cases in which frauds have been committed causing financial loss 

30 
 
of `2,70,650 to the Government/private persons.  The Committee note that     
e-fraud is an emerging field and with more an d more private persons and 
Government Departments making online transactions the scenario of              
e-fraud would become more challenging.  The Committee’s examination has 
revealed that at present there is no mechanism to ensure against financial 
loss through e-fraud.  The Committee would like the Department to study the 
e-fraud scenario internationally.  The data of e -fraud should be collected and 
furnished to the Committee.  Besides, the mechanism to deal with e -fraud in 
other countries should also be analyzed.  The Department should find out the 
insurance mechanism against e -fraud in other countries so that some 
mechanism in our country can be evolved.   
21. The Committee note that CERT-In has empanelled 51 IT auditors in the 
country through a stringent testing mechanism . The Committee further note 
that the Department has mandated for all critical sectors/ organizations to 
implement Information Security b est practices as per ISO 27001 and has 
advised to audit the system atleast once in  a year.  In this regard, t he 
Committee would like to know whether these  best security practices  are 
being implemented and are sufficient enough to check cyber threat s in all 
critical sectors.   The Committee would also like to be apprised about the 
adequacy of 51 auditors in such a large country. Further, with regard to the 
practical constraint and lacuna witnessed in the IT Act and about the sections 
which attracts most of the cases, the Department has stated that The IT Act is 
technology intensive and app lication motivated legislation and w ith the 
changing technologies they are facing several challenges such as collection of 
digital evidence, attribution of attacks to particular systems, anonymous and 
borderless nature of cyber space etc. To meet these cha llenges the 
Department is providing training on Cyber Security, Best Practices, Cyber 
Forensics to people at different levels, i.e. general public, law enforcement 
agencies and judicial officers. In this context, the Committee feel that besides 
emphasis on  training to law enforcement agencies and judicial officers, 
attention need to be provided to other categories of officers too.  There is an 
urgent need to increase the training infrastructure and the number of trainers 
in the country so that sufficient aw areness about cyber security is generated 
which would be definitely helpful in preventing the cyber attacks on our 
websites.    
 

31 
 
VII. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(i) Man power development (incl. Skill development in IT) 
 
22. The Committee find that the Department has proposed a new Scheme 
called Skill Development in IT for the year 2010 -11. The National Skill 
Development Policy has set a target of providing skill development in IT to 
500 million persons by 2022. In this regard , DIT has been given a target of 
skill development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT.  
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous year, 
the Committee had been informed that the Department has initiated action t o 
work out detailed project report covering various implementation aspects, 
inputs required to seek an approval of the competent authority.  Since the 
preliminary exercise of approval of the scheme was going on, during the year 
2010-11, a token provision o f ` 1 crore was made for the aforesaid 
programme.  The Committee find from the information furnished by the 
Department that after passage of one year there is not much progress.  The 
Scheme has not been formally launched and again in the year 2011 -12, a 
token provision of ` 1 crore has been made available for the scheme.  As 
regard the status of the scheme, the draft detailed project reports along with 
draft EFC Note has been circulated to the Ministries/Departments concerned 
for their comments.  After obtaining the recommendation of EFC, the proposal 
would be submitted to the Cabinet for obtaining approval for implementation 
of the programme. The Committee express serious concern over the tardy 
progress of getting approval for such an important scheme.  The  Committee 
fail to understand how the allocation of `460 crore during the year 2010 -11 
and of `717.75 crore for the year 2011 -12 was proposed by the Department 
even when the scheme is in the process of formulation.  More over the 
Committee wonder how the D epartment would meet the target of Skill 
Development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT with the 
aforesaid status of the scheme.  The Committee strongly recommend that all 
the consultations should be completed and the process of approval o f the 
scheme expedited so that the scheme is implemented during the year     
2011-12.  The required allocations when the approvals are in place may be 
provided at the RE stage/Supplementary Grant stage.  The Committee further 
observe that capacity building of SC/ST and women so as to enable them to 
compete in this competitive environment is the biggest challenge.  In view of 
this, the  Committee would like to emphasize that while finalizing the 

32 
 
modalities of the programme it should be ensured that SC/ST and w omen are 
adequately benefitted by the programme. 
 
(ii) Department of Electronics Accreditation for Computer Courses 
 (DOEACC) 
 
23. The Committee are perturbed to note that inspite of receiving the 
proposed allocation and utilizing the entire amount, DOEACC society has 
fallen short in all the targets for the year 2010-11 except for the formal sector 
long term courses. The Committee have b een informed that the targets in 
case of non -formal and short -term courses could not be achieved as it 
depends on the growth of the industry and the market requirements.   While 
appreciating the aforesaid reason which may have resulted in under -
achievement of the physical target, the Committee fail to understand the 
mismatch between the financial and physical achievements. The Committee 
would like the Department to furnish the reasons for the aforesaid mismatch.  
Besides, when the economy now is coming out o f the recent slow down, the 
Committee hope that more and more students and trainees may be benefited 
by the DOEACC programme.  Moreover, the Committee understand that 
DOEACC is playing an important role in implementation of one of the 
important programmes of the Department i.e. Skill Development of 10 million 
persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT.  The Committee recommend that all 
the initiatives should be taken by DOEACC for the successful implementation 
of the aforesaid programme so that the targets set u nder the programme are 
fully achieved. The Committee would also like to recommend the Department 
to ensure that SC/ST and women are adequately benefitted by DOEACC 
courses which would definitely help them to compete in the highly 
competitive job market. 
 
VIII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
(i) Centre for Development and Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
24. C-DAC, a premier R& D organisation in IT, Electronics and associated 
areas, has been witnessing attrition of manpower for the past few years. The 
Committee while examining DFG (2009 -10) had learnt that the issue of 
performance incentive was taken up by the Department with the  Ministry of 
Finance to check the attrition rate. However, when asked about the progress 
made in Performance Incentive Issue, the Committee learnt that the proposal 

33 
 
for service conditions including various beneficial schemes, which may be 
applicable to all the Societies under administrative control of DIT including C -
DAC, is under active consideration. The Committee exhort DIT to pursue the 
issue with the Ministry of Finance and take the decision expeditiously.  
 
 
 
(ii) IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) 
 
25. The Committee note that `156 crore were allocated for the entire 
Eleventh Five Year Plan under one of the important scheme of the Department 
i.e. IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST) meant for the capacity building of women 
and SC/ST through infrastructure develo pment, training of target groups in 
different States/UTs.  From the data made available by the Department, the 
Committee note that during first four years of Eleventh Plan only ` 41.46 
crore could be spent which is only 26.57 per cent of the entire allocat ion of 
the scheme.  As regards the physical target, the Committee have been 
informed that 2.5 lakh women and 30 thousand SCs/STs are being benefited 
under the programme.  The Committee during the course of deliberations 
have further been informed that the scheme was being implemented on a 
pilot basis in 10 different States selected randomly where the States h ave 
shown interest. The Committee note that the scheme has been launched with 
the laudable objectives.  However, the implementation of the programme is  
very slow.  The beneficiaries under the Scheme that is 2.5 lakh women and 30 
thousand SCs/STs is too low keeping in view the large number of SCs/STs 
and women in the country.  Not only that during the first four years of the 
plan, the scheme has been impl emented only on pilot basis with very low 
utilization of outlay.  The Committee strongly emphasize to extend the 
scheme throughout the country.  Besides, more stress should be given to the 
backward States. 
 
 The Committee would like to emphasize that besid es the aforesaid 
programme IT for masses (Gender, SC/ST ), there is a need for a focused 
attention in other Schemes of the Department too, which include Centre for 
Development and Advanced Computing (C -DAC), Department of Electronics 
Accreditation for Computer Courses (DOEACC ), National Knowledge Network 
(NKN), National Informatics Centre (NIC) , Promotion of Electronics/IT 
Hardware Manufacturing (M. Fab), Cyber Security (inc luding CERT-In, IT Act, 
CCA), Manpower Development (incl. Skill Development in IT ) and National     

34 
 
e-Governance Programme (NeGP) so as to provide adequate benefit to SC/ST 
and women.  
 
26. The Committee further note that the Department has enumerated 
various challenges faced in implementation of the aforesaid scheme which 
include Low enrollment rate/High drop-out rate, Connectivity issues, Naxalite 
problem, Project Sustainability after compl etion and scaling down of the 
project due to financial constraints . The Committee fail to understand the 
need of the Department to scale down the project even when they could not 
utilize the allocation provided during various years.  During the year 2007 -08 
RE allocation was made for `17 crore which could not be fully ut ilised. 
Although during the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 the allocations made 
available at RE stage were fully utilized, during the year 2010 -11, the 
allocation made for `14 crore was reduced at RE stage to  `10.67 crore and 
actual expenditure as reported is j ust `2.77 crore.  More so for the Eleventh 
Plan `156 crore allocation was approved and only a fraction of the allocation 
could be utilised during the first five years as explained above. The 
Committee desire the Department to apprise the Committee on the r easons 
for scaling down the project due to financial constraints  in the aforesaid 
scheme.  On the issue of low enrollment rate/high drop out rate, the 
Department need to take up the issue with HRD Ministry/State Governments 
to address the problem.  On proj ect sustainability after completion, the 
Committee feel that the Department need to coordinate with the local bodies 
i.e. Panchayats/Municipalities.  On connectivity issues, the Department need 
to take up the issue with BSNL.  The Committee emphasize the D epartment to 
take all the desired initiatives to address the various challenges in 
consultation with the State Governments and the other related agencies so 
that more women and SCs/STs masses are benefited by the programme.   
 
     
 
IX.  Emerging Issues 
 Cloud Computing 
 
27. The Committee note that  ‘Cloud Computing’ is an emerging concept and 
National e-Governance Division (NeGD) is planning to implement this concept 
of ‘shared Platform’ for roll out of citize n centric e-Governance Services.  The 
Committee note that the Department has not conducted any study to assess 
the suitability of the concept of ‘Cloud computing’ although they are  planning 
to implement it to one of the most important project of DIT that is National e-

35 
 
Governance P rogramme. The Department themselves, in the written note, 
have highlighted some of the technological and legal apprehensions 
associated with the  concept of ‘shared platform’. The apprehensions are 
Technology obsolescence; Security  issues; Contract and SLA Managemen t; 
Vendor Lock -in; Data security;  Retention and recovery of data in case of 
disaster; Exit options available to the or ganization; data retention or transfer 
by the provider; and Intellectual property issues.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that all the ap prehensions expressed above should be addressed 
before the concept of ‘Cloud computing’ is implemented for roll out of citize n 
centric e -Governance Services. The Committee also recommend the 
Department to conduct a study/survey to find out the existing sce nario 
nationally and internationally. The findings of the study should be furnished 
to the Committee. Besides, the Department should also be prepared with a 
mechanism to deal with the risks associated with the usage of Cloud 
computing and be vigilant about such emerging technologies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi               Chairman 
22 July, 2011                                                  Standing Committee on 
31 Sravana, 1933 (Saka)                     Information Technology      

36 
 
Appendix III 
Budget allocation of the Department for different Schemes under Plan and 
Non-Plan 
                                         (` in crore) 
    
 Plan Non-Plan Total 
Revenue 2822.60 48.61 2871.21 
Capital 177.40 -- 3048.61 
 

37 
 
Appendix IV 
 
 
The proposed and allocated outlays for NKN, Skill Development in IT, 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing and e-Governance 
during the year 2011-12 
 
(` in crore) 
Schemes Proposed Allocated 
NKN 2300.00 250.00 
Skill Development in IT 717.75 0 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing 1455.00 2.83 
e-Governance 2043.84 1087.31 
 

38 
 
 Appendix- V 
Status of CSCs functional in various States/UTs 
Sl. 
No. 
State Total CSCs 
to be set up 
CSCs actually 
functional as 
of Feb 2011 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5452 2122 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 200 112 
3 Assam 4376 3875 
4 Bihar 8463 6989 
5 Chhattisgarh 3385 2464 
6 Chandigarh 13 13 
7 Delhi 520 520 
8 Goa 160 160 
9 Gujarat  13695 13695 
10 Haryana 1159 0 
11 Himachal Pradesh 3366 2592 
12 Jammu & Kashmir 1109 539 
13 Jharkhand 4562 4556 
14 Karnataka 5713 800 
15 Kerala 2694 2694 
16 Madhya Pradesh 9232 8656 
17 Maharashtra 10484 7907 
18 Manipur 399 399 
19 Meghalaya 225 184 
20 Mizoram 136 118 
21 Nagaland 220 156 
22 Orissa 8558 6044 
23 Puducherry 44 44 
24 Punjab 2112 38 
25 Rajasthan 6626 2911 
26 Sikkim 45 45 
27 Tamil Nadu 5440 1976 
28 Tripura 145 145 
29 Uttar Pradesh 17909 7851 
30 Uttaranchal 2804 1564 
31 West Bengal 6797 6118 
  Total 126043 85287 
 
  

39 
 
Appendix-VI 
 
A comparative charts of states for Land Records, Property Registration, 
Transport, and Commercial Taxes & JNNURM 
 
 Land Records Property 
Registration 
Transport Commercial 
Taxes 
JnNURM 
Issue of 
RoR 
Mutation 
Average No. 
of trips 
Reduced 
from 2.8 to 2 
Reduced 
from 4 to 2.8 
Reduced 
from 3.9 to 
2.3 
Reduced by 
1 
- Reduced 
to 0 from 1 
for obtaining 
forms, 
obtaining 
information 
and paying 
taxes 
- No 
significant 
impact for 
filing returns 
- Marginal 
reduction across 
all ULBs for 
services such as 
Utility Bill 
payment and 
Renewal of 
Trader’s license 
- Increased for 
Issue of a new 
Trade license* 
Avg Waiting 
time 
(minutes) 
Reduced 
from 142.28 
min to 98.54 
min 
Reduced 
from 3 hours 
to 2 hours 
Reduced 
from 2 hours 
to 1 hour 
Reduced 
from 2 hours 
to 1.5 hours 
Reduced to 
0 from 30-
60 minutes 
- Utility Bill 
Payments: 
Reduced by 15-
50% for 
- Filing 
grievances online: 
zero 
- Tracking of 
complaints: easier 
- Birth Certificate:  
Increased 
- Issue and 
Renewal of Trade 
license: marginal 
% users 
paying 
bribes 
Declined 
from avg of 
39% to 23% 
Agents used 
in large 
proportion in 
4 states. 
Significantly 
reduced in  
others 
23% of all 
transactions 
in 11 states 
reported 
payment of 
bribes 
Only 1 state 
reported 
significant 
impact on 
bribes 
- 
Significantly 
lowered 
bribery for 
getting 
statutory 
forms 
- Marginal 
impact in 
filing returns 
Significant 
reduction except 
in the issue of 
Trade license in 
BMC and KMC 
and in Renewal of 
Trade license in 
GHMC 
Total 
elapsed time 
in availing 
service 
(Days) 
Almost 
immediate 
delivery 
except in 
Orissa & 
WB 
Reduced 
from 80-110 
days to 30-
60 days 
Reduced 
from avg of 
33 days to 
13 days 
(60% 
reduction) 
Marginal 
impact 
Impact 
varies 
widely 
between 
states and 
services. % 
reduction 
varies from 
17 percent 
in Gujarat to 
36 percent 
in Rajasthan 
and Tamil 
Nadu 
- Overall, the 
average elapsed 
time has 
increased after 
computerization 
for most services 
across all ULBs 
- One day 
reduction in Birth 
Certificate in BMC 
and a significant 
reduction in 
Renewal of Trade 
licenses 
* Due to an additional trip to the State Industries Commission office needed to procure the “Type of 
Business Certificate” 

40 
 
 Appendix-VII 
G2C Services provided by CSCs in the States/UTs 
State G2C Services in Brief  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 Information services of Agriculture & Cooperation Department 
 Utility services (Electricity, BSNL bill payment), Online Form Filing, Form submission, Certificates 
 Land Record Services 
Assam  CSCs as stamp vendor for selling of non-judicial Stamp and Stamp paper 
 Certificates, Pension, Grievances, Jamabandi, Utility services (Electricity bill payment)  
Bihar  RTI service, Birth Death, Caste, Income and residential certificates , NREGA Services, Public 
Grievance Redressal System  
Gujarat  Land Records, Utility services (Electricity bill payment), Birth Certificate, Death Certificate, 
Government Department forms, NREGA MIS Data Entry Service,  School Health Data Entry 
Haryana  Nakal of Land Records, Caste, Domicile Certificates, Social Welfare Schemes, India Gandhi Vivah 
Shagun Yojna (IGPVSY), Ration cards 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
 Agricultural Advisory services, e-Samadhan, Application for elector registration,  
 Various application forms (elector registrations, Himachal Pradesh Public Service Commission, forms 
for Forest, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Horticulture and Fisheries etc)  
J & K  Financial Inclusion (Banking Correspondents) 
Jharkhand  Issue of certificates through CSCs (E -nagarik sewa), Grievance redressal on E -samvaad, E -filing of 
Commercial Tax through CSCs,  
 NREGA MIS Data Entry Service, Digitization of national 18th cattle survey data, Jail Saksha tkaar,  postal 
products, stamp vendor, PDS data entry, CSCs as BC for SBI, Kendu leaf collector data digitization,  BPL 
data digitization,  
 Divisional survey of hand pumps. 
Kerala  Utility services (Electricity, BSNL, water bill payment) 
 Agricultural services 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
 MP Online Services, Financial Inclusion (Banking Correspondents) 
Maharashtra  Land Records,  
 Utility services (Electricity bill payment, Water connection), Certificates (Birth, Death, Caste, 
Domicile, Non-creamy layer, Marriage, Senior Citizen, student’s income etc)  
 Disbursal of social sector scheme benefits (Financial help to freedom fighters, I ndira Gandhi Awas 
Yojna, Janmachi Mryutyuchi, National Old Age Pension Scheme, Poor Family Finance Scheme, Sanjay 
Gandhi Yojna),  
 Stone crusher license, Stone Mine License. 
Mizoram  e-District Services 
Orissa  Birth and Death certificates, property tax, Utility services (Electricity and BSNL), trade license  
Rajasthan  Utility services (Electricity/ Water/ Telephone bill payment), Land Records, Stamp Vending, Sale of 
Rajasthan State Transport Roadways Corporation tickets  
Sikkim  MNREGA Data Entry Job, Biometric Ration Card Preparation 
Tamilnadu  Electoral services, Transport, Grievances 
Tripura  MNREGA Data Entry Job, Biometric Ration Card Preparation 
Uttar Pradesh  e-District services, Lokvani services , NREGA digitization work, Print outs of unsigned Land Records 
Uttarakhand  Services available at www.indg.in (India Development Gateway) through CSCs 
 Income, Caste, Haisiyat, Domicile & Character Certificate through Janadhar Services (State initiative)  
West Bengal  Registration, Employment Exchange, Awareness campaign, Utility services (Electricity, BSNL 
payment), Postal services, Agricultural Services. 

41 
 
     Appendix-VIII (A)  
 
Total outlay for National Knowledge Network (NKN), for 10 year period is      
`5990 crore and the year-wise requirement is as follows: 
 
 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
FY 2009-
2010 
2010-
2011 
2011-
2012 
2012-
2013 
2013-
2014 
2014-
2015 
2015-
2016 
2016-
2017 
2017-
2018 
2018-
2019 
` in 
crore 
240 1700 2300 768 169 157 157 167 166 166 
 
 
 
 
Appendix-VIII (B) 
 
The year -wise allocation and utilisation pattern for National Knowledge 
Network (NKN) is as under: 
                                                                                       (` in crore) 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
 
2011-12 
Proposed - - 100 2318 2300 
BE - 100 600 100 250 
RE - 60 240 1362  
Actual 
Expenditure 
- 60 240 1362  
 
 
  

42 
 
Appendix X 
Targets and Achievement during the year 2010-11 (Upto 31.12.2010) 
 
Activities/Targets 
 
Achievements 
 No. of students 
(Trained / 
Undergoing training) 
 
DOEACC Scheme 
 
 
O/A/B & C Levels (Non-formal Sector of IT Education & Training) Half Yearly 
Examinations. 
 
Target: 20,000 students to be trained 
 
5,823 
(July‟ 10 Exam 
qualifiers) 
 
DOEACC Centres 
 
 
To Conduct Training for formal sector Long Term Courses (M. Tech, MCA, BCA, 
PGDCA, Diploma, Diploma in Electronics Engg. & Computer Science etc.) 
 
Target: 1,700 students to be trained 
 
1,748 
 
To conduct training for non-formal Sector Long Term Courses O/A/B Level 
Course, Bio-informatics  
O/A Level Courses, Hardware Courses O/A Level 
 
Target: 13,500 students to be trained 
 
3,876 
 
Training for Short Term Courses of duration less than 1 year 
 
Target: 11,500 students to be trained 
7,405 
 
  
 
 
  

43 
 
Appendix-XI 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 20 th April, 2011 from 1500 hours to 
1710 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Inder Singh Namdhari - In the Chair 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
4. Dr. Charles Dias 
5. Shri Rajen Gohain 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
8. Shri Abdul Rahman 
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Dr. Bhola Singh 
11. Shri Dhananjay Singh 
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
13. Shri C. Sivasami 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
14. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
15. Shri Salim Ansari 
16. Shri Prabhat Jha 
17. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
18. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
19. Shri P. Rajeeve 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj   - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee under Rule 258(3) chose 
Shri Inder Singh Namdhari, MP, and a member of the Committee to preside over 
the meeting. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives 
of the Department of Information Technology  to the sitting of the Committee. He 
then drew the attention of the Members and the representatives of the Department 
of Information Technology to the ruling of Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha whereby 
the Committee is examining the Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Department 
even when the Demands have already been passed by the Parliament after 
suspension of Rule 331G of the Rule of Procedure an d Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha. He also drew attention of the representatives to Direction 55 (1) relating to 
confidentiality of the matter till the Report is presented to the House.   
 
4. The representatives of the Department then briefed the Committe e on 
various aspects relating to Demands for Grants (2011 -12) with the help of power 
point presentation.  The briefing broadly covered financial and physical 
performance of the Department during each year of the Eleventh Plan and various 
thrust areas viz. National e-Governance Plan, Electronics/IT Hardware 
Sl. NO. Name Designation 
 
1.  Shri R. Chandrashekar  Secretary (DIT) 
2.  Shri Rajarshi Bhattacharya Additional  Secretary & FA 
3.  Shri Shankar Aggarwal Additional  Secretary 
4.  Shri B.N. Satapathy Economic Advisor 
5.  Shri N. Ravi Shanker  Joint Secretary 
6.  Dr. Ajay Kumar Joint Secretary 
7.  Dr. B.K. Gairola  Director General, NIC 
8.  Dr. Gulshan Rai DG(CERT-In) & STQC 
9.  Shri Rajan Joseph Director General C-DAC 
10.  Dr. Omkar Rai Director General, STPI 
11.  Dr. V.N. Walivadekar Director General, DOEACC 
12.  Shri K. Mohanram Director General, ERNET 

45 
 
Manufacturing Industry, National Knowledge Network, road map for Skill 
development in IT, shortage of manpower in National Informatics Centre, etc. 
 
5. The Members of the Committee during the course of de liberations raised 
pertinent issues related to the persistent huge gaps between the proposed and 
budgetary support provided during the Eleventh Plan, under utilization of outlays, 
various slippages pertaining to National e-Governance Programme viz. State W ide 
Area Network (SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs), Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) 
and Common Service Centre (CSCs), cyber security concerns due to the import of 
electronic and software equipments/devices, concerns for STPI‟s in light of 
withdrawal of tax incentives, etc,. The representatives of Department responded to 
the various queries of Members. 
 
 A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
***** 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  
  

46 
 
Appendix-XII 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 1 5th June, 201 1 from 1500 
hours to 1 630 hours in Committee Room „ B‟, First Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh – CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
3. Dr. Charles Dias 
4. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
6. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Abdul Rahman 
8. Shri Prem Das Rai 
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Dr. Bhola Singh 
11.... Shri Dhananjay Singh 
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
13. Shri C.Sivasami 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri M.P. Achuthan  
15. Shri Salim Ansari 
16. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra -  Director 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. He drew the attention of the Members to Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker relating to confidentiality of the deliberations 
of the Committee till the report on the subject is presented to the House. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) relating to the Department of Info rmation 
Technology….X….X…X… 
 
4. …....X….X…X….. The draft Report relating to the Department of 
Information Technology was adopted with modifications to Para Nos. 17, 21 
and 22 of Part–II of the draft Report….X….X…X….. 
 
5. The C ommittee, then, authorized the  Chairman to finalize the 
aforesaid draft Reports in the light of the factual verifications made by the 
respective Ministries/Departments and present the same to the House on a 
date convenient to him.  
 
6. ………………..X…………………..X…………………..X……………………....X………………… 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 