 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF SERVICES BILL, 2011  
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2012/ Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
37 


 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF SERVICES BILL, 2011  
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2012/ / Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 

C.I.T. No. 238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. __________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by _____________________. 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Genesis  and the Background of the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
 
1 
II Analysis of ‘The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011’. 
 
4 
 (i) Delivery of Public Services through Electronic Mode (Clause 3 of the Bill) 
 
4 
 (ii) Timelines for implementation of the provision made under the current  legislation 
 
7 
 (iii) Delivery of Public services on payment basis 
 
12 
 (iv) Requirement of Financial Resources for implementation of Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 
2011 
 
13 
 (v) Penalties provided under the legislation 
 
16 
 (vi) Issues related to persons with physical disabilities 
 
18 
 (vii) Security and the privacy issues 
 
20 
 (viii) Verification of genuineness of the applicant 
 
22 
 (ix) Duplication of Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
23 
 (x) Term ‘Representation’  under Clause 26(1) 
 
23 
 (xi) Appointment of Central/State Chief Commissioner and Central/State  Commissioners 
 
24 
 (xii) Awareness/Training 
 
25 
 (xiii) Need for bringing  separate  EDS Legislation 25 
  
Part-II 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
27-47 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
 
48 
II. Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting held on 14th August, 2012 
 
80 
III. Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting held on 22nd August, 2012 
 
83 
IV. Minutes of the Twenty-third Sitting held on 28th August, 2012 
 
86 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-12) 
 
  Shri Rao Inderjit Singh   -  Chairman  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
 3. Smt.  Sarika D.S. Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
6. Dr.  Charles Dias 
* 7. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Smt. Darshana Jardosh 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Tapas Paul 
13. Shri  Tathagata Satpathy 
#14. Smt. Supriya Sule 
15. Smt. Seema Upadhyay 
16. Vacant 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
@ 22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
24. Shri Mohammed Adeeb 
 25. Shri Salim Ansari 
26. Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
**27. Dr.  Bhushan Lal Jangde 
28. Shri Prabhat Jha 
  29. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
30. Shri  Jesudasu Seelam 
@ 31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
              1.  Shri Brahm Dutt  -  Joint Secretary 
              2.  Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
  3.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal - - Additional Director 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29th November, 2011. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 vice  Shri P. Rajeeve, M.P. Rajya Sabha 
#   Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17th May, 2012   
@    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11th July, 2012 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar and Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, 
M.P. Rajya Sabha 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2011 -12) 
having been authorized by th e Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty-seventh Report on ‘The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011’, relating to 
the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 was introduced in Lok Sabha on                
27 December, 2011 and referred to the Committee on 5 January, 2012 for examination 
and report thereon by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of th e 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha within three months.  On the 
request of the Committee, the time given was extended till the last week of Monsoon 
Session of Parliament by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to enable the Committee to 
have wider consultations and present the Report to the House. 
 
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Electron ics and 
Information Technology) at their sittings held on  14 and 22 August, 2012. The 
representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Departments of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department) assisted the Committee in clarifying the legal position with 
regard to the aforesaid amending legislation.  
 
4. The Re port was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 28 August, 2012. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology for tendering evidence before 
the Committee and   providing information  that  the  Committee desired in connection 
with examination of the Bill. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department) in assisting the Committee.  The Committee, further, wish to 
express their thanks to the State Governments/UT Administrations for furnishing their 
valuable inputs as well as to experts/ individuals/ organizations/stakeholders and public 
at large who furnished written information/views for consideration of the Committee.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
  
RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
29 August, 2012 Standing Committee on  
07 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Information Technology 
(iii)

REPORT 
 
 
PART-I 
 
 NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
Genesis  and the Background of the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 
2011 
  
 The Electronic Deli very of Services Bill, 2011 (Appendix -I) was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 27 December, 2011 and was referred to the 
Standing Committee on 5 January, 2012 by Hon‘ble Speaker for examination 
and report to the House within three months i.e. by 4 April, 2012. Th e 
Committee at their sitting held on 3 April, 2012 decided that Hon‘ble Speaker 
might be requested to give extension of time for presentation of Report on the 
aforesaid Bill till the last week of the Eleventh Session of Parliament so as to 
facilitate wider  consultations on the provisions made under the Bill. Hon‘ble 
Speaker, accordingly, agreed to the request of the Committee.  
2. The proposed Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011, consists of 46 
Clauses in Nine Chapters. While enumerating the objectives of legislation the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons states as under:- 
―The National e-Governance Plan  approved by the Government in 
May, 2006 envisages to make all Government services accessible 
to the common man in his locality, through common service 
delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, transparency and reliability 
of such services at affordable costs to realise the basic needs of 
the common man.‖ 
 
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons while giving the genesis of the 
bringing the aforesaid legislation states as under:- 
―Though significantly the ground has been covered under the 
National    e -Governance Plan in terms of the provisioning of 
necessary infrastructure and creation of institutional  or 
organisational structures, and to a lesser extent, in the delivery of 
services, it is felt that the pace of implementation in enabling 
electronic delivery of public services is not commensurate with 
citizens‘ aspirations and expectations. It is also felt that the most 
critical challenge is to speed up the proces s of enabling electronic 
delivery of public services to the citizens. 
 
For promoting e -Governance in the country, the second 
Administrative Reforms Commission, in its Eleventh Report 
submitted in 2008, has recommended a clear road map with set of 
milestones to be outlined by Government of India with the 
ultimate objective of transforming the citizen -Government 
interaction at all levels to the e-Governance mode by 

2020 through a legal framework, taking into consideration the 
mammoth dimension of the task, th e levels of required 
coordination between the Union and State Governments and the 
diverse field situations in which it would be implemented. 
To give effect to this recommendation of the Administrative 
Reforms Commission, and for resolving issues like resis tance to 
change, systemic inertia, procedural hurdles, lack of transparency 
and legal impediments experienced in electronic delivery of 
services, it is proposed to enact a legislation which would mandate 
provisioning of all public services compulsorily thr ough electronic 
means from a specified date.‖ 
 
4. In regard to  the process of consultation s before bringing the aforesaid 
legislation, the Committee were informed by the Department that the draft of 
the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 was initially drafted on 8th February 
2011 and was placed in the DeitY website ( www.mit.gov.in) twice for public 
consultations. Subsequently, a draft Cabinet Note on the proposed EDS bill was 
prepared on 15 th April 2011 and shared with the various Central Government 
Ministries. In response, thereto 39 Central Government Ministries and 
Departments have provided their responses on the draft legislation. The 
Department also undertook consultations with State Government s. 
Subsequently, Consultative Meeting on the draft Bill was organized on 18th July, 
2011, under the chairmanship of Minister for Communication and Information 
Technology to provide an opportunity to all stakeholders to give their 
suggestions on the draft Bill. Further, a Public notice on the Electronic Delivery 
of Services Bill was inserted in all the editions of a national daily i.e., the Times 
of India. 
5. The Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 was t hen introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 2 7 December, 2011 and referred to the  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology by the Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha,  for examination 
and report to the House.  
6. Considering the immense importance of the Bill, the Committee invited 
memoranda containing views/suggestions from various individuals  /experts 
/organisations /stakeholders/ interested on the subject matter of the Bill 
through advertisements in print and electronic media. Accordingly, various 
memoranda from various stakeholders and public at large were received.  
7. Considering the fact tha t the State Governments/UT Administrations 
would have major role in implementation of various provisions in the Bill with 
regard to providing electronic delivery of services, the Committee decided to 
have wider consultations of State Governments/UT Administrations. As such the 
views/suggestions of State Governments/UT Administrations were invited after 

seeking the approval of Hon‘ble Speaker. In the process, the Committee 
received several write -ups/ views/ suggestions from 15 States/UT 
administrations viz. Delhi, Goa, Pudducherry, Dadar and Nagar Haveli, 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur, Sikkim, Nagaland, 
Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and 
Jharkhand. 
8. The representatives of the nodal Ministry i.e. th e Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology deposed before the Committee at the 
sitting held on 14th and 2 2nd August, 2012. The Committee in the process of 
examination of the Bill called for written replies to various issues that emerged 
during the course of deliberations on the provisions made under the Bill from 
the nodal Ministry .e. the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology. The representatives of the Legislative Department and Department 
of Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Law  and Justice assisted the Committee in 
clarifying the various legal issues.  
9. Having examined the provisions made under the Bill in the light of the 
write-ups/ views/ suggestions from various individuals /experts /organisations 
/stakeholders/ State Governments/UT Administrations and clarifications /written 
responses made by the Nodal Ministry as well as clarifications given by the 
Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs, the Committee could 
arrive at their views on the provisions made under the Bill. The detailed position 
with regard to the deliberations along with the recommendations/observations 
of the Committee with regard to the provisions made under the Bill is given in 
the subsequent parts of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF SERVICES BILL, 2011 
 
I. Delivery of Public Services through Electronic Mode (Clause 3 of 
the Bill) 
 
10. Clause 3 and 4 of the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 states as 
under:- 
Clause 3 
 
―The Central Government, the State Government and public 
authorities shall deliver all public services by electronic mode 
within five years of the commencement of this Act except such 
services,— 
 
(a) which cannot be delivered electronically; 
(b) which can be delivered electronically but the  Central 
Government or the State Government or public authority, as the 
case may be, notifies not to deliver electronically for the reasons 
to be specified in such notification: 
 
Provided that the Central Government, the State Government and 
public authority shall consult the Central Commission or the State 
Commission, as the case may be, before notifying any electronic 
services under clause (b): 
 
Provided further that such period of five years may be extended 
for a further period not exceeding three years by the Central 
Government or the State Government or public authority, in 
consultation with the Central Commission or the State 
Commission, for reasons to be notified.‖ 
  
Clause 4 
 
4. (1) Every competent authority shall publish within one hundred 
and eighty days from the commencement of this Act, the list of all 
public services to be delivered by it through electronic mode. 
(2) Every competent authority shall, after the publication of the 
list under sub-section (1), review the same and notify on the  1st 
day of January of every year– 
(a) the date by which each such service shall be made available 
through electronic mode; 
(b) the manner and quality of delivery of such services  as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) such other information as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Cen tral Government or the State Government or public 
authority may, while 
reviewing the list under sub -section (2), by notification, omit or 
add any public service in such list: 

Provided that any omission in the list shall be subject to the 
approval of the Ce ntral Commission or the State Commission, as 
the case may be:- 
 
Provided further that the reason for such omission shall be 
notified. 
(4)  The competent authority, while introducing services in an 
electronic mode, shall— 
(a) simplify and improve the existing process and forms relating to 
such services in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
(b) provide assisted  access to such services in such manner as 
may be 
prescribed. 
 
11. Further, the Objects and Reasons of the Bill states that it is proposed to 
enact a l egislation which would mandate provisioning of all public services 
compulsorily through electronic means from a specified date.  
12. One of the individual in the written memorand um submitted to the 
Committee suggested to incorporate the provisions in the Bill to work manually 
in case it becomes diff icult or impossible to provide electronic delivery of 
services, particularly with the existing scenario of power/computer breakdown.  
13. Besides, the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during 
the course of  consultations held by the Department of Electronic s and 
Information Technology on the issue of making electronic delivery of services 
mandatory suggested as under: 
―The Bill mandates that all services have to be delivered only 
electronically. It should in stead provide a choice to the citizen to 
receive public services either in the electronic or the non -
electronic mode.‖ 
 
In this connection, the Department in the written note clarified as 
under:-  
―Though the EDS Bill mandates delivery of all public servic es in 
electronic mode, the Bill does not preclude the delivery of services 
in manual mode. Thus, there is a window available to States to 
switch to manual mode in case of emergencies in the electronic 
mode.‖ 
 
14. When specifically asked whether there is a prov ision to have 
simultaneous services through electronic mode as well as manual mode except 
emergencies, the Department informed that the Bill is silent on simultaneous 
delivery of services through electronic mode as well as manual mode. 
15. The Committee  wanted to know  the position prevalent internationally 
regard to mandatory electronic delivery of services . T he Department in this 

connection indicated the objectives of respective legislation s of five countries 
viz. USA, Australia, UK, Republic of Korea and Austria as reproduced below:- 
― (a) The  E-Government Act of 2002  of the United States of America 
aims to enhance the management and promotion of electronic 
Government services and processes by establishing a Federal Chief 
Information Officer within the Office of Management and Budget, and 
by establishing a broad framework of measures that require using 
Internet-based information technology to enhance citizen access to 
Government information and services, and for other purposes. 
 (b) The Electronic Transactions Act, 1999 of Australia aims to 
facilitate electronic transactions, and for other purposes. 
(c) The Electronic Communications Act, 2000 of the United Kingdom 
aims to make provision to facilitate the use of electronic 
communications and electronic data storage; to make provision about 
the modiﬁcation of licences granted under section 7 of the 
Telecommunications Act 1984; and for connected purposes. 
 (d) In Republic of Korea, the Framework Act on Electronic Commerce 
(1999); and the Digital Signatures Act (1999 ) were enacted to 
promote e-commerce but are different in terms of basic objectives. 
While the Electronic Transactions Act provides for general and policy 
measures to promote e- commerce, the Digital Signature Act focuses 
on achieving security and reliabil ity of digital documents with clear 
provisions regarding digital signature technologies and the 
designation and management of the accredited certification 
authorities. 
(e) In Austria, the E -Government Act aims to promote legally 
relevant electronic communi cation. Electronic communications with 
public bodies are to be facilitated, having regard to the principle of 
freedom to choose between different means of communication when 
making submissions to such bodies.‖ 
 
16. The Department, in a written note, furnished the details with regard to 
number of electronic  delivery of services transactions made per month in 
various States/UTs as on 30 June, 2012. The analysis of the data indicates that  
only Andhra Pradesh and Bihar have delivered electronic services more than 1 
crore, whereas, bigger States like Uttar Pradesh has not even delivered 1 lakh 
services per month. On the other side, State of Goa, which has claimed to be 
far ahead in implementation of the electronic delivery of services and have 173 
public serves onli ne, has done e -transaction of only 6 thousand per month, 
which is even less than Puducherry. The data shows poor e -transactions in all 
the North Eastern States, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Odisha etc. The total 
e-transactions in one month in the country having billion plus population is only 
641.77 lakhs. 
17. The Committee took note of the scenario of Broadband expansion in the 
Country in the context of examination of the aforesaid Bill. As per the 

information made available to the Committee, during the course of examination 
of Demands for Grants 2012 -13, by the Department of Telecommunications, 
there are 13.54 million broadband connection in the Country. The broadband 
penetration is just 1.44 per cent. (Refer Para No. 25 of 31st Report 15th Lok 
Sabha). 
II.      Timelines for implementation of the provision made under the 
current  legislation 
 
18. Clause 3  of the Bill provides that the Central Government, State 
Government and public authorities shall deliver all public services by electronic 
mode within 5 years of the commencement of the Act and the period of five 
years can be further extended by 3  years in consultation with the Central 
Commission or the State Commission.  However, few States like Tripura and 
Arunachal Pradesh who submitted their Memoranda to the Com mittee, have 
expressed their reservations on the targeted time period of eight years (5 +3)  
on account of the following reasons:- 
―1. Tripura – The targeted timeline may be applicable for more 
advanced States in the country where ICT penetration has had a  
head-start advantage in the government.  However, for the 
underdeveloped NE region the Bill may have adverse effects 
arising out of service level maintenance due to unreliable 
infrastructure facilities.  It may perhaps be more appropriate to 
firstly address the provision of reliable and fail-proof infrastructure 
facility, especially ICT facilities, in a time -bound manner and 
thereafter purse the Bill. 
 
2. Arunachal Pradesh - ―Arunachal Pradesh is a difficult terrain so 
provisioning of Telecom Services should be given special care. For 
Delivery of Electronic Services the first and foremost requirement 
is the constant power supply throughout the day which is not 
available in the state.‖ 
 
19. Some States/UTs who submitted their memoranda to the Committee 
have outlined following concerns/ hindrances in implementing this Bill: 
Delhi 
 
 
There are a few concerns regarding the implementation of the Bill which 
are listed below:-  
Awareness/Training 
Co-ordination among departments 
Third party software 
But these can be overcome by Government of NCT of Delhi. 
Goa  The Department should work in coordination and give equal importance 
to the application received through electronic mode and dispose the 
same in time bound manner. 
State should amend the rules & regulations to deliv er the services 

online  
Awareness & acceptance of the key services 
Puducherry  State Government does not foresee any hindrance in implementing the 
Bill once it becomes an Act.  All State/UT Government departments 
have their own challenges like unavailabil ity of digitized data, 
infrastructure, software applications, IT manpower, etc, in 
implementing e-Governance and delivery of services in electronic mode. 
Dadar and 
Nagar Haveli 
No 
Meghalaya  As mentioned above, the core infrastructure projects are ready and 
functional.  However, not many services are available as backend MMPs 
of different departments are still pending for approval.  This is a major 
challenge.  Lack of services is also a big hindrance for the sustainability 
of even CSCs.  Capacity building  and change management are other 
challenges which could be handled with proper planning and execution. 
Manipur  Yes, A large effort will have to be made on publicizing the new look 
certificates and documents which will have digital signature instead of 
ink signature.  Officers have to be trained on how to use digital 
signature. 
Sikkim  No the State has a fully functional IT Department whose role is to 
impart computerization in the Government processes. 
Nagaland  While appreciating the Bill, the state als o foresee the following 
challenges. 
a) Lack of manpower  with the right skillset  to drive the delivery of 
services. 
b) Lack of fund to undertake computerization of departmental 
services. 
c) Lack of regular and stable electricity in the State. 
d) Mindset change among the Government machinery to ICT base 
administration and ICT base delivery of service. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
No  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
True process transformation in all Government services is taking place 
and this process transformation implies reallocation of current resources 
and functions. 
Internal infrastructure (Computers, Process, Manpower) in Departments 
is to be strengthened and may demand investment. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
There are factors which need to be looked into or re-visited : 
 Since, the electronic delivery of services required extensive back 
end data entry, the GoI must separately structure a scheme to 
fund the State Governments for creating back end databases. 
 Because of challenging terrain region make provisions to provide 
multiple connectivity options to the State Departments such as 
Broadband, Satellite, Optical Fibre etc.  

 The provision of creating a separate State Electronic Service 
Delivery Commission.  Since, Himachal Pradesh is a small State, 
therefore, instead of creating a State Electronic Service Delivery 
Commission (which may entail unnecessary cost on the State 
exchequer), the States should have freedom to choose from 
amongst its autonomous regulatory bodies to take on this 
responsibility. 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
i) Constant power supply not available  
ii) Telecom services coverage not reaching most of the Districts and Blocks 
consequently Network coverage lagging in the state. 
iii) Transportation difficulty in remote areas. 
iv) Computer literacy rate is low. 
v)  
Jharkhand  That the State of Jharkhand foresees no hindra nce in the 
implementation of the Bill once it becomes an Act. 
 
20. The Committee desired to know about the sufficiency of existing 
infrastructure facility with the Centre and States/UTs for implementing th e 
proposed legislation and preparedness of the Departm ent to overcome the 
infrastructure and other hurdles. Besides, the Committee also asked as to how 
the implementation of the Bill would be ensured in villages/areas where basic 
infrastructure like electricity, internet connectivity etc. has not yet reached and 
where existing infrastructure facility is not sufficient to implement th e proposed 
legislation. Responding to this, the Department, in their written note stated that 
existing infrastructure facility with the Centre and States/UTs is sufficient 
enough for implementing the proposed legislation  and there is adequate time 
with the States to overcome the infrastructure and other hurdles. The 
Department also proposed to address these concerns through the 
implementation of flagship programme of NeGP.  
21. Since, computer literacy of the masses is imperative to avail the services 
through electronic delivery mechanism, the Committee took note of the fact 
that the Government is yet to conduct the survey to know about the literacy 
level in the country. More  so, literacy level is still to be defined as emerged 
during the course of deliberations of D emands for Grants  (2012-13) of the 
Department of Electronic and Information Technology . (Refer Para No.  19 of 
34th Report 15th Lok Sabha). 
22. Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand Governm ent in their written suggestion 
submitted to the Committee in this regard furnished the following constraints:- 
―Andhra Pradesh - Literacy and Computer literacy rates are 
adequate in urban areas.  However, there is a shortfall in rural 
areas.  Technology a lternatives could be touch based or mobile 
based applications incorporating more symbols than language. 

 
Jharkhand - The literacy rate and computer literacy rate are not 
sufficient enough to deliver the services electronically.‖ 
 
23. To provide e -infrastructure at various levels of the Government, the 
National e-Governance Plan was approved by the Government in May, 2006. 
The Statement of Objects and Reasons while analyzing the objective of the 
proposed legislation inter-alia states as under:- 
―The National e-Governance Plan approved by the Government in 
May, 2006 envisages to make all Government services accessible 
to the common man in his locality, through common service 
delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, transparency and reliability 
of such services at a ffordable costs to realize the basic needs to 
the common man.  
 
In order to realize this, the Central government is creating a 
common core and support infrastructure consisting of State Wide 
Area Networks, State Data Centres, Common Services Centres 
and El ectronic Service Delivery Gateways, besides evolving and 
laying down Standards and Policy Guidelines to ensure sharing of 
information and seamless interoperability of data and e -
Governance applications. The National e -Governance Plan lays 
down policy guide lines and stipulates serve delivery orientation 
and strategy for identified e -Governance projects in Mission Mode 
in various Ministries.‖ 
 
24. The Committee have consistently been raising concerns over shifting of 
deadlines of implementation of various compone nts of e -Governance 
programme. The Committee in the context of examination of the Bill took note 
of the status of implementation of various component of e-Governance as made 
available during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13). 
The relevant extract from 34th Report 15th Lok Sabha are reproduced below:- 
―The under CSCs, the target was for setting up of one lakh CSCs 
in various States.  In spite of shifting the deadline for several 
times, out of the target of one lakh CSCs, 97871 CSCs co uld be 
established till 31.12.2011.  Not only that out of 97871 CSCs that 
could be established around 88,000 CSCs could be made 
operational in the Thirty-three States.  Besides, only 68,754 CSCs 
could be connected by the internet.   Now, the deadline for 
completing the task of one lakh CSCs has been shifted to March, 
2013.  State Wide Area Network (SWAN) could be made 
operational in 30 States/UTs and now the deadline has been 
shifted to March, 2013.  In respect of the State Data Centres 
(SDCs), 16 SDCs have  been declared operational and now the 
extended deadline is by March, 2013.  With regard to MMP, NSDG 
target completion date is January, 2014, NLRMP is expected to be 
completed in August, 2016 and for Treasuries, Municipalities, 
Commercial Taxes, the compl etion date is 2013 -14.  The target 
date for one of the ambitious programme Gram Panchayat is still 
to be firmed up.  With regard to other important MMPs like, 
employment exchange, public distribution system, health and 

education, the target dates have not been indicated.  The MMPs 
are still at the conceptual/design and development stages.‖ 
 
25. With regard to the functioning of CSCs, the Committee has referred to 
the independent evaluation done by M/s IMRB International at paragraph no. 
11, page 25 of 23 rd Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12).  The study 
revealed that only 58 per cent of CSCs were found to be fully operational out of 
a sample size of 1727. The irregular power connectivity in various States as 
known to everybody is another constraint.  Above al l, the biggest challenge is 
Broadband connectivity.   With the existing Broadband penetration of just 1.44 
per cent, it is not understandable how the implementation of the mandatory 
electronic delivery of services would be ensured. 
26. Irregular power supply is another constraint in implementation of the 
provisions made under the current legislation.  When specifically asked as to 
how the Department would address to the challenge of irregular power supply 
and poor connectivity particularly in the view of the ex isting scenario, the 
Committee have been apprised that under the National e -Governance Plan, 
Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY) is tackling the 
issues related to connectivity and power in the Common Service Centres. It is 
targeted t o provide Broadband Connectivity for all CSCs by December 2012. 
Besides, National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) will also provide connectivity to 
all the Panchayats by December 2013. On the power issue, the Central/State 
Governments would work in tandem to ensure adequate supply of power to the 
CSCs. DeitY is also exploring various options like Solar Power, in consultation 
with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), to address the problem of 
inadequacy of power.  
27. In this connection, the Secretary, duri ng course of oral evidence 
submitted as under:- 
“There are a couple of issues like power ....xxxxx.....  On the power 
front, we are in dialogue with the Ministry of Non -Conventional 
Energy Sources.  They have agreed to sanction a scheme of solar 
power for all those villages in the North -East and in hilly States.  
We need to provide these services in respect of chaos and for 
Government offices.  It exists with 90 per cent subsidy.  We are on 
the verge of submitting a proposal.  We have had a detailed 
discussion with them.  We are going to visit there very soon.  In the 
current year itself, we are going to take up that scheme.  A scheme 
of 40 per cent exists for remaining phase which is outside the 
North-Eastern hills.  We will consider it in the next phase.   

28. On being pointed out by the Committee that this type of energy would 
not be available in winter/cloudy days, the Secretary further added as under:-  
“We are also addressing the power problems in our own way so 
that they are not dependent exclusively on th e grid power.  Even if 
there is a failure, then they should be able to run on solar power. “ 
 
III. Delivery of Public services on payment basis  
 
29. The Ministry in their replies has stated that public services would be 
available through internet, Common Serv ice Centres, cyber café, internet 
kiosks, mobile phones and devices as well as through Departmental outlets.  
30. When asked whether such  services would be paid services, the 
Department in the written reply stated as under:-  
―Under Section 6A of the Informati on Technology Act the 
appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider 
to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government for the purpose of 
providing such services from the person availing such service. The 
service charges would be nominal and as approved by the 
‗appropriate Government‘. Central Government and several State 
Governments have notified rules under this section prescribing 
such service charges. The existing provisions do not  preclude a 
situation where some services can be provided free.‖ 
 
31. On the specific query of the Committee, who would help the illiterate 
masses in making their applications through all these techno savvy application 
centers, the Department responded as under:- 
―Sub-clause(a) of clause 2 of the Bill defines ‗assisted access‘ 
which means assistance to access electronic services. It would be 
the responsibility of the Central Government/State 
Government/Public authority to provide assistance to users 
including, illiterate people, while delivering a public service in 
electronic mode.  The scheme of Common Service Centres is 
meant to provide assistance to illiterate users in rural areas to 
avail all the e-services on par with others.‖ 
 
32. The Committee in the context of the examination of the Bill, referred to 
their observations regarding shifting of deadlines of CSCs made in 34 th Report 
of the Committee. Extracts of Para no. 5 of the aforesaid Report are reproduced 
below: 
―In spite of shifting the deadline for several  times, out of the 
target of one lakh CSCs, 97871 CSCs could be established till 
31.12.2011.  Not only that out of 97871 CSCs that could be 
established around 88,000 CSCs could be made operational in the 
Thirty-three States.  Besides, only 68,754 CSCs coul d be 

connected by the internet.   Now, the deadline for completing the 
task of one lakh CSCs has been shifted to March, 2013.  State 
Wide Area Network (SWAN) could be made operational in 30 
States/UTs and now the deadline has been shifted to March, 2013. 
‖ 
 
33. Planning Commission during the course of consultation by the 
Department on the Bill had made the observation that if the services are to be 
charged for in the form of fee then the bill should specifically contain a 
provision, considering that a legislative basis for a fiscal charge is the norm. 
 
34. To this, the Ministry, responded as under:- 
―The same has been provided for under the Rules framed under 
Section 6A of IT Act amended as on 2008 and necessary approvals 
for quantum and nature of service charges wi ll be decided by  the 
concerned Department/State Government by following the laid 
down process.‖ 
 
 
 
 
IV. Requirement of Financial Resources f or implementation of 
Electronic  Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
  
35. The Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill provides as under:- 
Clause 31 
31. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission 
by way of grants such sums of money as the Central Government 
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
     (2) The Central Commission may spend such sums of money 
as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, and 
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the 
grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
Clause 32 
 
32.  (1) The State Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the State 
Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the State 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of 
this Act. 
(2)  The State Commission may spend such sums of money as it 
thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, and such 
sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1) 
 
36. The Committee during the cours e of consultations received memoranda 
from 15 States. All the States have raised the issue of financial constraints the 
details of which are given as under:- 

Delhi Additional financial resources are required in Government 
of NCT of Delhi.  Additional infra structure will need to be 
set up and there will be requirement of additional 
resources at Government of NCT of Delhi. 
Goa  In order to do an assessment on financial, a DPR needs to 
be prepared with the help of Consultant, who will study 
the requirements.   Accordingly, it is proposed that a 
central funding needs to be provided to the States for 
successful implementation. 
Puducherry  Fund requirement is very important for implementation of                
e-Governance projects and ensure delivery of service s 
online. 
Dadar and 
Nagar Haveli 
The UT is in the process on implementing the NeGP 
projects of SDC/UTWAN/SSDG & SP through assistance of 
Goa, which is expected to be operational by September, 
2013.  The requirement of financial resources for the 
above pro jects will be sourced through the Central 
Government through Department of Information 
Technology, Government of India. 
Meghalaya  The existing financial resources with the state are 
considered grossly insufficient to implement and sustain 
these projects.  Core infrastructure has been created with 
the help of NeGP funds and further allocations will 
certainly be required for various MMPs of the departments.  
The State Government will also provision for the unique 
requirements in its own Budget and Annual Pl an outlays.  
Detailed project reports along with expected fund 
requirements for more than ten different departments 
have already been forwarded to respective central line 
ministries for approval.  Without automating the 
department back ends, no services ca n be delivered 
seamlessly. 
Manipur  Additional resources will required. 
Andman and 
Nicobar 
Island   
__ 
Sikkim  Yes 
Tripura  The State Government has very limited financial resources 
to address the ongoing initiatives.  Adequate financial 
resources woul d therefore be required towards 
preparedness for successful implementation of the Bill.  
No, the Central Government shall be informed on analysis 
of the gap requirements for implementation of the law. 

Nagaland  Financial resources available with the state  government is 
not sufficient so as to employ concerned officials (State 
Chief Commissioner, State Commissioner, State 
Commissioner, other official staff etc.) 
Uttar Pradesh The current infrastructure is grossly insufficient for 
implementing this Law.  Th ere is huge requirement of 
Systems and Capacity Building to enact the Law.  The 
delivery end needs to be well equipped before making the 
electronic services delivery mandatory. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Yes. A proposal on ‗Mee Seva‘ has been sent to Planning 
Commission, GoI and 30% has been granted as one time 
assistance. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
The existing financial resources are not sufficient to 
undertake the activity for the implementation of Electronic 
service Delivery law.  The same was conveyed during the 
meeting held in GoI on 18.07.2011. 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
We would like to take this opportunity to highlight our 
concerns to Central Government.  We need Financial 
resources for Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
development across the state.  The infrastructure par t 
covers for  
 Telecom Services 
 Gensets 
 Power supply  
 Roadways development  
 Computer/Network infrastructure  
 
With regard to infrastructure and capacity building 
development, can you give us the address to whom we 
should approach for financial resource assistance? 
Jharkhand  The existing financial resources available with the State 
Government may be sufficient for the implementation of 
this law.  In case of any further financial constraint, 
financial aid may be sought for from the Central 
Government.  Since  no certain financial constraint was 
visualized the same has not been communicated to the 
Central Government. 
 
37. Planning Commission during the course of consultation s held by the 
Department had raised the following issue:- 
―DIT has shown ` 4 core as the financial implications for setting up 
of Central Electronic Service Delivery Commission. However, DIT 
needs to take into consideration the overall cost involved as the 
proposal envisages establishment of State Electronic Service 
Deliver Commission also.‖ 
 

38. In response to the observation of Planning Commission, the Department 
of Electronic s and Information Technology has stated that the State 
Government will make financial provisions for the State Electronic Delivery 
Commission. 
39. On a specific query raised by the Committee, with regard to requirement 
of additional funds as sought by various States/UTs, the Department has stated 
that most States have expressed their agreement with the provisions of the Bill 
during consultations with them. Under the National e -Governance Plan, funds 
are provided to the State Governments to implement several electronic service 
delivery projects. Specific and additional fund requirements of States/UTs can 
also be considered on a case to case basis. 
V. Penalties provided under the legislation 
 
40. Clause 29 of the Bill provides as under:- 
―29 (1)Where a Competent Authority or any officer under it, while 
discharging duty relating to any provision of this Act, without any 
reasonable cause, contravenes any provision of this Act, or the 
directions issued by the Central Commission or the State 
Commission, then, the Central Commission or the State 
Commission, as the case may be, may, after providing it or him, 
as the case may be, the opportunity of being heard, impose upon 
it or him a penalty which may extend up to five thousand rupees.‘ 
29 (2) In case of willful and persistent default of any of the 
provisions of this Act or the directions issued by the Central 
Commission or the State Commission, on the part of any 
competent authority or any officer under it, the penalty referred to 
in sub-section (1) may extend up to twenty thousand rupees.‖ 
41. When asked to clarify as to who would be the competent authority/ 
officer for discharging the duty/held accountable for handling ‗Electronic Service 
Delivery‘ the Department has stated as under:- 
―Competent authorities would be notified by the Central/State 
Governments. Depending on the facts of the case, the Commission 
would impose penalty on the Competent Authority or any officer 
under it, if it or he while di scharging duty relating to any 
provisions of this Act, without any reasonable cause contravenes 
any provisions of the Act and it or he would be made responsible 
for all acts related to electronic delivery of services.‖ 
 
42. In view of the fact, that most of th e IT services in Government 
Departments are outsourced and employees also work on contract, the 
Committee desired to know about the provisions incorporated in the Bill to 
ensure/fix accountability of these outsourced employees. The Department has 
clarified that the outsourced employees are under contract with the Government 
and Government can proceed against them for any contravention of the 

contract.  Besides, in cases of fraud, the Government can always prosecute 
under criminal laws.   
43. The Department, whe n further asked to clarify as to whether the 
provisions of clause 29(1)  would be applicable in the case of outsourced 
employees or the outsourced employees would be governed by the terms and 
conditions of the contract, they have stated that the outso urced employee who 
is working on an outsourced job are not covered by the provisions of the Bill. In 
addition, they have submitted as under:- 
―The provisions of clause 29(1) are applicable to any competent 
authority or any officer under it. Employees on contract  working 
for the Central Government or State Government or the public 
authority would be governed by the Act, if the word ‗officer‘ is 
changed to ‗employee‘. This change is proposed for the 
consideration of the Standing Committee.‖ 
 
44. The Secretary, further clarifying about the provisions during the course 
of evidence stated as under:- 
 
―In the Government today, there are permanent Government 
employees or employees who are taken on contract, who is also a 
Government  employee only but he is hired on a contract basis for 
three or four years. He is a private man; he is taken on a contract. 
He can sign the Government file, he will have the authority to 
exercise everything. He is on par with other employees except 
that he is hired on contract from the market for a fixed term.  
Third category is, what is called outsource, who is not a 
Government employee, now or any time. That means, I want 
certain activity to be done. For instance, printing of certain 
publications, etc. I do not have the adequate capacity or press.  
So, I outsource it to some company outside or I will ask that 
company to supply certain people on my premise, on an outsource 
basis. I pay to the company; I do not pay salary to the individual; 
then, he is not with the government. He is not a Government 
employee in any manner. So, these provisions do not apply to him 
but to the person who has employed; who has given that service 
to that company. So what we are saying is – category one, it 
applies to pure Government employees; category two – employing 
in a contract basis, the provision would apply; but for an 
outsourced employee, who is working on an outsourced job, it will 
not apply to him. Currently, that is the situation because the 
relationship is between the contractor and the Government, and 
not between the person and the Government. ― 
45. When specifically enquired about the applicability of the applicant in case 
of outsourced service provider, the Secretary clarified as under:- 
―The current law does not spell it out. It is not covering that 
contingency of a pure private person. He is not under the penal 
provision here.‖ 

46. The Secretary further added as under:- 
―We will consult legal experts as to how to handle outsourced work.‖ 
47. In the post evidence communication, the following amendments in 
Section 29 of the Bill were suggested by the Department:- 
―In Clause 29 insertion of the words ― or any person on contract‖ 
after the words ―Where a Competent Authority or any officer 
under it‖. 
 
In Clause 29 (2) insertion of the words ―or any person on 
contract‖, after the words ―or any officer under it.‖ 
 
VI. Issues related to persons with physical disabilities 
 
48. One of the Stakeholder s ‗Inclusive Planet Centre of Disability Law and 
Policy‘, in their Memorand um has  expressed concerns on accessibility 
requirement of persons  with disabilities. To this, the Department, in their 
comment on the Memoranda, has stated that the EDS Bill does not discriminate 
against persons with disabilities.  The Bill also defines ‗assistance access‘ which 
means ‗assistance to access electronic me ans‘.  On being asked about their 
opinion on the definition of ‗assisted access‘ being too general, the Department 
has negated the view and has stated that the term assisted access is a generic 
provision under the EDS Bill which would include assistance to  persons with 
disabilities. 
49. Further, when asked to clarify about the facilities for providing hard copy 
documents/forms in Braille and large print or for using thumb impressions 
instead of signatures while submitting the form or receiving the services / 
provision for providing intermediaries/ professional sign  language 
interpreters etc, for assisting the persons from disabilities at the electronic 
delivery centre, the Department, in the written reply has submitted as under:- 
―Clause 4(4)(a) of the Bill provides for ―(4) The competent 
authority, while introducing services in an electronic mode, shall— 
           (a) simplify and improve the existing process and forms relating 
to such services  in such manner as may be prescribed;‖ 
Further, Central /State Gov ernments under Clause 
42(2)(c)/44(2)(c) of the Bill have been empowered to frame Rules 
to ―simplify and improve the existing process and forms relating to 
such services. 
That is, at the time of making of Rules, special needs of physically 
handicapped in terms of ―assisted access‖ would be taken care of.  
‖ 

50. In the post evidence communication, the following amendment has been 
proposed by the Department in the Clause 2 (a):- 
―In Clause 2(a), insertion of the words ―by the users including 
users with special needs‖ after the words ‗electronic services‘.‖ 
 
51. When the issue was specifically raised during the course of oral evidence, 
the Secretary suggested as under:- 
―In Section IV, Sub -section (iv), the Bill provides for assisted 
access in such manner as may be prov ided. So, in the rules, we 
can give more detailed specifications. There is already a provision 
for assisted access in the Bill itself. Under these rules, we can 
elaborate what kind of disabilities are there and what kinds of 
provisions are needed. 
xxxxxxx.......................xxxxxxx......................xxxxxxx.............
................xxxxxx 
We are to come up with those guidelines which will supplement or 
elaborate it about the ground level, what are all to be done for the 
people who are physically -challenged, visually -challenged, 
mentally-challenged, who have hearing impairment, etc. What 
needs to be done has been put in the form of a policy document 
by the Department for the electronic procedures.‖ 
 
52. Highlighting the issue of removal of Commissioners , one of the disability 
organisation, during the course of consultation, in their memorandum submitted 
to the Committee, stated as under:- 
―There is a provision for removal of Commissioners on the ground 
of disability without providing reasonable accommodat ion, 
therefore Section 12 and Section 19 of Bill must be reworded to 
state that Commissioners may be removed from office on the 
grounds of disability only if they are incapable of acting as 
Commissioners in spite of the provision of reasonable 
accommodation. The concept of reasonable accommodation is 
clearly articulated in the UNCRPD and India is mandated to 
provide reasonable accommodation.‖ 
 
53. Relevant Provision of the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 are 
reproduced as below:- 
 Clause 12 
 
12. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
Central Government may, by order, remove the Central Chief 
Commissioner or Central Commissioner from his office if the 
Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case 
may be,— 

…………………xxxxx…………………xxxx………………………………..………..xxx….
. 
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a 
Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case 
may be  
 
12. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (4), no 
Central Co mmissioner or  Central Chief Commissioner shall be 
removed from his office on the ground specified in clause (d) or 
clause (e) of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court, on a 
reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central 
Government, has, on a n inquiry, held by it in accordance with 
such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the 
Supreme Court, reported that the Central Commissioner or Central 
Chief Commissioner, ought on such ground or grounds to be 
removed. 
 
Clause 19 
 
19. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
State Government may, by order, remove the State Chief 
Commissioner or State Commissioner from his office if such State 
Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be: 
…………………xxxxx…………………xxxx………………………………..………..xxx….
. 
 
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as State 
Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be. 
 
 
19. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (4), no 
State Chief Commissioner or S tate Commissioner, shall be 
removed from his office on the ground specified in clause (d) or 
clause (e) of that sub -section unless the High Court, on a 
reference being made to it in this behalf by the State Government, 
has, on an inquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as 
may be prescribed in this behalf by the High Court, reported that 
the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, ought on 
such ground or grounds to be removed. 
In this context, the Department in their reply has stated as under:- 
 
―…xxxx….. As regards the suggestion on reasonable 
accommodation, drafting of the relevant Clauses are as per similar 
provisions in other legislations. However, suggestion can be 
considered while prescribing rules under clause 12 and 19.‖ 
 
VII. Security and the privacy issues  
 
54. When asked how far the services delivered under National e -Governance 
Programmes in the State/UT are  secured, few States/UTs like Delhi, Nagaland, 
Andhra Pradesh and Haryana  responded as under:- 
―Delhi - Every State has its data in the State –run and sometimes 
State-owned Data Center.  The data center is managed by the 
Service Provider who is responsible for adhering to and 
maintaining best practices for security of Government owned data. 

However, when data is used at the Dep artmental end, there is a 
huge scope of re -engineering of processes to create a robust and 
tamper – proof system in place. 
 
Nagaland - Yes, the services will be provided through an electronic 
mode and through an online system.  Hence, tempering can be 
restricted.  However there should be provision in the Bill to restrict 
tempering. 
 
Andhra Pradesh - The services need to be audited and certified 
periodically at least once in a year by a Third Party then only it 
can be confirmed whether the services are tamper proof or not. 
 
Himachal Pradesh - The security audit of the NeGP programmes 
needs to be conducted through CERT -In to ensure that these 
applications are tamper proof.‖ 
55. Further, when the Committee desired to know whether the existing 
mechanism of electroni c delivery of services is foolproof and will not digitizing 
the same faulty system increase errors and frauds in service delivery 
mechanism, the Department   stated as under:- 
―The competent authorities, under clause 4(4), while introducing 
services in an electronic mode, are expected to simplify and 
improve the existing processes and forms relating to such 
services. The Central/State Governments can prescribe the 
manner of such process reengineering.‖ 
56. In addition, the State of Goa has submitted as under:- 
―The EDS Bill does not talk about the change in technology and 
associated steps to be taken for ensuring the integrity and safety 
of documents during technological upgradation and migration of 
data from one platform to an advanced platform.‖ 
 
57. State of Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh, in this regard, has submitted as 
under: 
―Tripura - The said disaster recovery mechanism should be able to 
sustain major disaster events and ensure minimal downtime for 
the services. 
 
Arunachal Pradesh - This is true.  Necessary p reventive measures 
should be incorporated.  As such the Bill in the current state 
doesn‘t have the provision to tackle the issues addressed above.  
It should be addressed before the bill prevails and is passed as an 
Act.‖ 
 
58. With regard to the exigency plans that have been chalked out to have an 
alternate back-up system/mechanism for maintaining data / delivering services, 
the Department  responded as under:-  
―For all common core and support infrastructure under the NeGP, 
alternate back -up system/mechanism f or maintaining data/ 
delivering services in the form of ―disaster recovery‖ and 

―business continuity‖ plans have been envisaged. The Disaster 
Recovery Sites for all States/UTs have already been identified in 
the respective National Data Centres at Delhi, H yderabad, Pune 
and Bhubaneswar.‖  
 
59. On being asked about the need of dealing privacy and security issue in 
holistic manner in the legislation itself instead of leaving such sensitive matter 
to be decided by rules by Central/State Governments, the Department   stated 
as under:- 
―Clause 5 provides for specification of electronic governance 
standards and Clauses 42(2)(e) and 44(2)(e) are the 
corresponding rule making powers of the Central/State 
Governments regarding electronic governance standards. As e -
Governance is a technological and dynamic subject that undergoes 
changes from time to time and as different governments could be 
at different levels of technological preparedness, the issue of 
security has been envisaged to be specified by rules to be made 
by Cent ral/State Governments. Moreover, to ensure timely 
notification of electronic governance standards, instead of 
repeated amendments to Clause 5, it has been envisaged that 
notification of rules by the Central/State Governments under 
Clauses 42(2)(e) and 44(2)(e) would be more appropriate.‖ 
 
60. Further, when asked whether some model rules would be drafted by the 
Centre so as to be a guideline for States in framing such rules, the Department 
answered in affirmation. 
61. On the issue of cyber -security, the Department, in their comments on 
the suggestions for States/UTs, has stated that the provisions of IT Act shall 
apply to an offence or contravention committed outside India by any person 
irrespective of nationality.  In this regard, the Committee desired to know as to  
how far it has been possible to prosecute the offender who is residing outside 
India in such cases. To this, the Department submitted as under:- 
―India has signed Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) and 
Extraditions Treaties with many countries. In o ther words, it is 
possible to prosecute any offender who is residing outside India on 
the strength of existing legal framework.‖ 
 
VIII. Verification of genuineness of the applicant 
62. On the issue of verification of the intended recipient, State of Meghalaya, 
Uttar Pradesh and Delhi in their Memoranda,  submitted as under:- 
―Delhi - There are e -government systems in place within various 
departments but there is no robust way of authenticating the recipient of 
the service.  Systems are not working under common umbrella and the 
concept of connected government is yet to arrive.  Sometimes there is 
dependency on other states for certain intermediary services like 

verification.  For example – if a citizen applies for a SC certificate in Delhi 
but he belongs from Bih ar, in that case Delhi will have to depend on 
Bihar for verification of this citizen. 
 
Meghalaya - …xxxx…….This being a complex and very important aspect, 
is being addressed separately both at national and State levels. 
 
Uttar Pradesh - currently there is no mechanism for identification of the 
recipient of the service.  The only way out in the current scenario shall be 
after the full implementation of the UID project.   The unique 
identification number shall be linked with the citizens database thereby 
making the identity fool proof.‖ 
 
63. Further, the Department in this regard stated as under:- 
―Currently, different government applications use different modes 
of authentication of the user. As per the proposed e-authentication 
framework of the Government, the me chanism of verifying the 
genuineness of the intended recipient of services would be 
established for e -Governance applications. Government of India 
has embarked upon a project for the unique identification of the 
citizens called Aadhaar. All e -governance ap plications are 
expected to progressively leverage Aadhaar authentication 
services. Further, under clause 5 of the EDS Bill, Central 
Departments/State Governments would also prescribe e -
governance standards which would, inter alia, include appropriate 
use of authentication mechanisms.‖ 
 
 
 
IX. Duplication of Grievance Redressal Mechanism  
 
64. One of the Stakeholder s drew the attention of the Committee to the 
duplication of grievance Redressal mechanism as suggested in the proposed Bill 
with the Citizens Charter Bill which is pending in the Parliament. When specific 
comments from the Department on the aforesaid observation were sought, the 
Committee were informed as under:- 
―Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the EDS Bill pertains to 
redressal related to ―complai nt‖ by any aggrieved person in 
respect of non -availability of service in electronic mode and also 
regarding ‗deficiency‘ in delivery of electronic service [clause 7], 
whereas under the Citizens Charter Bill, ―grievance redressal 
pertains to delivery of goo ds and services‖ (no reference as to 
redressal of ‗electronic service‘).‖ 
 
X. Term ‘Representation’  under Clause 26(1) 
65. In the context of the  provision related to Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism, one of the stakeholders in his Memorandum submitted to the 
Committee had stated that the term ‗Representation‘ used under Clause 26(1) 
of the EDS Bill, 2011 is neither defined by this Bill nor by the IT Act, 2000. 

When asked to clarify on the term ‗Representation‘, the Department submitted 
as under:-  
―The Commissio ns are appellate authorities vested with the 
powers of a Civil Court under the sub-clause(2) of clause 28 of the 
Bill. Therefore, the word ‗appeal‘ seems more appropriate than 
‗representation‘ at clause 26. The suggestion can be considered 
and the word 're presentation' could be  substituted with the word 
'appeal' at Clauses 26, 42 and 44.‖ 
66. Further, in the post evidence communication, the Department has 
suggested following amendment in Clause 2 (a):- 
―Substitution of the word ‗APPEAL‘ in place of the word 
‗REPRESENTATION‘ in the Chapter VI heading under the 
arrangement of clauses in page (ii) and in page 11. 
In clause 26(1), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗an appeal‘.  
In clause 26(2), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeal‘.  
In clause 26(3), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeal‘. . 
 
xxxxx………………….xxxxx…………….xxxxx…………………xxxxx……………..x
xxxx 
 
In clause 42(q), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeals‘.  
In clause 42(r), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeal‘.  
In clause 44(q), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeals‘. 
In clause 44(r), the word ‗representation‘ to be replaced with the 
word ‗appeal‘.‖ 
 
XI. Appointment of Cent ral/State Chief Commissioner and 
Central/State  Commissioners  
 
67. With regard to qualification for appointment of Central Chief 
commissioner and Central Commissioners as well as State chief Commissioner 
and State Commissioners, Clause 9(1) and 17 (1) of the Bill provides as under:- 
―Clause 9(1) –(for Central Chief Commissioner and Central 
Commissioners) 
 
The Central chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners of the 
Central mission shall be persons of eminence in public life who 
have special knowledge of and not less than twenty -five years of 
professional experience in information technology, management, 
public administration or governance. 
 
Provided that the Central Commissioner, at the time of his 
appointment, shall not be more than sixty-two years of age.‖ 
 
 Clause 17(1) –(for State Chief Commissioner and State 
Commissioner) 

 
The State Chief Commissioner and the State Commissioners shall 
be appointed by the State government from  amongst the persons 
of eminence in public life who have special knowledge and not less 
than twenty -five years of professional experience in information 
technology, management, public administration or governance 
 
Provided that the State Commissioner, at the time of his 
appointment, shall not be more than sixty-two years of age.‖ 
 
68. The age prescribed in the Bill for the aforesaid posts is that at the time of 
appointment the applicant should not be more than Sixty-two years. Besides as 
per Clause 11(3) and 18(3) an officer of the Central Government or the State 
Government, on his selectio n as the Central/State Chief Commissioner or 
Central/State Commissioner, as the case may be, shall have  to retire from 
service before joining as Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner. 
69. The aforesaid Commissioners shall hold officer for a term of five years 
from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of 
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and not be eligible for re -appointment as 
such Central Commissioner provided that where the Central Commissioner is 
appointed as the Central Chief Commissioner, his term of office shall not be 
more than five years in aggregate as the Central Commissioner and the Central 
Chief Commissioner. 
XII. Awareness/Training 
 
70. When the Committee desired to know as to whether the Department  has 
envisaged any plan for educating people/citizens for receiving /using public 
services electronically/ for creating awareness about the legal enablement of 
the EDS Bill once it becomes an Act, the Department responded as under:- 
―Under the NeGP, Depart ments have been creating awareness 
regarding   public services available electronically. Information, 
Education and Communication activities will also be undertaken to 
educate the public about the provisions of the Bill and the services 
that would be avail able progressively on account of 
implementation of the Act. 
 
Preparatory activities will also be undertaken to spread  
awareness, improve the capacity and preparedness of 
central/state authorities, and legal enablement through 
prescription of rules and the  setting up of commissions and 
notification of Grievance Redressal Mechanisms once the Bill 
becomes an Act.‖ 
XIII. Need for bringing separate EDS Legislation 
 
 
71. The Committee during the course of examination were apprised that the 
views of Department of Leg al Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice were sought 

on the legislative competence of the Parliament to enact this law. The 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice stated that the subject 
matter of the draft Bill is not appearing or specifi ed in any of the list of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, therefore, the subject matter of the 
proposed legislation falls within the residuary entry of the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution. The Parliament is competent to enact the law in terms of Entry 
97, List 1 of the Seventh Schedul e of the Constitution of India, which reads as 
under:- 
―Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including 
any tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.‖ 
 
72. When specifically asked as to how many State Government have enacted 
Electronic Delivery of Services legislation, the Committee were informed that 
only Jharkhand has enacted EDS legislation so far. However, the States of 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh 
have prescribed Rules under sections 6/6A of the IT Act regarding electronic 
delivery of public services. Recently, DeitY has formulated and circulated Model 
State Electronic Service Delivery (ESD) Rules for adoption by various States 
under the IT Act. On t he basis of these Model Rules, the State of Manipur has 
recently notified Manipur State IT Electronic Service Delivery (ESD) Rules. 

PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
Delivery of Public Services through Electronic Mode (Clause 3 of the Bill) 
1. The Committee note that Clause 3 of the Bill specifically provides that 
the Central Government, the State Government and public authority shall 
deliver all public services by electronic mode within five years of the 
commencement of the Act extendabl e by three years. The Statement of 
Objects and Reasons of the Bill clearly states that it is proposed to enact a 
legislation which would mandate provisioning of all public services 
compulsorily through electronic means from a specified date.  In this 
connection, the Committee deliberated the aforesaid provisions at length 
during the course of exa mination and have noted  that with the existing 
constraints in e -delivery mechanism which include poor broadband 
connectivity, inadequate power supply to run the computers/internet services, 
lack of qualified manpower handling the services, mindset of the officials etc., 
providing services through electronic mode seems to be a distant reality for 
the Central Government, the State Government and public authority.  
Considering the optimism of the Department that even if these constraints are 
addressed within the specified period, the irregular power supply and 
broadband availability would still remain as the constraints.  
 The other major challenge is to address the issu e connected on the part 
of the recipient of the services.  The Committee understand that electronic 
delivery of services means delivery of services would be made electronically to 
the applicant who would require accessibility through computer.  With the lo w 

level of literacy not to talk of computer literacy and the poverty of the masses, 
implementation of the provision made in the Bill remains the biggest 
challenge.  In the connection, the Committee took note of the fact that the 
broadband penetration in th e country is only 1.44 per cent and as per the 
Department’s own data the e-transactions in a particular month in the country 
are only 641.77 lakh.  Biggest State like Uttar Pradesh has not even delivered 
one lakh services in a month as per which the data m ade available by the 
Department.  The diversity of language s used by the masses in the country is 
another constraint for the masses to avail electronic delivery of services.  
Apart from official languages there are hundreds of dialects used by people 
living in different parts of the nation which makes the implementation of 
electronic delivery of services a biggest challenge.  The Committee feel that in 
the aforesaid circumstances to make the electronic delivery of services 
mandatory would result into a big role of middleman /self styled unofficial 
service providers and harassment to the poor masses particularly in availing of 
day-to-day services like birth/death certificates, BPL card, MGNREGA card, 
payment of electricity/ power bills, copies of land records etc. 
 In this connection the Committee desired to know about the 
international position with regard to mandatory electronic delivery of services.  
From the objectives of the IT legislation with regard to five developed 
countries like USA, Australia, UK, Re public of Korea and Austria, the 
Committee noted that even in these countries the e -Governance legislation 
aims to enhance/promote/facilitate electronic governance/transactions.   

 What is more disturbing is the fact that the Department during the 
course o f deliberations could not clarify clearly the intention of the 
Government in this regard.  On the one hand, the Department stated that the 
Bill does not preclude delivery of services in manual mode, on the other hand 
it is stated that the Bill is silent on  the simultaneous delivery of services 
through electronic mode as well as manual mode.  Inspite of the different 
interpretations given by the Department, the Committee note that Clause 3 of 
the Bill and the Statement of Objects and Reasons clearly stipulat e that the 
delivery of services would be mandatory in electronic form after the 
enactment of the legislation.   
 Although the Secretary during the course of evidence acknowledged to 
consider the aforesaid concerns of the Committee, the suggested amendment 
as received through a post evidence communication suggests amendment only 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons and that too to preclude only the 
services which the Central Government or the State Government or public 
authority notifies not to deliver el ectronically, do not address the concerns of 
the Committee at all. 
 While the Committee appreciate intended e -delivery of services which 
would make delivery mechanism transparent and consistently been 
emphasizing to push up e -governance agenda in their var ious reports, the 
Committee are of the firm view that Government should provide the option to 
its citizens to apply and receive the services through electronic mode or 
manual mode in the circumstances brought out above. In this connection, the 

Committee endorse the suggestion made by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment during the course of consultations held by the Department 
wherein it was suggested that a choice to the citizen to receive public service 
either in the electronic or the non -electronic mode should be provided.  The 
Committee, accordingly, strongly recommend that a suitable modification 
clarifying that the option to avail of services by the applicant through 
electronic and manual mode would always be available should be made in 
Clause 3 of the Bill. 
Timelines for implementation of the provisions made under the current 
legislation 
2. The Committee further observe that so far as the timelines for 
implementation of the provisions made under the proposed legislation are 
concerned, Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government, the State 
Government and public authority shall deliver all public services by electronic 
mode within five years of the commencement of the Act.  The proviso to 
Clause 3 provides that such period of five yea rs may be extended for a further 
period not exceeding three years by the Central Government or the State 
Government or public authority, in consultation with the Central Commission 
or the State Commission, for reasons to be notified.  Further, Clause 4(1) of the 
Bill provides that every competent authority shall publish within one hundred 
and eighty days from the commencement of the Act, the list of all public 
services to be delivered by it through electronic mode.   
 While most of the States have agreed wi th the aforesaid timelines as 
could be seen from the memoranda submitted by various States to the 

Committee as well as through consultations process held by the Department,  
few States like Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh have expressed their 
reservations on  the targeted period of eight years.  While Tripura has stated 
that it would be more appropriate to first address the provision of reliable and 
foolproof infrastructure facility especially ICT facility in a time bound manner 
and thereafter pursue the Bill,  Arunachal Pradesh has pointed out the issue of 
power supply requirement in this regard.  In this connection, the Committee 
note that the onus of providing infrastructure for e -Governance lies solely with 
the Union Government as the objective of National T elecom Policy, 2011 
include providing affordable and reliable broadband on demand by the year 
2015 and to provide high speed and high quality broadband access to all 
village Panchayats by the year 2014. 
 While the Department is optimistic that within the g iven time adequate 
infrastructure would be created, the Committee may like to highlight here the 
continuous shifting of deadlines of implementation of various components of                        
e-Governance programme that have been noted by the Committee  during the 
course of examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department for the 
year 2012-13.  The Committee strongly recommend that all the initiatives need 
to be taken in a time bound programme to ensure that the deadlines with 
regard to broadband connectivity particularly in the difficult areas are 
achieved as per the National Telecom Policy 2012 so as to enable the State 
Governments to implement the provisions made in the proposed legislation.   

 The representatives of the Department apprised the Committee during 
evidence that the Government proposed to use renewable sources of energy 
like solar energy. On being pointed by the Committee that this type of energy 
would not be available in winter/cloudy days, the Secretary stated that the 
back–up elec tricity through conventional sources would also be provided. In 
view of this the Committee desire that the Department should prepare 
necessary plans in coordination with the Ministry of Power and Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy so that e -Governance pr ogrammes can be 
synchronized/inter-linked with national programm es like ‘power for all’ and 
‘Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojna ’. More initiative needs to be 
taken on the R&D front to make the alternate energy system viable as well as 
cost effective. 
Exclusion of services from the purview of EDS Bill 
3. Clause 3 (a) and 3(b) of the Bill provides for the services which can be 
excluded from the purview of the current legislation.  Clause 3(a) provides for 
exclusion of services which cannot be delivered el ectronically.  In this 
connection, the Committee have been apprised that the Central Government, 
the State Government and public authority will decide the services which 
cannot be delivered electronically after examining the non -feasibility of 
delivery in electronic mode.   Clause 3(b) of the Bill further provides for 
exclusion of services which can be delivered electronically but the Central 
Government or the State Government or public authority, as the case may be, 
notifies not to deliver electronically f or the reasons to be specified in such 

notification.  For the services with regard to provision of exclusion of services 
as provided in Clause 3(b) of the Bill the first proviso states that the Central 
Government, the State Government and the public author ity shall consult the 
Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, before 
notifying any electronic service.  With regard to consultations, the Department 
has clarified that it refers to a dialogue between the Central Government, the 
State Government and public authority with the Central Commission or the 
State Commission.  The Department in the post evidence communication has 
suggested further amendment to Clause 24 (2) of the Bill whereby a sub -clause 
(cc) would be inserted providing tha t holding consultations with public and 
other stakeholders while reviewing the publication of services to be delivered 
through electronic mode by the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, will  be one of the functions of Central C ommission or the 
State Commission.  
 The Committee observe that absolute authority to the Central 
Government, the State Government and public authority has been provided to 
exclude any of the services which they find not feasible to deliver 
electronically under Clause 3(a) of the Bill.  With regard to excluding the 
services at the discretion of the Central Government, the State Government 
and public authority with the reasons to be specified, consultations with 
Central Commission or State Commission is requ ired.  The Committee endorse 
the proposed amendments of the Department in Clause 24(2) of the Bill as 
furnished by the Department through a post evidence communication 

‘whereby holding consultations with public and other stakeholders while 
reviewing the pu blication of services to be delivered through electronic mode 
by the Central Government or the State Government would be required.’  The 
Committee also recommend that the word ‘public authority’ should also be 
added after the word ‘State Government’ in the suggested Clause 24(2) (cc).  
4. The Committee would also like to emphasize that consultations with 
Central Commission or the State Commission should also be provided in 
respect of Clause 3 (a) also in line with the provisions made in Clause 3 (b) so 
as to p rovide some check on the absolute power provided to the Central 
Government, the State Government and public authority to exclude any of the 
services from the list.  The necessary modifications in this regard should be 
made in Clause 3 of the Bill.    
Delivery of Public services on payment basis   
5. The Committee note that for the implementation of the provisions 
made under the Bill, it is imperative that the applicant has access to internet 
and is well aware of the nuances of usage of computer.  When particul arly 
asked as to how the poor persons would access the computer, the Department 
informed that the access to the applicant would be available through internet, 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) , cyber cafe, internet kiosks, mobile phones as 
well as through Dep artmental outlets.  The Committee find that the poor 
person who can file his application for various day -to-day services like Ration 
Card, BPL Card, MGNREGA Card, Birth and Death Certificates, water/electricity 
Bill, copy of land record, etc. free of cost in the present circumstances would 

be made to pay service charges for availing such services from Common 
Service Centres, cyber café and internet kiosks as acknowledged by the 
Department in the written note.   
 The Department in this regard has tried to su bstantiate that the service 
charge would be nominal.    The Committee find that the cost of using internet 
could possibly increase due to high demand and even minimum charge would 
constitute a substantial part of day’s income of a poor man.  Moreover, the 
existing status of Common Service Centres being set up with the Government 
funding is also not satisfactory. Out of 97871 CSCs established so far 88000 
CSCs could be made operational and 68,754 CSCs could be connected by the 
internet as per the information  made available to the Committee during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13). The Committee find 
that if the electronic delivery of services is made compulsory, there would be a  
lot of pressure on the internet service providers.  With the present status of 
functioning of the Government infrastructure like CSCs, more pressure would 
be on the private cyber cafes who would then charge exorbitant service 
charges from the poor persons.  Above all the poor persons not able to file 
their appli cations would be required to consult the middleman for availing 
various services.  Although, the Department has explained that assisted access 
to illiterate persons would be provided, the Committee fail to understand 
what sort of assisted access would be provided to the poor persons who would 
be compelled to use the private cyber café in the explained circumstances. The 

ultimate result would be financial burden and harassment of the citizens 
particularly the poor masses.   
 The Committee are further disappo inted to note that even when 
Planning Commission during the course of consultations made the 
observations that if the services are to be charged for in the form of fee, then 
the Bill should specifically contain a provision, considering that a legislative 
basis for a fiscal charge is the norm, the Department didn’t feel it necessary to 
make such provisions on the pretext that the services charges have been 
provided under the rule under Section 6A of IT Act amended as on 2008 and 
necessary approvals for quantum and nature of service charges will be decided 
by  the concerned Department/State Government by following the laid down 
process. The aforesaid response of the Department clearly indicates that the 
issue of service charges has been kept hidden while bring ing the legislation 
even when Planning Commission had specifically made the serious 
observation. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to 
incorporate a specific provision in the Bill that no fee or other charges would 
be payable by the citizens particularly the poor persons. 
6. While enacting the proposed legislation, it should particularly be 
ensured by the Government that no additional financial burden is imposed on 
the citizens while facilitating electronic delivery of services.  Above all, as  
recommended in the earlier part of the report, the Committee emphasize that 
to file application and to access service, the manual option should be left open 
and electronic of services should not be made compulsory.  The electronic 

delivery of services in the Committee’s opinion should be to facilitate 
electronic governance thereby bringing transparency in the delivery 
mechanism of the Government.  With more emphasis on connectivity, 
education and computer literacy, more and more people would automatically 
access the services through electronic mode.  Thus, the Government initiatives 
need to be more proactive.   
Requirement of additional financial resources for implementation of Electronic 
Delivery of Services Bill, 2011 
 
7. The Financial Memorandum to the Bill  stipulates expenditure only for 
the establishment of Central Electronic Service Delivery Commission, salary 
allowances of officials of the Commission. Annual expenditure on this account 
has been estimated of the order of `4 crore, which can initially be m et from 
the budget of the Department. Similarly, State Government would meet the 
expenditure on State Commissions out of the State Governments 
budget/grants. 
 The Committee, however, note that to implement the provisions made 
in the proposed legislation, t he robust e -infrastructure is the pre -requisite.  
Almost all the 15 State Governments, who have furnished written views to the 
Committee have requested  for  additional Central assistance for different 
NeGP projects.  The Department on the specific request  of the State 
Governments has stated that the financial assistance would be provided on 
case to case basis.  This shows that Financial Memorandum to the Bill is highly 
tentative without any serious thought. The Committee further note that under 
the Central  e-Governance programme, financial allocation for setting up of 

various components of NeGP, e -infrastructure like SDC, SWAN, MMP and CSC 
is being provided.  The Committee feel that before bringing the EDS Bill, the 
additional requirement of resources shoul d have been worked out in 
consultation with various State Governments/UT Administrations. Now when 
the legislation has been brought by the Government, the Committee 
recommend that the Union Government should ensure that additional 
requirement of State Gove rnments/UT Administrations are met from the 
Central funding particularly when the onus of providing broadband 
connectivity lies with the Union Government as per Telecom Policy, 2011. 
Penalties provided under the legislation  (Clause 29 of the Bill) 
 
8. The Co mmittee during the course of examination have noted that the 
persons appointed on contract and outsourced services are not covered by the 
penalty provisions made in the amending legislation.  The Department through 
a post-evidence communication has propose d further amendments as stated 
below in Clause 29 of the Bill:- 
“The Standing Committee may consider changing of word 
`officer’ as appeared in Clause 29 to `employee’.” 
 “In Clause 29 insertion of the words “or any person on contract” 
after the words “Wher e a Competent Authority or any officer 
under it”. 
 In Clause 29 (2) insertion of the words “or any person on 
contract”, after the words “or any officer under it.” 
  
 The Committee understand that the proposed amendments suggested 
by the Department would co ver the employees on contract.  However, the 
aforesaid changes would not address the issue of having penalty provisions for 

the outsourced agency/employees.   The Secretary, during the course of 
evidence before the Committee assured that the Department wou ld consult 
legal experts as to how to handle the outsourced agency/employees.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that adequate penalty provisions should be 
made in the proposed legislation for the outsourced agency/employees 
bringing necessary modifications  in Clause 29 of the Bill in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
9. The Committee, further, find that the maximum limit of penalty as Rs. 
20,000 has been provided for contravention of the provisions made under the 
Act as per Clause 29 of the Bi ll.  The Committee feel that some minimum 
amount of penalty should also be indicated in the legislation.  Besides, the 
Committee would also like to recommend the Department to suggest some 
inbuilt mechanism in the proposed legislation itself for periodic e nhancement 
of the penalty amount so as to cover the inflationary aspects in future. 
Issues related to the ‘Differently abled persons’ (Clause 2(a) of the Bill) 
10. One of the associations of ‘differently abled persons’ during the course 
of consultations has brought before the Committee the concern with regard to 
accessibility requirement of persons with disability in the context of the 
proposed legislation.  When the issue was taken up, the Department, in the 
initial response, informed that term `access’ under the EDS Bill is a generic 
provision and would include assistance to persons with disabilities.  When the 
issue was specifically raised by the Committee during the course of oral 
evidence, the representatives assured that the provisions needed for various 

kinds of disabilities would be elaborated under rules. Further, in the post 
evidence communication, the Ministry has suggested insertion of words `by 
the users including the users with special needs after the words electronic 
services’ in clause 2 (a) of th e Bill so as to address the concerns of the 
differently abled persons.  The Committee agree with the proposed 
amendment suggested by the Department. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize that the specific needs of the differently abled  persons like 
providing hard copy documents/forms in Braille and large print or for using 
thumb impressions instead of signatures while submitting the form or 
receiving the services/provision for providing intermediaries/professional sign 
language, interpreters, location s for offices for availing services for the 
purpose of EDS at the ground floor etc. should specifically be taken care of 
while formulating rules. 
 In this connection the association of differently abled persons drew the 
attention of the Committee to the pr ovisions made under Clauses 12 and 19 of 
the Bill whereby it has been provided that the Central Government may by 
order remove the Central/State Chief Commissioner from his office if a Central 
Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner has become physical or mentally 
incapable of acting as Central Commissioner or State Chief Commissioner, as 
the case may be.  The organisation has suggested that the aforesaid section 
should be reworded to state that respective Chief 
Commissioner/Commissioner may be removed f rom office on the grounds of 
disability only if they are incapable of acting as Commissioners inspite of the 

provisions of reasonable accommodation.  The Committee’s attention was also 
drawn to the fact that the concept of reasonable accommodation is clear ly 
articulated in the UNCRPD and India is mandated to provide reasonable 
accommodation.  To this issue, the Department in the written reply stated that 
the drafting of the relevant clauses of the Bill are as per similar provisions of 
other legislations.  T he Department, however, assured that the suggestion 
could be considered under the rules to be framed under Clauses 12 and 19.  
The Committee, therefore recommend that specific suggestions of associations 
of differently abled persons may carefully be consid ered and suitable 
amendments/relevant provisions may accordingly be made in the 
legislation/rules. 
Security and privacy in the context of the EDS Bill  (Clause 5 of the Bill) 
11. The Committee endorse the apprehension and concerns expressed by 
various States/U Ts in the memoranda submitted to the Committee on the 
issue of security and privacy in the context of the EDS Bill .  The Committee 
further note that Clause 5 of the Bill in a very general way addresses the issue 
of security whereby it has been provided th at any Department of the 
Government of India may from time to time, notify, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, electronic governance standards, being not inconsistent with 
electronic governance standards notified by the Central Government, as may 
be nece ssary for ensuring inter -operability, integration, harmonisation  and 
security of electronic services.  Proviso to the aforesaid Clause further provides 
that a State Government may prescribe such standards which had not been 

notified by the Central Governm ent and the standards so notified by the State 
Government shall remain in force till such standards are notified by the Central 
Government.  
 The Committee further note that with the implementation of EDS Bill, 
the number of users would increase and as suc h the security issues may 
further pose a great challenge.  Besides, the implementation of the provisions 
under the EDS legislation more and more persons would share their personal 
data on the websites while seeking various services and as such the issue of  
privacy also need to be addressed comprehensively.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should take all the initiatives to ensure a 
robust security mechanism and strict provision in this regard should be made 
in the proposed legislation or through suitable amendment in ‘The Information 
Technology Act, 2000’.  Besides, issue of privacy need to be analyzed and 
suitable provisions made in ‘The Information Technology Act, 2000’/current 
legislation. 
Verification of the genuineness of the applicant (Clause 5 of the Bill) 
12. On the issue of verification of genuineness of the applicant in the 
context of the current legislation, the Committee have been apprised that all 
e-governance applications are expected to progressively leverage AADHAAR 
authentication services.  Further, Clause 5 of the Bill also provides that the 
Central Departments/State Governments would also prescribe e -governance 
standards which would inter alia, include appropriate use of authentication 
mechanism.     

 Considering the submiss ion of the Government of Uttar Pradesh that 
currently there is no mechanism for identification of the recipient of the 
service and the only way out in the current scenario shall be after the full 
implementation of the UID project and the Government of Megh alaya’s 
suggestion that this being a complex and very important aspect, is being 
addressed separately both at National and State levels, the Committee feel 
that the Department needs to constitute a dedicated Group or Task Force so as 
to have a robust mecha nism for authentication of the recipient of electronic 
services. Noting the Department’s submission that e -Governance applications 
are expected to progressively leverage Aadhar authentication process, the 
Committee strongly recommend to evaluate and addres s the loopholes of 
Aadhar and then only use it fully for verification of the genuine recipient. 
Duplication of Grievance Redressal Mechanism (Clause 7 of the Bill) 
13. The Committee’s attention during the course of deliberations was 
drawn to the duplication of grievance redressal mechanism as suggested under 
Clause 6 of the Bill with the grievance redressal system proposed in the Citizen 
Charter Bill which is pending in Parliament. The Department in this connection 
has clarified that  grievance redressal mechanism under the EDS Bill pertains to 
redressal related to “complaint” by any aggrieved person in respect of non -
availability of service in electronic mode and also regarding ‘deficiency’ in 
delivery of electronic service [clause 7], whereas under the Citizen s Charter 
Bill, “grievance redressal pertains to delivery of goods and services”. 

 The Committee observe that electronic delivery of services is the 
facilitating mechanism for delivery of services to the masses. The Government 
as such while setting up the redressal mechanisms under the aforesaid two 
proposed legislations should ensure that there is no overlapping of jurisdiction 
of such mechanisms.  
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment of Central/State Chief Commissioner and Central/State 
Commissioners (Clause 9(1), 11(2), 17(1) and 18(1)) 
 
14. The Committee find that the proposed Bill provides the minimum age 
for appointment of Central Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner as well 
as State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioner upto sixty -two years of 
age. The Central Govern ment/State Government employees on their selection 
have to retire from service before joining such offices. The Committee in this 
connection would like to recommend to prescribe the competitive selection 
process whereby such important offices are occupied by the competent 
persons selected from the market through a transparent selection mechanism 
so that such important bodies do not turn into a refuge for retired/retiring 
Government officers. 
Replacing word ‘representation’ by ‘appeal in various Clauses of the Bill  
(Clauses 26(1), 26(2), 26(3), 42(q), 42(r), 44(q) and 44(r) of the Bill) 
 
15. The Department in the post evidence correspondence suggested to 
substitute the word ‘representation’ by ‘appeal ’ as appearing in Clauses 26(1), 

26(2), 26(3), 42(q), 42(r), 4 4(q) and 44(r) of the Bill  as elaborated in Part -I of 
the Report. The Committee endorse the suggestion of the Department in this 
regard and would like that the desired modifications be made in the amending 
legislation. 
Awareness/Training 
16. The Committee obse rve that once the Electronic Delivery of Services 
comes into the effect there would be need for awareness generation and 
providing training on a large scale regarding various services which would be 
available online to the officials and public at large. As  the Department has 
rightly pointed out that though the country has progressed with the 
information technology revolution in the recent years, yet there is systemic 
inertia and resistance to change which is also one of the reasons for bringing in 
the propo sed legislation as highlighted in the Statement and Objects of the 
Bill. Several State Governments who furnished their memoranda to the 
Committee in connection with examination with the Bill also corroborated the 
same. The Committee observe that once peopl e all over the country 
simultaneously start availing the services online, a large pool of trainers would 
be required to educate and train the officials undertaking various tasks as well 
as in assisting the masses on the usage and facilities available online. However, 
the trainees available at present are grossly inadequate to meet the 
requirement. Needless to highlight here that besides infrastructural hurdles 
which continue to be the biggest challenge, training, awareness generation 
pose next bigger challe nge for implementation of the National e -Governance 

Programme (NeGP). Keeping in view the fact that masses are illiterate and 
ignorant and unless people are made aware of the various basic services/ 
facilities available online and people are empowered to u tilise these services, 
the purpose of providing services electronically will be defeated and the Act 
would remain just on paper.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department, in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development should work out a strategy for skill development and training in 
information and technology to address the above challenge.  The Committee 
in this regard recommend the Department to make best use of all available 
means for awareness generation viz.  the electro nic and print media, through 
regular seminars and workshops, distribution of pamphlets, awareness camps 
etc. and educate the people on the benefits envisaged in electronic delivery of 
services as well as about the provisions of the Bill and the services wh ich 
would be available on account of implementation of the Act. Efforts should 
also be made for capacity building through involvement of institutions of local 
self Government i.e. Gram Panchayats in rural areas and equivalent bodies in 
scheduled areas and urban areas by ensuring co -ordination among these vis-a-
vis the people.  
Need for bringing separate EDS Legislation 
 
17. The Committee have been apprised that as per the consultations held 
with the Ministry of Law and justice, the Parliament is competent to en act the 
law in terms of Entry 97, List 1 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of 
India. The Committee further find that the implementation of the provisions 

made under the proposed legislation rests with the State Governments/UT 
Administrations. Mor eover, Jharkh and has recently enacted EDS legislation. 
Further, some of the States like Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh have prescribed Rules under sections 6/6A 
of the IT Act regarding electronic delivery of pub lic services. Recently, DeitY 
has formulated and circulated Model State Electronic Service Delivery (ESD) 
Rules for adoption by various States under the IT Act. Further, on the Model 
Rules, the State of Manipur has recently notified Manipur State IT Electr onic 
Service Delivery (ESD) Rules.  
 The Committee are unable to comprehend the intention of the 
Government while bringing a separate legislation for electronic delivery of 
services, particularly when the Model State Electronic Services Delivery (ESD) 
Rules are being formulated under the IT Act. Moreso, the international 
experience also indicates that the IT laws have  been just 
facilitating/enhancing/promoting electronic governance/transactions through 
their IT legislations. The Committee, therefore, feel that the purpose of 
facilitating Electronic Delivery of Services would have been achieved through 
some amendments to the comprehensive IT legislation i.e. ‘The Information 
Technology Act, 2000’. Even if the new law was to be brought, it should have 
been a model enabling legislation which could have replaced the model rules 
and remain a guiding law for the States/UTs while enacting their own 
legislation.  

 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to reconsider the whole 
issue of bringing separate EDS leg islation in consultation with the legal and IT 
experts before the Bill is taken up for consideration by Parliament. In case the 
Department still feels the necessity of bringing the law, the concerns of the 
Committee with regard to various provisions made i n the proposed legislation 
should be given due consideration and necessary modifications as suggested 
be made in the Bill. 
 
 RAO INDERJIT SINGH 
New Delhi Chairman, 
29 August, 2012 Standing Committee on  
07 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Information Technology 
 
 

Appendix-I 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 Bill No. 137 of 2011 
 
THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF SERVICES BILL, 2011 
 
———— ARRANGEMENT OF 
CLAUSES 
———— 
CHAPTER 
I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
CLAUSES 
 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
 
2. Definitions. 
 
CHAPTER II ELECTRONIC 
SERVICE DELIVERY 
3. Delivery of public services through electronic mode. 
 
4. Duty of competent authority. 
 
5. Specification of electronic governance standards. 
 
6. Notification of Grievance Redressal Mechanism. 
 
7. Complaint in respect of non availability of service in electronic mode. 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
THE CENTRAL ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY COMMISSION 
 
8. Constitution of Central Electronic Service Delivery Commission. 
 
9. Qualifications for appointment of Central Chief Commissioner and Central 
Commissioners. 
 
10. Genera l superintendence , directio n and contro l to vest in Centra l Chief  
Commissioner. 
 
11. Term of office and conditions of service. 
 
12. Resignation and removal. 
 
13. Meetings. 
 
14. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Commission. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
THE STATE ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY COMMISSION 
 
15. State Electronic Service Delivery Commission. 
 
16. Genera l superintendence , directio n and contro l to vest in Centra l Chief  
Commissioner. 
 
17. Qualification s for appointmen t of Chie f State Commissione r and State  
Commissioners. 

 
 
CLAUSES 
(ii) 
 
18. Term of office and conditions of service. 
 
19. Resignation and removal. 
 
20. Meetings. 
 
21. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission. 
 
22. Orders constituting Central Commission or State Commission to be final. 
 
23. Staff of the Central Commission or State Commission. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
FUNCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL COMMISSION AND STATE COMMISSIONS 
 
24. Functions of the Central Commission or State Commission. 
 
25. Reporting. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
REPRESENTATION TO CENTRAL COMMISSION OR STATE COMMISSION 
 
26. Representation. 
 
27. Appeal against order of Commission. 
 
28. Procedure and powers of Central Commission or State Commission. 
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIES 
 
29. Penalty. 
 
30. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
CHAPTER VIII FINANCE, 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
31. Grants by Central Government. 
 
32. Grants by State Governments. 
 
33. Accounts and audit of Central Commission. 
 
34. Accounts and audit of State Commission. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Act to have overriding effect. 
 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
 
37. Directions by Central Government. 
 
38. Directions by State Government. 
 
39. Supersession of Central Commission. 
 
40. Supersession of State Commission. 
 
41. Members to be public servant. 
 
42. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
43. Laying of rules. 
 
44. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
45. Laying of rules. 
 
46. Power to remove difficulties. 

 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 137 of 2011 
 
 
 
THE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF SERVICES BILL, 2011 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to provide for electronic  delivery of public services by the Government to all persons to 
ensure transpa rency, efficienc y, accountabilit y, accessibilit y and reliabilit y in 
delivery of such services and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Electronic Delivery of Services Act, 2011. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act and for differen t States and any referenc e in any such provisio n to the 
10 commencement of this Act shall, in relation to any State, be construed as a reference to 
coming into force of that provision in that State. 
 
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 
(a) ―assisted access‖  means  assistance to access electronic services; 
 
 
 
 
Shor t title, 
exten t and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  

2 
 
(b) ―Central Commission‖ means the Central Electronic Service Delivery 
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 8; 
 
(c) ―Central Chief Commissioner‖ means the Chief Commissioner of the Central 
Commission appointed under sub-section (3) of section 9; 
 
(d) ―Central Commissioner‖ means the Commissioner of the Central Commission 5 
appointed under  sub-section (3) of section 9; 
 
(e) ―competen t authority ‖ means the Head of every   public authorit y or 
Department of the Central Government as notified by the Central Government or the 
public authority or Department of the State Government as notified by the State 
Government, from time to time and includes, the Secretaries to the Central Government 10 
and the Secretarie s to the   State Government , and the Heads of Government 
Organisations and Government Bodies; 
 
(f) ―electronic mode‖ includes any method, process or application to deliver 
any service electronically; 
 
(g) ―electronic service delivery‖  means the delivery of public services or other 15  
services through electronic mode including,  the receipt of forms and applications, 
issue or grant of any licence, permit, certificate, sanction or approval and the receipt 
or payment of money; 
 
(h) ―Grievance Redressal Mechanism‖ means the mechanism for redressal of 
public grievances as notified by the Central Government and the State Government; 20  
 
(i) ―law‖ includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances 
promulgated by the President or a Governor, as the case may be, regulations made by 
the President under article 240, Presid ent’s Act under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of 
article 357 of the Constitution and includes rules, regulations, bye-laws and orders 
issued or made thereunder; 25  
 
(j) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the 
term ―notify‖ shall be construed accordingly; 
 
(k) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
 
(l) ―public authority ‖ means any authorit y or body or institutio n of self- 
government established or constituted,— 30  
 
(i)  by or under the Constitution; 
 
(ii) by or under any other law made by Parliament; 
 
(iii) by or under any other law made by State Legislature; 
 
(iv) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government, 
 
and includes any— 35  
 
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed; 
 
(ii ) non -Governmen t organisatio n substantiall y financed , 
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government; 
 
(m) ―public service‖ means any service or part thereof being provided  to any 
person by the Central Government and the State Government or public authority 40 
either directly or through any service provider and includes the receipt of forms and 
applications, issue or grant of any licence, permit, certificate, sanction or approval 
and the receipt or payment of money by whatever name called in a particular manner; 

3 
 
(n) ―service provider‖ means any individual, agency, company, partnership 
firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body or agency which has been authorised 
by the Central Government or the State Government to offer services through electronic 
mode; 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
21 of  2000.  
 
(o) ―State Commission‖ means the State Electronic Service Delivery Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 15; 
 
(p)  ―State Chief Commissioner‖ means the Chief Commissioner of the State 
Commission appointed under sub-section (3) of section 17; 
 
(q) ―State Commissioner‖ means the Commissioner of the State Commission 
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 17; 
 
(r) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 shall have the same meanings respectively assigned 
to them in that Act. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
15 ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY 
 
3. The Central Government, the State Government and public authorities shall deliver 
all public services by electronic mode within five years of the commencement of this Act 
except such services,— 
 
(a) which cannot be delivered electronically; 
 
20  (b) which can be delivered electronically but the Central Government or the 
State Gov ernment or public authorit y, as the case may be, notifies not to deliver 
electronically for the reasons to be specified in such notification: 
 
Provided that the Central Government, the State Government and public authority 
shall consult the Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, before 
25 notifying any electronic services under clause (b): 
 
Provided further that such period of five years may be extended for a further period 
not exceeding three years by the Central Government or the State Government or public 
authority, in consultation with the Central Commission or the State Commission, for reasons 
to be notified. 
 
30  4. (1) Every competent authority shall publish within one hundred and eighty days 
from the commencement of this Act, the list of all public services to be delivered by it 
through electronic mode. 
 
(2) Every competent authority shall, after the publication of the list under sub-section 
(1), review the same and notify on the  1st day of January of every year– 
 
35  (a) the date by which each such service shall be made available through 
electronic mode; 
 
(b) the manner and quality of delivery of such services  as may be prescribed; 
(c) such other information as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government or the State Government or public authority may, while 
40 reviewing the list under sub-section (2), by notification, omit or add any public service in 
such list: 
 
Provided that any omission in the list shall be subject to the approval of the Central 
Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be: 
Deliver y of 
public  services 
through  
electronic 
mode.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dut y of 
competen t 
authorit y. 

4 
 
Provided further that the reason for such omission shall be notified. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specification 
of  electronic 
governance  
standards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notification 
of  Grievance 
Redressal  
Mechanism.  
 
Complain t  in 
respec t  of 
non -  
availability 
of service  in 
electronic  
mode.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution 
of Central  
Electronic  
Service  
Delivery  
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualifications 
fo r  
appoin tmen t 
of Central 
Chief  
Commissioner 
and Central 
Commissioners. 
(4) The competent authority, while introducing services in an electronic mode, shall— 
 
(a) simplify and improve the existing process and forms relating to such services 
in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
 
(b) provid e assiste d   access to such service s in such manner as may be 5 
prescribed. 
 
5. Any Department in the Government of India may, from time to time, notify, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, electronic governance standards, being not inconsistent 
with electronic governance standards notified by the Central Government, as may be 
necessary for ensuring inter-operability, integration, harmonisation and security of electronic 10  
services:  
 
Provided that a State Government may prescribe such standards which had not been 
notified by the Central Government and the standards so notified by the State Government 
shall remain in force till such standards are notified by the Central Government. 
 
 
6. Every competent authority shall notify a Grievance Redressal Mechanism for the 15 
redressal of grievances under this Act, within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
 
7. (1)  Any aggrieved person may file a complaint in prescribed manner to such 
authority as may be notified under the Grievance Redressal Mechanism notified under 
section 6 with respect to,— 20  
 
(a) non-availability of  public services in an electronic mode as published by 
the competent authority under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
 
(b) deficiency in delivery of the electronic service. 
 
(2) The complaints filed under sub-section (1) shall be dealt with in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 25  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
THE CENTRAL ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY COMMISSION 
 
8. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission to be known 
as the Central Electronic Service Delivery Commission. 30  
 
(2) The Central Commission shall consist of— 
(a) the Central Chief Commissioner; and 
(b) such number of Central Commissioners, not exceeding two, as may be deemed 
necessar y. 
(3) The head office of the Central Commission shall be at Delhi and the Central 35  
Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices 
at other places in India. 
9. (1)  The Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners of the Central 
Commission shall be persons of eminence in public life who have special knowledge of and 
not  less  than  twenty-five  years  of  professional  experience  in   information  technology, 40  
management, public administration or governance: 

5 
 
Provided that the Central Commissioner, at the time of his appointment, shall not be 
more than sixty-two years of age. 
 
(2) The Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioners shall not be a Member 
of Parliament or Member of Legislature of any State or Union territory, or hold any other 
5 office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing 
any profession. 
 
(3) The Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners shall be appointed 
by the President of India on the recommendation of a committee consisting of— 
 
(a) the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India; 
 
10  (b) a person of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India nominated by 
the Central Government; 
 
(c) an expert of repute who has knowledge of, and experience in, information 
technology, public administration or governance to be nominated by the Central 
Government. 
 
15  10. The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the 
Central Commission shall vest in the Central Chief Commissioner who shall be assisted by 
Central Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things 
which may be exercised or done by the Central Commission autonomously. 
 
 
 
11. (1) The Central Chief Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from 
20 the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, 
whichever is earlier, and shall not be eligible for reappointment. 
 
(2) Every Central Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is 
earlier, and not be eligible for reappointment as such Central Commissioner: 
 
25  Provided that where the Central Commissioner is appointed as the Central Chief 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the 
Central Commissioner and the Central Chief Commissioner. 
 
(3)  An officer of the Central Government or the State Government, on his selection as 
the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case may be, shall have 
30 to retir e from servic e befor e joinin g as Centra l Chie f Comm issione r or Central  
Commissioner. 
 
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioner shall be such as may be 
prescribed: 
 
35  Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Central 
Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioner shall not be varied  to their disadvantage 
after their appointment. 
 
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Central Chief 
Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Central 
40 Commissioner shall act as the Central Chief Commissione r, until the date on which a new 
Central Chief Commissioner, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill 
such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 
(6) When the Central Chief Commissioner is unable to discharge his functions owing 
to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Central Commissioner shall discharge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General 
superintendence, 
directio n  and 
contro l to 
vest in 
Centra l  Chief  
Commissione r. 
 
Term of 
offic e  and 
condition s  of 
service. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Resignation  
and  removal.  
6 
 
the functions of the Central Chief Commissioner until the date on which the Central Chief 
Commissioner resumes the charge of his functions. 
 
12. (1) The Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner may, by notice in 
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office: 
 
Provided that the said Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner shall, 5 
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office soone r, continue 
to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until 
a person, duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his 
term of office, whichever is earliest. 
 
(2) The Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner shall not be removed 10 
from his office except by an order by the Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which 
the Central Chief Commissioner or the Central Commissioner had been informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges. 15  
 
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation 
of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner 
referred to in sub-section (2). 
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Central Government 
may, by order, remove the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner from his 20  
office if the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case may be,— 
(a)  is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment; 
or 
 
(c)   has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Central 25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meetings.  
 
 
 
 
Vacanc y,  etc., 
no t  to  
invalidate  
proceedings 
of  Central  
Commission.  
Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case 
may be; or 
 
(e)  has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 30  
to the public interest; or 
 
(f)  has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Central Chief 
Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case may be. 
 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), no Central Commissioner 
or  Central Chief Commissioner shall be removed from his office on the ground specified in 35  
clause (d) or clause (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court, on a reference being made  
to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the 
Central Commissioner or Central Chief Commissioner, ought on such ground or grounds to 
be removed. 40  
 
13. The Central Commission shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe 
such rules of procedures in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed. 
 
14. No act or proceeding of the Central Commission shall be invalid merely by reason 
of— 45  
 
(a)  any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Commission; 
or 

7 
 
(b) any defect in the appointment of Central Chief Commissioner or Central 
Commissioner; or 
 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Central Commission not affecting the 
merits of the case. 
 
5 CHAPTER IV 
 
THE STATE ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY COMMISSION 
 
15.  (1)  With effect from such date  as the State Government may, by notification 
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission to be known 
as the .........(name of the State) Electronic Service Delivery Commission. 
 
10 (2) The State Commission shall consist of— 
(a) the State Chief Commissioner; and 
(b) such number of State Commissioners, not exceeding two, as may be deemed 
necessar y. 
 
(3) The head office of the State Commission shall be at such place as the State 
15 Government may, by notification, specify and the State Commission may, with the previous 
approval of the State Government, establish offices at other places in State. 
 
16. The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the State 
Commission shall vest in the State Chief Commissioner who shall be assisted by the State 
Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may 
20 be exercised or done by the State Commission autonomously. 
 
 
 
17. (1) The State Chief Commissioner and the State Commissioners shall be appointed 
by the State Government from amongst the persons of eminence in public life who have 
special knowledg e and not less than twenty-five years of professiona l experienc e in 
information technology,  management, public administration or governance: 
 
25  Provided that the State Commissioner, at the time of his appointment, shall not be 
more than sixty-two years of age. 
 
(2) The State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioners shall not be a Member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any 
30 business or pursuing any profession. 
 
(3) The State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners shall be appointed by the 
Governor of the State on the recommendation of a committee consisting of— 
(a) Chief Secretary of the State; 
(b) a person of the rank of Principal Secretary to the State Government nominated 
35 by the State Government; 
 
(c) an expert of repute who has knowledge and experience in information 
technolog y, public administratio n   or governanc e to be nominated by the State 
Government. 
 
18. (1) The State Chief Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the 
40 date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever 
is earlier, and shall not be eligible for reappointment as such State Chief Commissioner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State  
Electronic  
Service  
Delivery  
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General 
superintendence, 
directio n  and 
contro l to 
vest in 
Centra l  Chief  
Commissione r. 
 
Qualifications 
fo r  
appointmen t 
of Chief  State 
Commissioner 
and State 
Commissioners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of 
offic e  and 
condition s  of 
service. 

8 
 
(2) Every State Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever  is 
earlier, and shall not be eligible for reappointment as such State Commissioner: 
 
Provide d that where the State Commissione r is appointe d as the State Chief  
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the State 5 
Commissioner and the State Chief Commissioner. 
 
(3) An officer of the Central Government or the State Government, on his selection as 
the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be, shall have to retire 
from service before joining as State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner. 
 
(4)  The salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service    10  
of the State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the State Government: 
 
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the State 
Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage 
after their appointment. 15  
 
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the State Chief 
Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most State 
Commissioner shall act as the State Chief Commissioner, until the date on which a new State 
Chief Commissioner, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such 
vacancy, enters upon his office. 20  
 
(6) When the State Chief Commissioner is unable to discharge his functions owing to 
absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most State Commissioner shall discharge the 
function s of the State Chief Commissione r until the date on which the State Chief 
Commissioner resumes the charge of his functions. 
 
Resignation  
and  removal.  
 
19. (1) The State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner may, by notice in writing    25  
under his hand addressed to the State Government, resign his office: 
 
Provided that the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner shall, unless he is 
permitted by the State Government to relinquish his o ffice sooner, continue to hold o ffice 
until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly 
appointed as his successor enters upon his office, or until the expiry of his term of office,    30  
whichever is earliest. 
 
(2) The State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner shall not be removed from 
his office except by an order by the State Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour 
or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the High Court in which the State Chief 
Commissioner or the  State Commissioner,  as the case may be,  had been informed of the   35 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges. 
 
(3) The State Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner 
referred to in sub-section (2). 40  
 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the State Government 
may, by order, remove the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner from his office 
if such State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be,— 
 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 
 
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment; or    4 5  

9 
 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be; 
5 or 
 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest; or 
 
(f) has become physicall y or mentally incapabl e of acting as State Chief 
Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be. 
 
10  (5) Notwithstandin g anythin g containe d in sub -sectio n (4), no Stat e Chief 
Commissioner or State Commissioner, shall be removed from his office on the ground specified 
in clause (d) or clause (e) of that sub -section unless the High Court, on a reference being 
made to it in this behalf by the State Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the High Court, reported that the 
15 State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, ought on such ground or grounds to be 
removed. 
 
20. The State Commission shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such 
rules of procedures in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meetings.  
 
20  
of— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
21. No act or proceeding of the State Commission shall be invalid merely by reason  
 
 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the State Commission; 
or 
 
(b)  any defect in the appointment of the State Chief Commissioner or State 
Commissioner; or 
 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Commission not affecting the 
merits of the case. 
Vacanc y,  etc., 
no t  to  
invalidate 
proceeding s  of 
Commission.  
 
22. No order  of the Central Government or the State Government appointing any 
person as the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner or, as the case may be, 
30 State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, shall be called in question in any manner 
and no act or proceeding before the Central Commission or State Commission shall be 
called in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the constitution 
thereof. 
 
23. (1) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall 
35 provide the Central Chief Commissione r and Central Commissioner s or State Chief 
Commissioner or State Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary 
for the efficient performance of their functions under this Act. 
 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of service of 
the officers and other employees appointed for such purpose shall be such as may be 
40 prescribed. 
 
(3) The officers and employees of the Central Commission or the State Commission, 
as the case may be, shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of 
the Central Chief Commissioner or the State Chief Commissioner, as the case may be. 
Orders  
constituting  
Central  
Commission 
or State  
Commission 
to be  final. 
 
 
Staff of 
Central  
Commission 
or State  
Commission.  

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Function s  of 
Central  
Commission 
or   State 
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting.  
CHAPTER V 
 
FUNCTIONS OF THE  CENTRAL COMMISSION AND STATE COMMISSION 
 
24.  (1) The Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, shall 
monitor the implementation of this Act on a regular basis. 
 
 
( 2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of 5 
the Central Commission and State Commission shall,  amongst other things, include the 
following, namely:— 
 
(a) monitoring the publication of services to be delivered through electronic 
mode and adherence to the time schedule, manner of delivery and quality of service 
notified  for  delivery  of  public  services  by  the  Central  Government  or  the  State    1 0  
Government, as the case may be; 
 
(b) monitoring the periodic progress made by the Central Government, the State 
Government and public authority, as the case may be, towards achieving the delivery 
of all services through electronic mode in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
 
(c) recommending the simplification of processes and forms relating to delivery   1 5 
of electronic services by the Central Government, the State Government and public 
authority, as the case may be; 
 
(d) monitorin g the effectivenes s of feedbac k and Grievanc e Redressal 
Mechanisms established by the Central Government, the State Government  and the 
public authority, as the case may be; 20  
 
(e) monitoring the periodic progress made by the Central Government, the State 
Government and the public authority, as the case may be, towards compliance with the 
applicable electronic governance standards  and make recommendations in respect 
thereof; and 
 
(f) performing any other function as may be prescribed by the Central Government    25  
or the State Government, as the case may be. 
 
25. (1) The Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, shall, 
prepare, in such form and at such time every year, as may be prescribed, an annual report on 
the implementation of the provisions of this Act during the previous financial year and 
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government and the State Government. 30  
 
(2) Every Ministry or Department of the Central Government and the State Government 
shall, in relation to the public authorities within their jurisdiction, collect and provide such 
information, as may be prescribed, to the Central Commission or the State Commission, as 
the case may be, as is required to prepare the report referred to in sub-section (1) and comply 
with the requirements concerning the furnishing of that information for the purpose of this    35  
section. 
 
(3) The information referred to in sub-section (2), shall include,— 
 
(a) till such time as all public services offered by the public authorities under 
their control have been made available through electroni c mode, the details of 
complianc e  in  respec t  of  the  provision s  of   sectio n  3  and  sub-sectio n  (2)  of    40  
section 4; 
 
(b) in respect of the year to which the report referred to in sub-section (1) 
relates,— 

11 
 
(i) the number of electronic service requests received and the total number 
of service requests in respect of that service made available through electronic 
mode; 
 
(ii) the number of electronic service requests in response to which service 
5 was provided in accordance with the applicable quality of service and prescribed 
details of the remaining cases; 
 
(iii) the number of grievances pertaining to the provision of electronic 
services received under the Grievance Redressal Mechanism and information 
related to such grievances and their disposal; 
 
10  (iv) the steps taken by the competent authority to sustain and promote the 
delivery of services through electronic mode in conformity with the provisions 
of this Act; 
 
(v) the steps taken by the competent authority to ensure compliance with 
the applicable electronic governance standards; 
 
15  (vi) the steps taken by the competent authority to ensure the availability 
of assisted access; 
 
(vii) details of the feedback received by the competent authority in respect 
of the implementation of various provisions of this Act and in respect of services 
made available through electronic mode, and the action taken by the competent 
20 authority in pursuance thereof; 
 
(c) recommendations for further development, improvement, modernisation and 
integration of electronic services and the legal and policy interventions which may be 
required to improve electronic service delivery; 
 
(d) any other information as the Central Commission or the State Commission, as 
25 the case may be, may require from time to time. 
 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, as soon 
as practicable after the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the Central Commission 
or the State Commission, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1), to be laid before 
each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature, 
30 where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature, before 
that House. 
 
(5) If it appears to the Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may 
be, that the practice of a Ministry, Department or public authority in relation to the exercise 
of its functions under this Act does not conform with the provisions of this Act, it may direct 
35 the competent authority to take such steps which it considers necessary to be taken for 
promoting such conformity: 
 
Provided that no such direction shall be issued by the Central Commission or the State 
Commission, as the case may be, without providing the Ministry, Department or public 
authority, a reasonable opportunity for taking corrective measures. 
 
40  (6)   The Ministry, Department or public authority, as the case may be, on finding that 
there exist circumstances which require a review of such directions, may apply to the Central 
Commission or the State Commission, for review of such directions of the Central Commission 
or the State Commission, as the case may be, and the Central Commission or the State 
Commission may, after review, modify or cancel the direction or issue a fresh direction. 
45 CHAPTER VI 
 
REPRESENTATION TO CENTRAL COMMISSION OR STATE COMMISSION 
 
26. (1) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism on 
the complaint filed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 7, may make a representation, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Representation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal  against 
order  of 
Commission.  
 
 
 
Procedure  and 
powers  of 
Central  
Commission 
or State 
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalt y. 
12 
 
in such manner as may be prescribed, to the Central Commission or the State Commission, as 
the case may be . 
 
(2) The Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, while 
disposing of the representation made under sub-section (1), shall give reasonable opportunity 
of hearing to the competent authority and the appellant. 
 
(3) The Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, shall dispose 
of the representation in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
 
27. (1) Any person aggrieved against an order of the Central Commission may file an 
appeal to the High Court of Delhi. 
 
(2) Any person aggrieved against an order of the State Commission may file an appeal 
to the High Court of the State where such State Commission is located. 
 
28.  (1) The Central Commission or State Commission shall not be bound by the 
procedure laid down by the  Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908, but shall  be guided  by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made thereunder, the Central Commission or State Commission shall have powers to regulate 
its own procedure including the place at which it shall hold its sittings. 
 
(2) The Central Commission or State Commission, as the case may be, shall, 
while inquiring into any matter under this section, have the same powers as are vested 
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect 
of the following matters, namely: — 
 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 
 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic 
records; 
 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
 
(e) issuing directions to the competent authority for promoting conformity to 
the provisions of this Act; 
 
(f) imposing penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of this Act as per 
section 29; 
 
(g) reviewing its decisions; 
 
(h) dismissing an application for default or disposing it ex parte; 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIES 
29. (1) Where a Competent Authority or any officer under it, while discharging duty 
relating to any provision of this Act, without any reasonable cause, contravenes any provision 
of this Act, or the directions issued by the Central Commission or the State Commission, 
then, the Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, may, after providing 
it or him, as the case may be, the opportunity of being heard, impose upon it or him a penalty 
which may extend up to five thousand rupees. 
 
(2) In case of wilful and persistent default of any of the provisions of this Act or the 
directions issued by the Central Commission or the State Commission, on the part of any 
competent authority or any officer under it, the penalty referred to in sub-section (1) may 
extend up to twenty thousand rupees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
5  of 1908.  
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20   5 of  1908.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  

13 
 
30.  All sums realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII FINANCE, 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
5  31. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the 
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) The Central Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for 
performing the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure 
10 payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
32. (1) The State Government shall, after due appropriation made by Legislature by 
law in this behalf, pay to the State Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the 
State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) The State Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for performing 
15 the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of 
the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
33.  (1)  The Central Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
 
20  (2) The accounts of the Central Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred 
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Central Commission to the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General. 
 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection 
25 with the audit of the accounts of the Central Commission under this Act shall, have the same 
rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of boo ks, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Central 
30 Commission. 
 
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Central Commission 
and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it 
35 is received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
34.  (1) The State Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by 
the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
 
(2)   The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
40 Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred 
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the State Commission to the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General. 
 
(3)   The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the State Commission under this Act shall have 
40 the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government 
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
 
 
Crediting  sums 
realised by 
way of 
penaltie s to 
Consolidated 
Fund of  India. 
 
 
 
Grants by 
Central  
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grants by State 
Governments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts  and 
audit  of 
Central  
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts  and 
audit  ofState 
Commission.  

14 
 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the State Commission. 
 
(4) The accounts of the State Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the State Government by the State Commission and 5 
the State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before the State Legislature. 
 
 
 
 
 
Act to  have 
overriding  
effect.  
 
 
Protectio n  of 
actio n  taken  
in  good faith. 
 
 
Direction s  by 
Central  
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Direction s  by 
State  
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supersession 
of Central 
Commission.  
 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 10 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
 
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder. 15  
 
37. (1)   Without prejudice to the foregoin g provision s of this Act, the Central 
Commission shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, 
be guided by such directions on questions of policy involving public interest, as may be 
given to it by the Central Government in writing from time to time. 
 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Central Commission 20 
as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy involving public interest, the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
 
38. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the State Commission 
shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be guided 
by such directions on questions of policy, involving public interest, as may be given to it by 25  
the State Government in writing from time to time. 
 
(2) If any dispute arises between the State Government and the State Commission as 
to whether a question is or is not a question of policy involving public interest, the decision 
of the State Government thereon shall be final. 
 
39.  (1) If at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion— 30  
 
(a) that on accoun t of circumstance s beyond the contro l of the Central 
Commission, it is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on 
it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 
 
(b) that the Central Commission has persistently made default in complying with 
any direction given by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of 35  
the functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of 
this Act and as a result of such default, the financial position of the Central Commission 
or the administration of the Commission has suffered; or 
 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to 
do, 40  
 
the Central Government, after consultation with the committee appointed under sub-section 
(3) of section 9 may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede the 
Central Commission for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the 
notification: 
 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give 45  

15 
 
a reasonable opportunity to the Central Commission to make representation against the 
proposed supersession and shall consider representation, if any, of the Commission. 
 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Central 
Commission,— 
 
5  (a) the Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners shall as from the 
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; 
 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions 
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Central Commission shall, 
until the Central Commission is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and 
10 discharged by the Central Government or such authority as the Central Government 
may specify in this behalf; 
 
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Central Commission shall, until the 
Central Commissio n is reconstitute d under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central 
Government. 
 
15  (3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification 
issued under sub-sectio n (1), the Centra l Governmen t shall reconstitut e the Central 
Commissio n by a fresh appointment of its Central Chief Commissione r and Central 
Commissioners and in such case, any person who had vacated his office under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment. 
 
20  (4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section (1) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such 
action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
40. (1) If at any time, the State Government is of the opinion— 
 
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the State Commission, 
25 it is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under 
the provisions of this Act; or 
 
(b) that the State Commission has persistently made default in complying with 
any direction given by the State Government under this Act or in the discharge of the 
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this 
30 Act and as a result of such default, the financial position of the State Commission or 
the administration of the Commission has suffered; or 
 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supersession  of 
State 
Commissi on. 
do, 
 
the State Government, after consultation with the committee appointed under sub-section 
35 (3) of section 17, may by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede the 
State Commission for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the 
notification: 
 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the State Government shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the State Commission to make representation against the proposed 
40 supersession and shall consider representation, if any, of the Commission. 
 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the State 
Commission,— 
 
(a)  the State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners shall as from the 
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; 
 
45  (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions 
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the State Commission shall, 
until the State Commission is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member s  to 
be public 
servant.  
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central  
Government 
to make  rules. 
16 
 
discharged by the State Government or such authority as the State Government may 
specify in this behalf; 
 
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the State Commission shall, until the 
State Commission is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the State Government. 
 
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification 
issued under sub-section (1), the State Government shall reconstitute the State Commission 
by a fresh appointment of its State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners and in such 
case, any person who had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be 
deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment. 
 
(4) The State Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section (1) and 
a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such 
action to be laid before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, 
or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
 
41.  The Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners and officers and 
other employees of the Central Commission and the State Chief Commissioner and State 
Commissioners and officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be deemed, 
while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
 
 
42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
 
(a) the manner and qualit y of deliver y of service s   under clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) of section 4; 
 
(b) other information under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4; 
 
(c) the manner of simplification and improvement of existing process and forms 
relating to such services under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 
(d) the manner in which assisted access to electronic services shall be provided 
to specified categories of users under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 
(e)  the manner of notifying of electronic governance standards for ensuring 
inter-operability, integration, harmonisation and security of electronic services under 
section 5; 
 
(f) the time and the manner of notifying the Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
under section 6; 
 
(g) the manner of filing complaint by the aggrieved person under sub-section (1) 
of section 7; 
(h) the manner of dealing with complaints under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
(i) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Central 
Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners under sub-section (4) of section 11; 
 
(j) the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the 
Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 
12; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
45 of  1860.  
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
(k) the time and places and the rules of procedure for the transaction of business 
of the Central Commission under section 13; 
 
(l) salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of staff of 45  
the Central Commission under sub-section (2) of section 23; 

17 
 
(m) any other function to be performed by the Central Commission under clause 
(f) of sub-section (2) of section 24; 
 
(n) the form and time for preparatio n of the annual report of the Central 
Commission under sub-section (1) of section 25; 
 
5  (o) the informatio n to the Centra l Commissio n under sub-sectio n (2) of 
section 25; 
 
(p) details of the remaining cases under sub-clause (ii) of clause ( b) of sub- 
section (3) of section 25; 
 
(q) the manner of making representation before the Central Commission under 
10 sub-section (1) of section 26; 
 
(r) the procedure to be followed while disposing the representation under sub- 
section (3) of section 26; 
 
(s) any other matter under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 28; 
 
(t)  the form of preparation of the annual statement of accounts of the Central 
15 Commission under sub-section (1) of section 33; 
 
43. Every rule made and every notification issued by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
20 immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or the notification or both Houses agree that the rule 
or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
25 done under that rule or notification. 
 
44. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
30  (a) the manner and quality of delivery of services  under clause (b) of sub- 
section (2) of section 4; 
(b) other information under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(c) the manner of simplification and improvement of existing process and forms 
relating to such services under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 4; 
35  (d) the manner in which assisted access to electronic services shall be provided 
to specified categories of users under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4; 
(e)   the manner of notifying electronic governance standards for ensuring 
inter-operability, integration, harmonisation and security of electronic services under 
section 5; 
40  (f) the time and the manner of notifying the Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
under section 6; 
(g) the manner of filing complaint by the aggrieved person under sub-section (1) 
of section 7; 
(h) the manner of dealing with complaints under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
45 (i) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of State 
Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners under sub-section (4) of section 18; 
(j) the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the State 
Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 19; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Layin g  of 
rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of  State 
Government 
to make  rules. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying  of 
rules. 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
18 
 
(k) the time and places and the rules of procedure for the transaction of business 
of the State Commission under section 20; 
 
(l) salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of staff of 
the State Commission under sub-section (2) of section 23; 
 
(m) any other function to be performed by the State Commission under clause (f) 5 
of sub-section (2) of section 24; 
 
(n) the form and the time for preparation of the annual report of the State 
Commission under sub-section (1) of section 25; 
 
(o) the information to the State Commission under sub-section (2) of section 25; 
 
(p) details of the remaining cases under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub- 10  
section (3) of section 25; 
 
(q) the manner of making representations before the State Commission under 
sub-section (1) of section 26; 
 
(r) the procedure to be followed while disposing the representation under sub- 
section (3) of section 26; 15  
 
(s) any other matter under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 28; 
 
(t)  the form of preparation of the annual statement of accounts of the State 
Commission under sub-section (1) of section 34. 
 
45. Every notification or rule made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is notified, before each House of the State Legislature where it 20 
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 
 
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary or expedient for 25 
removal of the difficulty: 
 
Provided no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
date of the commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 30  

 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The National e-Governance Plan approved by the Government in May, 2006 envisages 
to make all Government services accessible to the common man in his locality, through 
common service delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, transparency and reliability of such 
services at affordable costs to realise the basic needs of the common man. 
 
2. In order to realise this, the Central Government  is creating a common core and 
support infrastructure consisting of State Wide Area Networks, State Data Centres, Common 
Services Centres and Electronic Service Delivery Gateways, besides evolving and laying 
down Standards and Policy Guidelines to ensure sharing of information and seamless inter- 
operability of data and e-Governance applications. The National  e-Governance Plan lays 
down policy guidelines and stipulates service delivery orientation and strategy for identified 
e-Governance projects in Mission Mode in various Ministries. 
 
3. With the enactment of the Right to Information Act, 2005 an obligation has been 
placed on the Central Government and State Governments and all public authorities under 
them to provide information to citizens to ensure  transparency and accountability in their 
functioning. The Information Technology Act, 2000 provides for legal recognition of electronic 
transactions for enabling citizens to electronically access information and public services 
efficiently and seamlessly. 
 
4. Thoug h significantl y the groun d has bee n covere d unde r the National 
e-Governance Plan in terms of the provisioning of necessary infrastructure and creation of 
institutional  or organisational structures, and to a lesser extent, in the delivery of services, 
it is felt that the pace of implementation in enabling electronic delivery of public services is 
not commensurate with citizens’ aspirations and expectations. It is also felt that the most 
critical challenge is to speed up the process of enabling electronic delivery of public services 
to the citizens. 
 
5. For promoting e-Governance in the country, the second Administrative Reforms 
Commission, in its Eleventh Report submitted in 2008, has recommended a clear road map 
with set of milestones to be outlined by Government of India with the ultimate objective of 
transforming the citizen-Government interaction at all levels to the e-Governance mode by 
2020 through a legal framework, taking into consideration the mammoth dimension of the 
task, the levels of required coordination between the Union and State Governments and the 
diverse field situations in which it would be implemented. 
 
6. To give effect to this recommendation of the Administrative Reforms Commission, 
and for resolving issues like resistance to change, systemic inertia, procedural hurdles, lack 
of transparency and legal impediments experienced in electronic delivery of services, it is 
proposed to enact a legislation which would mandate provisioning of all public services 
compulsorily through electronic means from a specified date. 
 
7. Accordingly, it is proposed to provide for the following matters, namely:— 
 
(i) within a period of five years from the date of coming into force of the Act, the 
Central Government, the State Governments and all public authorities under them shall 
deliver all public services by electronic mode except such services which cannot be 
delivered electronically, and the said period may be extended by a further period of 
three years to achieve the said object; 
 
(ii) all concerned Government Departments shall, within one hundred and eighty 
days from the date of coming into force of the Act, publish a list of all public services 
to be delivered through electronic mode; 
 
 
19 

20 
 
(iii) all concerned Government departments to review and verify— 
 
(a) the date by which each such service shall be made available through 
electronic mode; 
 
(b) the manner and quality of delivery of such services; 
 
(c) any addition or omission in the list of services so notified; 
 
(iv) simplify and improve existing processes and forms relating to these services; 
(v) provide  assisted access to electronic services; 
(vi) notify electronic governance standards to ensure inter-operability, integration, 
harmonisation and security of electronic services; 
 
(vii) all concerned Departments to notify Grievance Redressal Mechanisms for 
the redressal of grievances relating to electronic delivery of services; 
 
(viii) establishment of an oversight mechanism for implementation and monitoring 
of the Act in the form of the Central Electronic Service Delivery Commission at the 
Central Government level and the State Electronic Service Delivery Commission at the 
State Government level; 
 
(ix) to empower  the Central Commission or the  State Commission to issue 
directions to the concerned Ministries or Departments to ensure actions in conformity 
with the Act; 
 
(x) imposition of a penalty on defaulting officials for contravention of the 
provisions of this Act; 
 
(xi) empower the Central Government and the State Government to issue 
directions on questions of policy involving public interest to the Central Commission 
or the State Commission. 
 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL. 
The 21st December, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes on clauses 
 
Clause 1.— This clause of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to extend the provisions of the Bill 
to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir commencement of the proposed 
EDS Legislation. It provides that it shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may appoint by notification in the Official Gazette and the Central Government 
may appoint different dates for different provisions of the proposed legislation and for 
different States. 
 
Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill which inter 
alia include ―assisted access‖, ―Central Commission‖, ―Central Chief Commissioner‖, ―Central 
Commissioner‖, ―competent authority’, ―electronic mode‖, ―electronic service delivery’, 
―Grievance redressal mechanism‖, ―public authority’, ―public service‖, ―service provider‖, 
―State Commission‖, ―State Chief Commissioner‖, ―State Commissioner‖ etc. 
 
Clause 3.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the delivery of all public 
services through electronic mode by the Central Government, the State Government and 
public authorities within five years of the commencement of the proposed legislation except 
certain services specified therein. However, before notifying any electronic services, the 
Central Government or the State Government or public authority shall consult the Central 
Commission or the State Commission. 
 
It further provides that the Central Government or the State Government or public 
authority in consultation with the Central or the State Commission may extend such period of 
five years by a further period not exceeding three years. 
 
Clause 4.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the duty of competent authority 
which, inter alia, includ e publishin g within one hundre d and eighty days from the 
commencement of the proposed legislation, the list of all public services which are to be 
delivered by it through electronic mode,  to review and notify the list of all public services 
which are to be delivered through electronic mode, the date by which each such service shall 
be made available through electronic mode, the manner and quality of delivery of such 
services, omission or addition of any   public service in such list,the simplification and 
improvement of the existing process and forms relating to such services and to provide 
assisted access to such services. 
 
Clause 5.—This clause of the Bill seeks to p rovide for specification of electronic 
governance standards which are not inconsistent with electronic governance standards 
notified by the Central Government in the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology(Departmen t of Informatio n Technology ), for ensurin g inter-operabilit y, 
integration, harmonization and security of electronic services. This clause also empowers 
the State Governments to prescribe standards which are not notified by the Central Government 
and such standards shall be valid till the Standards are notified by the Central Government. 
 
Clause 6.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for notification of Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism by the competent authority  for the redressal of grievances within 
such time and in such manner as may be provided by rules. 
 
Clause 7.— This clause of the Bills seeks to provide for filing of complaint by any 
aggrieved person in respect of non-availability of service in electronic mode and deficiency 
in delivery of electronic service in such manner as may be provided by rules. 
 
Clause 8.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of Central 
Electronic Service Delivery Commission by the Central Government which shall consist of 
the Central Chief Commissioner and such number of Central Commissioners not exceeding 
 
21 

22 
 
two and that the Head Office of the Central Commission shall be at Delhi. It also empowers 
the Central Commission to establish offices at other places in India with the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 
Clause 9.— This clause of the Bill seeks to lay down the qualifications for appointment 
of Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners of the Central Commission who 
shall be persons of eminence in public life who have special knowledge of and not less than 
twenty-five years of professional experience in, information technology, management, public 
administration or governance. The age of Central Commissioner at the time of his appointment 
shall not be more than sixty two years of age. The Central Chief Commissioner or Central 
Commissioners shall not be a Member of Parliament or Member of Legislature of any State 
or Union territory, or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or 
carrying on any business or pursuing any profession. 
 
It further provides that the Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners 
shall be appointed by the President of India on the recommendation of a committee consisting 
of the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India, a person of the rank of Secretary to the 
Government of India nominated by the Central Government, an expert of repute who has 
knowledge of, and experience in information technology, public administration or governance 
to be nominated by the Central Government. 
 
Clause 10.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for vesting in the Central Chief 
Commissioner, the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the 
Central Commission and that he shall be assisted by Central Commissioners to exercise all 
such powers and do all such acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Central 
Commission autonomously. 
 
Clause 11.— This clause of the Bill seeks to lay down conditions of service of the 
Central Chief Commissioner and Central Commissioners, their period of office, salaries and 
allowances payable and other terms and conditions of service. Sub-clause (2) thereof provides 
that the Central Chief Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is 
earlier, and shall not be eligible for reappointment. Every Central Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains 
the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and not be eligible for reappointment as such 
Central Commissioner. However, where the Central Commissioner is appointed as the Central 
Chief Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate 
as the Central Commissioner and the Central Chief Commissioner. 
Sub-clause (3) thereof provides that where an officer of the Central Government or the 
State Government is selected as the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as 
the case may be, he shall have to retire from service before joining as Central Chief 
Commissioner or Central Commissioner. 
Sub-clause (4) thereof provides for salaries and allowances payable to and other term 
and condition of service of the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioners and 
that the same shall not be varied to their disadvantages. 
 
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in the event of the occurrence of a vacancy 
in the office of the Central Chief Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, 
the senior-most Central Commissioner shall act as the Central Chief Commissioner, until the 
date on which a new Central Chief Commissioner, appointed in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that whenever the Central Chief Commissioner 
is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior- 
most Central Commissioner shall discharge the functions of the Central Chief Commissioner 
until the date on which the Central Chief Commissioner resumes the charge of his functions. 
 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

23 
 
Clause 12.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the resignation and removal 
of the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner. The Central Chief Commissioner 
or Central Commissioner may by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government , resign his office. Sub-clause (2) thereof provide that the Central Chief 
Commissioner or Central Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except by an 
order by the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which the Central Chief Commissioner or 
the Central Commissioner had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
Sub-clause (3) thereof empowers the Central Government to make rules to regular 
procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or in capacity. 
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides the circumstances under which the Central Chief 
Commissioner or the Central Commissioner   may be removed.  Where the Central Chief 
Commissioner or the Central Commissioner is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an 
insolvent or has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment or 
has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude or has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner, as the case may be 
or due to abuse of office rendering his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; 
or due to physical or mental disability. 
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides for reference to the Supreme Court by the 
Central Government in some circumstances for the removal of Central Commissioner or 
Central Chief Commissioner. 
Clause 13.— This clause provides for meeting of the Central Commission at such 
times and places and for observing such rules or procedures in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings. 
Clause 14.— This clause provides that any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution 
of the Central Commission or any defect in the appointment of Central Chief Commissioner or 
Central Commissioner or any irregularity in the procedure of the Central Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case shall not invalidate any act or proceeding of the Central 
Commission. 
Clause 15.— This clause provides for the establishment of a State Commission 
consisting of the State Chief Commissioner and such number of State Commissioners not 
exceeding two and that the head office shall be at such place as the State Government may by 
notification specify and the State Commission with the previous approval of the State 
Government establish offices at other places in the State. 
Clause 16.— This clause provides for vesting in the State Chief Commissioner the 
general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the State Commission 
and that he shall be assisted by State Commissioners to exercise all such powers and do all 
such acts and things which may be exercised or done by the State Commission autonomously. 
Clause 17.— This clause lays down the qualifications for appointment of State Chief 
Commissioner and State Commissioners of the State Commission who shall be persons of 
eminence in public life who have special knowledge of and not less than twenty-five years 
of professional experience in information technology, management, public administration or 
governance. The age of State Commissioner at the time of his appointment shall not be more 
than sixty two years of age. The State Chief Commissioner or the State Commissioners shall 
not be a Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, 
or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any 
busines s or pursuin g any profession . The State Chief Commissione r and the State 
Commissioners shall be appointed by the Governor of the State on the recommendation of a 
committee consisting of the Chief Secretary of the State, a person of the rank of Principal 
Secretary to the State Government nominated by the State Government, an expert of repute 
who has knowledge and experience in information technology, public administration or 
governance to be nominated by the State Government. 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

24 
 
Clause 18.— This clause of the Bill seeks to lay down the conditions of service of the 
State Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners, their period of office, salaries and 
allowances payable and other terms and conditions of service. Sub-clause (2) thereof State 
Chief Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not 
be eligible for reappointment. Every State Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five 
years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five 
years, whichever is earlier, and not be eligible for reappointment as such State 
Commissioner. Where the State Commissioner is appointed as the State Chief 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the 
State Commissioner and the State Chief Commissioner. 
 
This clause also provides that where an officer of the Central Government or the State 
Government is selected as the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case 
may be, he shall have to retire from service before joining as State Chief Commissioner or 
State Commissioner. 
 
Sub-clause (4) thereof provides for salaries and allowances and other terms and 
condition of service of the State Chief Commission and State Commission. 
 
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in the event of the occurrence of a vacancy 
in the office of the State Chief Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or 
otherwise, the senior-most State Commissioner shall act as the State Chief Commissioner, 
until the date on which a new State Chief Commissioner, appointed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that whenever the State Chief Commissioner is 
unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior- 
most State Commissioner shall discharge the functions of the State Chief Commissioner until 
the date on which the State Chief Commissioner resumes the charge of his functions. 
 
Clause 19.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the resignation and removal 
of the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner. The State Chief Commissioner or 
State Commissione r may by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the State 
Government, resign his office. The State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner shall be 
removed from his office by an order by the State Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the High Court in which the 
State Chief Commissioner or the State Commissioner had been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
 
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides the circumstances under which the State Chief 
Commissioner or State Commissioner may be removed. Where the State Chief Commissioner 
or State Commissioner is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent or has engaged 
at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment or has been convicted of an 
offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude or has 
acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, as the case may be or due to abuse of office 
rendering  his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or due to physical or 
mental disability. 
 
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides for reference to the High Court by the State 
Government in some circumstances for the removal of the State Chief Commissioner or the 
State Commissioner. 
 
Clause 20.— This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for meeting of the State Commission 
at such times and places and for observing such rules or procedures in regard to the transaction 
of business at its meetings. 
 
 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

25 
 
Clause 21.—This clause provides that any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution 
of the State Commission or any defect in the appointment of State Chief Commissioner or 
State Commissioner or any irregularity in the procedure of the State Commission not affecting 
the merits of the case shall not invalidate any act or proceeding of the State Commission. 
 
Clause 22.—This clause of the Bill  seeks to provide that no order of the Central 
Governmen t or the Stat e Governmen t appointin g any perso n as the Centra l Chief 
Commissioner or Central Commissioner or State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner, 
shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before the Central 
Commission or State Commission shall be called in question in any manner on the ground 
merely of any defect in the constitution thereof. 
Clause 23.—This clause of the Bill seeks to provide that the Central Government or 
the State Government, as the case may be, shall provide the Central Chief Commissioner and 
Central Commissioners or State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner with such officers 
and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of their functions under 
the proposed legislation, the salaries and allowances payable, the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for such purpose and who are subject 
to the general superintendenc e of the Central Chief Commissione r or the State Chief 
Commissioner, as the case may be. 
 
Clause 24.—This clause of the Bill seeks to provide the functions of the Central 
Commission or the State Commission which inter alia include monitoring the publication of 
services to be delivered through electronic mode and adherence to the time schedule, manner 
of delivery and quality of service notified for delivery of public services by the Central 
Government or the State Government as the case may be, monitoring the periodic progress 
made by the Central Government,  the State Government and public authority as the case 
may be, towards achieving the delivery of all services through electronic mode in accordance 
with the provisions of this proposed legislation, recommending the simplification of processes 
and forms relating to delivery of electronic services by the Central Government, the State 
Government and public authority as the case may be, monitoring the effectiveness of 
established feedback and Grievance Redressal Mechanisms, monitoring the periodic progress 
made by the Central Government, the State Government and the public authority as the case 
may be, towards compliance with the applicable electronic governance standards and make 
recommendations in respect thereof. 
 
Clause 25.—This clause provides for the preparation of an annual report by the Central 
Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on the implementation of the 
provisions of the proposed legislation containing  inter alia  the plan of action to make 
available all public services through electronic mode, the number of electronic service requests 
received  and the total number of service requests in respect of that service made available 
through electronic mode, the number of electronic service requests in response to which 
service was provided in accordance with the applicable  quality of service and  prescribed 
details of the remaining cases, the number of grievances pertain ing to the provision of 
electronic services received under the Grievance Redressal Mechanism and information 
related to such grievances and their disposal, the steps taken by the competent authority to 
sustain and promote the delivery of services through electronic mode in conformity with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation, the steps taken by the competent authority to ensure 
compliance with the applicable electronic governance standards, the steps taken by the 
competent authority to ensure the availability of assisted access etc. 
 
Sub-clause (4) of this clause seeks to provide that at the end of each year the Central 
Government or the State Government shall cause copy of the report of the Central Commission 
or State Commission, as the case may be, before each House of Parliament or each House of 
the State Legislature, as the case may be. 
 
Clause 26.—This clause provides for the representation by any person aggrieved by 
the order of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism to the Central or State Commission as the 
case may be. 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

26 
 
Clause 27.—This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for appeal against the order of the 
Central Commissioner to the High Court of Delhi. 
 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that an appeal against the order of the State 
Commission shall be to the High Court of the State in which such State Commission is 
located. 
 
Clause 28.—his clause provides that the Central Commission or State Commissions 
are not bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but by the 
principles of natural justice and shall have same powers as are vested in a civil court while 
enquiring into any matter. 
 
Clause 29.—This clause provides for  empowering the Central Commission or the 
State Commission to impose penalty on a competent authority or any officer under it  for 
contravention of any provisions of the proposed legislation which may extend up to five 
thousand rupees. In case of wilful and persistent default the penalty may extend up to 
twenty thousand rupees. 
 
Clause 30.—This clause provides for crediting any sums realized by way of penalties 
to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
Clause 31.—This clause provides for payment of grants to the Central Commission by 
the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament. 
 
Clause 32.—This clause provides for payment of grants to the State Commission by 
the State Government after due appropriation made by Legislature. 
 
Clause 33.—This clause provides for maintaining the accounts and other relevant 
records and annual statement of accounts by the Central Commission. It further provides 
that accounts of the Central Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. It also provides that the accounts of Central Commission together with the 
Audit Report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central 
Government shall lay the same before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 34.—This clause provides for maintaining the accounts and other relevant 
records and annual statement of accounts by the State Commission. It further provides that 
accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. It also provides that the accounts of State Commission as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf  together with the 
Audit Report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the State Government and the State 
Government shall lay the same before the State Legislature. 
 
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of the proposed legislation 
shall have overriding effect. 
 
Clause 36.—This clause provides for protection of any person from legal proceedings 
etc., for the action taken in good faith. 
 
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to issue directions 
on questions of policy for guiding the Central Commission from time to time. 
 
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to empower the State Government to issue directions 
on questions of policy for guiding the State Commission from time to time. 
 
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to supersede the 
Central Commission if it is of the opinion that the Central Commission is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it. However, the Central Government shall 
give a reasonable opportunity to the Central Commission to make representations against 
the proposed supersession. Howeve r, the Central Government shall cause a notification 
issued and a full report of any action taken and the circumstances leading to such action to 
be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

27 
 
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to empower the State Government to supersede the 
State Commission if it is of the opinion that the State Commission is unable to discharge the 
functions or perform the duties imposed on it. However, the State Government shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the State Commission to make representations against the proposed 
supersession. However, the State Government shall cause a notification issued and a full 
report of any action taken and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before 
each House of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
Clause 41.—This clause provides that Central Chief Commissione r and Central 
Commissioners and officers and other employees of the Central Commission and the State 
Chief Commissioner and State Commissioners and officers and other employees of the State 
Commission shall be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
 
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause 
enumerates the various matters in respect of which such rules may be made. 
 
Clause 43.—This clause provides that every rule made and every notification issued 
under the proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to empower the State Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause 
enumerates the various matters in respect of which such rules may be made. 
 
Clause 45.—This clause provides that every rule made and every notification issued 
under the proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of State Legislature where it 
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 
 
Clause 46.—This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to remove 
difficulties. In case any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation, the Central Government may make such provisions as may be necessary in 
removing the difficulties by order published in the Official Gazette. However, no such order 
shall be made under this clause after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement 
of the proposed legislation and every such order shall also be required to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S-3 /F/ BILL_2011/LS/3473LS/3473LS3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Central 
Electronic Service Delivery Commission. 
 
Sub-clause (4) of Clause 11 of the Bill provides for salaries, allwances and other terms 
and conditions of service of the Central Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioners. 
 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 of the Bill provides for establishment of the State Electronic 
Service Delivery Commission. 
 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 18 provides for salaries, allwances and other terms and 
conditions of service of the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioners. 
 
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 23 of the Bill provides for salaries and allowances payable to 
and the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Central 
Commission and the State Commission. 
 
Clause 30 of the Bill provides that all sums realized by way of penalties under the 
proposed legislation shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
Clause 31 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law, pay to the Central Commission by way of grants such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of the 
proposed legislation and the Central Commission may spend such sums of money as it 
thinks fit for performing the functions under the proposed legislation  out of the grants 
received. The annual expenditure for the operations of the Commission will be of the order of 
Rs 4 crores which can initially be met from within the outlay available with the Department of 
Information Technology. No additional funding is being sought. 
 
Clause 32 of the Bill provides that State Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by the Legislature by law, pay to the State Commission by way of grants such sums of 
money as the State Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of the 
proposed legislation and the State Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks 
fit for performing the functions under the proposed legislation out of the grants received. 
 
The Bill if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose 
of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of said clause 
specifies the various matters in respect of which the rules may be made. These matters 
inter alia, relate to the  manner and quality of delivery of services, the manner in which 
assisted access to electronic services shall be provided to specified categories of users, the 
framing of electroni c governanc e standard s for ensurin g interoperabilit y, integration, 
harmonisation and security under section 5, the manner of notifying the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism under section 6, the manner of filing the complaint by the aggrieved person 
unde r sub-sectio n (1) of sectio n 7, the manne r of processin g of complaint s under 
sub-section (2) of section 7, salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 
Central Chief Commissioner, Central Commissioners, under sub section (4) of section 11, 
regulation of the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Central 
Chief Commissioner or Central Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 12, salaries 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of staff of the Central Commission, the 
form of preparation of the annual report of the Central Commission, the manner of filing of 
representations before the Central Commission, the procedure to be followed while disposing 
the representation, the form of preparation of the annual statement of accounts of the Central 
Commission. 
 
2. Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to carry out the 
provisions of the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause(2) of said clause specifies the various 
matters in respect of which the rules may be made. These matters inter alia, relate to the 
manner and quality of delivery of services, the manner in which assisted access to electronic 
services shall be provided to specified categories of users, the framing of electronic governance 
standards for ensuring interoperability, integration, harmonisation and security under section 
5, the manner of notifying the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under section 6, the manner 
of filing the complaint by the aggrieved person under sub -section (1) of section 7, the 
manner of processing of complaints under sub-section (2) of section 7, salary, allowances 
and other terms and conditions of service of State Chief Commissioner, State Commissioners, 
under sub section (4) of section 18, regulation of the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the State Chief Commissioner or State Commissioner under 
sub-section (3) of section 19, salaries allowances and other terms and conditions of service 
of staff of the State Commission, the form of preparation of the annual report of the State 
Commission, the manner of filing of representations before the State  Commission, the 
procedure to be followed while disposing the representation, the form of preparation of the 
annual statement of accounts of the State Commission. 
 
3. The rules made and notification issued by the Central Government under the proposed 
legislation shall be required to be laid before each House of Parliament and in case of the 
rules made and notification issued by the State Government, before each House of the State 
Legislature where it  consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature  consists of one 
House, before that House. 
 
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the proposed legislation 
are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them 
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 

 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL 
to provide for electronic delivery of public services by the Government to all persons to ensure 
transparency, efficiency, accountability, accessibility and reliability in delivery of such services 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development) 
 
GMGIPMRND—3473LS(S3)—21.12.2011. 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 14 th August, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1600 
hours in Committee Room ‗D‘, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
M.P. Achuthan – In the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Smt. Sarika D.S Baghel 
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
5. Dr. Charles Dias 
6. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
7. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  
8. Shri Joy Abraham 
9. Shri Salim Ansari 
10. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
11. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Additional Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
 
List of Witnesses 
 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
 
 
Sl. No. Names Designation    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
1. Shri  J. Satyanarayana Secretary  
2. Mrs. Rita  Teaotia Additional  Secretary   
3. Dr. B.K. Gairola Director General, NIC 
4. Dr. Gulshan Rai Director General (CERT-In)  
5. Dr. Rajendra Kumar  Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Ajay Sawhney President & CEO, NeGD, DeitY 
7. Shri V.L. Kantha Rao COO, NeGD, DeitY 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
 
 
(i)    Legislative Department 
Sl. No. Names Designation    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
1. Dr. S. D. Singh Joint Secretary and Legislative 
Counsel 
 
2. Ms. Reeta Vasistha Addl. L.C 
(i)    Department of Legal Affairs 
 
Sl. No. Names Designation    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
1. M. K. Sharma Additional Secretary 
2. Mrs. Veena Kothavale D.L.C 
 
2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee under Rule 258(3) chose Shri 
M.P. Achuthan, M.P., and a member of the Committee to preside over the meeting. 
 
3. At the outset, th e Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the  Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology in connection with examination of ‗The Electronic 
Delivery of Services Bill, 2011‘.  
 

 
 
 
 
[The representatives of the Department were then called in] 
 
 
4.  The Chairman welcomed the aforesaid witnesses and drew their attention to the 
provisions of Direction 55(I) of the Directions by the speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House. 
 
5. The Secretary of the Department at the outset explained genesis and need for 
bringing the Bill with the help of power point presentation . The Presentation inter-alia 
focused on va rious provisions in the Bill and the comments of the Department thereon. 
Thereafter, he clarified issues raised by Members regarding infrastructural hurdles , need 
for specifying channels o f delivery of services, financial support, access for physically 
challenged people, etc. 
  
6. The sitting of the Committee, h owever, adjourned in the midst due to the sad 
demise of Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Union Minister of Science and Technology and 
Minister of Earth Sciences. As a mark of respect to the departed soul, the  Committee 
observed silence  for a while and expressed their profound sorrow and grief.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
[The witnesses then withdrew] 
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix-III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 nd August, 2012 f rom 1500 hours to 
1650 hours in Committee Room ‗E‘, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri M.P. Achuthan – in the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
13. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
14. Smt. Sarika D.S. Baghel 
15. Dr. Charles Dias 
16. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
17. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
18. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
19. Shri Tapas Paul 
20. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
21. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
  
22. Shri Joy Abraham 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
25. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
4. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
6. Shri Y.M. Kandpal           -        Additional Director 
7. Smt. Dr.Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology) 
 
1. Shri J. Satyanarayana  Secretary 
2. Shri B.K. Gairola    Director General, NIC 
3. Dr. Rajendra Kumar   Joint Secretary 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) 
 
Shri  M.K. Sharma    Additional Secretary 
(Legislative Department) 
Shri S.D. Singh      Joint  Secretary 
 
3. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri M.P. Achuthan, MP, a 
Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in accordance with rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
4. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  ……….xxxxxx…………………………………xxxxxx………………………………..xxxxxx………… 
The witnesses were then called in 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the D epartment of Electronics 
and Information Technology and the Ministry of Law and Justice and informed that the 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology on ‗The Electronic Delivery of Services  Bill, 20 11‘ at the previous sitting of 
the Committee held on 14 August, 2012  remained inconclusive as the sitting had to be 
adjourned due to   the   sad   demise   of  Shri   Vilasrao  Deshmukh, Union  Minister  of  
Science  and Technology and Earth Sciences and today the Committee would resume 
deliberations on the aforesaid Bill from the stage it was left on that day.  The Chairman 
then drew the attention of the witnesses to the provisions made under Direction 55 (1) 
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha reg arding confidentiality of the 
deliberations till the Report on the Bill is presented to the House.  
 
6. The representatives of the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology then elaborated on the various provisions made under the Bill. The 

 
 
 
 
representatives of the Department also responded to the various queries raised by 
members during the course of deliberations . The important issues came for discussion  
inter-alia included availability of electricity, broadband, computers, multiple languages, 
access of internet to poor families, position about mandatory EDS in other developed 
countries vis-a-vis provisions made in the Bill, etc. The representatives of the Ministry 
of Law and Justice clarified on the legal issues raised during the course of deliberations. 
7. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the Department of Electronics 
and Information Technology and the Ministry of Law and Justice for appearing before 
the Committee and furnishing the information which the Committee desired in 
connection with the examination of the aforesaid Bill.  
The witnesses then withdrew 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***** Matters not related to the Report. 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28 th August, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Charles Dias – in the Chair 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
26. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
27. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary 
28. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
29. Smt. Supriya Sule 
30. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
31. Shri Joy Abraham 
32. Shri Salim Ansari 
33. Shri Mohammad Adeeb 
34. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
35. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
36. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
8. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
9. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
10. Shri Y.M. Kandpal            - Additional Director 
11. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
-2- 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the committee chose Dr. Charles Dias, MP, and a 
Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in accordance with rule  
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the out set, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the draft Report on ‘The Electronic Delivery 
of Services Bill, 2011’. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the Draft Report 
on ‘The Electronic D elivery of Services Bill, 2011’ and adopted the same with minor 
modification at Para No. 17 in Part-II of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the report 
to the House in the current session of Parliament. 
 
5. The Chairman also apprised the Committee that the term of the present 
Committee is coming to an end on 30 th August, 2012 and highlighted the 
achievements/work done by the Committee during their tenure. He then thanked the 
Members for making valuable contributions in the working of the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance provided by the officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 