STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)]
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2010 /Kartika, 1932 (Saka)
17

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-2011)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.11.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.11.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2010 /Kartika, 1932 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 218
Price : Rs. 62.00
© 2010 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 15
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government ...................................................................... 43
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration........ 44
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies are of interim in nature...................................... 53
A PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2010-11)
held on 27 October, 2010 ................................................ 54
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in
their Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)................. 56

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2010-2011)
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Milind Deora
 5. Dr. Charles Dias
6. Shri Rajen Gohain
7. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
8. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
 9. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Abdul Rahman
13. Shri Prem Das Rai
14. Shri Tufani Saroj
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanti
17. Dr. Bhola Singh
18. Shri Dhananjay Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri C. Sivasami
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M.P. Achuthan
23. Shri Mohammed Adeeb*
24. Shri Salim Ansari
25. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar*
26. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot*
27. Shri Prabhat Jha
28. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
29. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
30. Shri P. Rajeeve
31. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2010-11) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) relating to
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April,
2010 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. The Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Information Technology) furnished their Action Taken Notes on
5 August, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 27 October, 2010.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Seventh Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI;  RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
15 November, 2010 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1932 (Saka)Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Seventh Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) pertaining to the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Information Technology).
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April,
2010 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010. It contained
32 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Information Technology) and these have been categorized as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31 and 32
Total : 23
Chapter : II
(ii)Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:—
Paragraph No: 14
Total : 1
Chapter : III
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and require reiteration:—
Paragraph Nos: 3, 5, 8, 9, 11, 28, 29 and 30
Total : 8
Chapter : IV
1

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:—
Paragraph No: NIL
Total : Nil
Chapter : V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I
should be furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Pendency of Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have consistently been raising their concern over
the persistent problem of pendency of the Utilisation Certificates
and unspent balances. As per the information provided by the
Department 1143 UCs amounting to Rs. 1545.22 crore are pending
from the implementing agencies. As per the clarification given by
the Department, in accordance with the provisions made under
rule 212(1) of the General Financial Rules, the Utilisation Certificate
in the prescribed performa is required to be submitted within
12 months of the closure of the financial year by the institution or
the organization concerned. Thus, even if the pendency after
1.4.2009, is not taken into consideration, 804 UCs amounting to
Rs. 1060.30 crore which is the substantial amount are due from the
implementing agencies. More disturbing is the fact that the
substantial number of implementing agencies have been allocated
the first installment and have neither submitted the utilization
certificate nor demanded the further allocation. The aforesaid
practice clearly defeats the purpose of the programme. The
Committee strongly recommend that the monitoring of the different
2

programmes should further be strengthened. The provision of the
release of the next installment only after the receipt of the utilisation
certificate do not address the case where the implementing agency
after release of first installment and is least interested in demanding
the next installment. Urgent steps should be taken to recover the
money from the implementing agencies who have not spent the
allocation made by way of the first installment effectively. Besides,
the accountability for keeping the money with the implementing
agencies without implementing the project should be fixed and the
Committee informed accordingly.”
7. The Department has responded as under:—
“The concrete actions taken by the Department to liquidate pending
UCs/unspent balances are:—
• Periodic reviews were undertaken to liquidate the pending
UCs at various levels in the Department of Information
Technology.
• Every release of next installment is subject to receiving the
Utilization Certificate for the amount already released.
• Special drives have also been organized to facilitate
co-ordination between PAO and Programme Divisions of DIT
in liquidating pending UCs/unspent balances.
• All Group coordinators and heads of all Autonomous
Bodies have been requested for the early liquidation of
pending UCs.
•  Communications have also been issued to all GCs/Heads of
all Autonomous Bodies under DIT apprising them of UCs
pending with them and have been requested to put in sincere
efforts to ensure clearance of pending UCs. It has also been
reiterated that proposal for further releases (including core
grant) will not be processed in case of non-clearance of
pending UCs by all concerned.
• Recommendation of the Project Review and Steering Group
(PRSG) for release of next installment of Grants-in-aid is also
insisted upon, so as to ensure that releases are linked with
the progress made in the project.
• All the Group Coordinators (GCs) have been requested to
take action immediately in liquidating the pending UCs,
particularly with those agencies which had been released grant
3

in a single installment. The institutions with single installment
have been identified and all the concerned HoDs have been
requested to pay special attention to them.
• One to one meetings with implementing agencies having huge
unspent balances have also been held to liquidate the unspent
balances.
• Secretary, DIT has directed all the Programme Divisions to
constitute committees under the chairmanship of HoD of
respective Divisions to review the pending UCs/unspent
balances and undertake special directives for their liquidation
and submit the progress for discussion at a senior level
meeting.
All these efforts have resulted in reducing the number of pending
utilization certificates/unspent balances to some extent as given
below:—
(Rs. in crore)
As on No. of Pending Amount of Amount
UCs (Due)  Pending UCs Liquidated
22.03.2010 804 1060.30 0
01.04.2010 798 1057.51 2.79
19.07.2010 486 764.78 295.52”
Comments of the Committee
8. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had raised
serious concern over the pendency of utilization certificates where the
implementing agency has not utilized the amount released by first
installment and is least interested in demanding the next installment
and strongly recommended to recover the money from the implementing
agencies who have not spent the allocation made by way of first
installment effectively. Besides, the Committee had also desired that
the accountability for keeping the money with the implementing
agencies without implementing the project should be fixed. The
Department has not addressed to the aforesaid issue raised in the
recommendation. The Committee again emphasize to take strict action
against defaulter implementing agencies as suggested in the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee should be informed
about such cases along with action taken against each of the
implementing agencies.
4

B. Reduction of outlay at RE stage under the Infrastructure Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Gross Budgetary Support is provided for the different
Schemes/Programmes of the Department under the three sectors
viz. Research and Development, Infrastructure Development and
Human Resource Development. The trend of the allocations made
at RE stage to these sectors indicates that under the Infrastructure
Development Sector, the Outlays are considerably being reduced
at RE stage during each of the three years of the Eleventh Plan.
More apparent is the reduction during the year 2009-10. Under the
other two sectors, the Outlays have been slightly increased at RE
stage. Under the Infrastructure Sector, the important Schemes/
Programmes viz. Electronics Governance, Cyber Security, Promotion
of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing are being implemented
which are very crucial for the information technology sector. The
Committee would like the Department to explain the main reasons
for reduction of Outlay at RE stage in the Infrastructure sector,
particularly when the other two sectors are not being subjected to
the cut at RE stage. The Committee strongly recommend that
keeping in view the importance of the Programmes which include
NeGP being implemented under the Infrastructure Sector, no cut
should be imposed at the RE stage. The concerns of the Committee
in this regard should be communicated to the Ministry of Finance,
at the same time the Committee also expect the Ministry to ensure
effective utilisation of the Outlay provided for the different
Programmes/Schemes.”
10. The Department has responded as under:—
“The major programme under the infrastructure sector is
e-Governance Programme. A sum of Rs. 900 crore was earmarked
in BE 2009-10. Implementation of this programme is mainly
dependent upon State-level Implementing Agencies, release of State
share by State Governments, etc. Despite the efforts of this
Department to implement the programme faster, the total amount
spent under this programme during the first two quarters of
2009-10 was quite less which is why a cut was imposed during
RE stage. DIT is making all possible efforts for effective utilization
of the outlay and to avoid any cut at RE stage. The concerns of
the Committee will be communicated to the Ministry of Finance
during the pre-budget discussions at RE stage.”
5

Comments of the Committee
11. The Committee are concerned to note that the outlay
earmarked at Budget Estimates Stage under one of the important sectors
of the Department i.e. infrastructure sector is considerably being reduced
at Revised Estimates Stage due to inability of the Department in
utilizing the outlay during the first two quarters. The Committee would
like to reiterate that under the infrastructure sector, the important
schemes/programmes viz. electronics governance, cyber security,
promotion of electronics/IT hardware manufacturing are being
implemented which are very crucial for the information technology
sector. All the steps should be taken to utilize the outlay earmarked
for each of the schemes so as to justify demand of adequate allocation
at the Budget Estimates stage of the following year. All the concrete
initiatives should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.
C. Skill Development in IT
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8 and 9)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the Department have proposed a new
Scheme called Skill Development in IT for the year 2010-11. The
National Skill Development Policy has set a target of providing
skill development in IT to 500 million persons by 2022. In this
regard, DIT has been given a target of skill development of
10 million persons by 2022 in the domain of IECT. As a preparation
for the Scheme, the Department has worked out a roadmap for
expansion of the capacities of the DIT’s organizations viz. DOEACC
Societies and C-DAC and submitted the same to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission too has examined the
proposal and accorded in principal approval for the same. As
informed by the Department, action has been initiated to work out
detailed project report covering various implementation aspects,
inputs required etc. to seek an approval of the competent authority.
During the year 2010-11, a token provision of Rs. 1 crore has been
made for the aforesaid programme. While taking note of the steps
being initiated by the Department for the launch of the Scheme,
the Committee emphasize that all the preparations should be
completed expeditiously so that the programme start in full swing
from the year 2010-11 itself. The Department should seek the
requisite allocations of Outlay after the Scheme is formally approved
so as to implement the Scheme in the year 2010-11.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
6

“The Committee further note that for the successful implementation
of the programme ‘Skill Development in IT’, there are various issues like
connectivity, trained man power to impart skill development in IT as
well as the modules for the programme. Since the programme would be
implemented by different societies like DOEACC and C-DAC, the
Committee strongly recommend that common module should be prepared
by the Department in coordination with the other Ministries/Departments
involved in imparting skill development in IT as per the National Skill
Development Policy. Besides, the other issues like connectivity and trained
man power should also be taken into consideration and the effective
steps taken to address the aforesaid issues. The concrete action taken in
this regard should be communicated to the Committee.”
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
13. The Department has responded as under:—
“Government of India announced the National Skill Development
Policy which has set a target of skilling 500 million by 2022.
Department of Information Technology has been listed as a part
of the skill development initiative and has been given a target to
train 10 million persons by the year 2022. As a follow up action
for implementation of Skill Development in IT, discussions are in
progress with various stakeholders – DOEACC Society, C-DAC,
etc. Detailed Project Report is under preparation. DIT would seek
the requisite allocations of outlay after the Scheme is formally
approved.”
Comments of the Committee
14. The Committee take note of the fact that the Department is
undertaking discussions with various stakeholders, DOEACC society,
C-DAC etc. and preparing detailed project report as a preparatory
exercise for the launch of the National Skill Development Programme
under which the target of skill development of 10 million persons by
the year 2022 has been given to the Department of Information
Technology. Keeping in view the importance of the programme in the
IT skill development of masses, the Committee again emphasize to
expedite the implementation of the programme.
The Committee further find that the Department has not
addressed to part recommendation of the Committee whereby it was
emphasized (i) common module for skill development should be
prepared by the Department of Information Technology in connection
with other Ministries/Departments involved in imparting skill
development in IT sector as per the National Skill Development Policy
7

(ii) the issues like connectivity and trained manpower should be
addressed. The Committee feel that the aforesaid issues need to be
addressed as a part of the preparatory exercise before the scheme is
launched in full scale for its effective implementation. As such the
Committee would like the Department to take the desired action and
inform the Committee accordingly.
D. Maintenance of data with regard to literacy rate and e-waste in
the country
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are concerned to note that even when the
Government propose to launch a full-fledged scheme for skill
development in IT, the Department has not bothered to maintain
the data with regard to computer literacy in the country. Besides
even when the Department has an important role in e-waste
management and creating awareness on e-waste, the Department
has shown the ignorance of the data with regard to e-waste
generated in the country. The Committee note that the Department
of Information Technology is the nodal Department with regard
to various issues related to information technology. As such the
Department should maintain various data indicating the overall
scenario of the issues related to IT in the country. The urgent action
should be taken to maintain the data with regard to literacy rate
in computer as well as e-waste.”
16. The Department has responded as under:—
“The recommendations of the Committee on maintaining data on
literacy rate in computers have been noted for compliance.
As regards data on e-waste, it is stated that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency for policy,
planning, promoting and coordinating the environmental
programmes and is involved in enacting laws, guidelines referring
to e-waste. Department of Information Technology is involved in
the process of technological solutions to the e-waste management.”
Comments of the Committee
17. The Committee had desired that the data with regard to
literacy rate in computers as well as e-waste in the country should be
maintained by the Department being the nodal Department for
8

information technology. The Department has agreed to maintain the
data with regard to literacy rate in computers. The Committee would
like the Department to devise the mechanism to collect the data in this
regard expeditiously.
With regard to the data in connection with e-waste generated in
the country, the Department in a casual way has stated that the Ministry
of Environment and Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency for policy,
planning, promoting and coordinating the environmental programmes
and is involved in enacting laws, guidelines referring to e-waste. The
Department of Information Technology is involved in the process of
technological solutions to the e-waste management. While agreeing
that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal Ministry for
environmental issues and is involved in enacting laws, guidelines
relating to e-waste, the Department of Information Technology being
the nodal Department for issues related to information technology
should at least be aware of the data of e-waste in the country. The
Committee fail to understand how the technological solutions as per
the mandate of the Department can be suggested without having the
idea of the quantum of e-waste in the country. While expressing
unhappiness over the way the Department has responded to the issue,
the Committee would like the Department to have proper coordination
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the issues related to
e-waste. The data of e-waste after procuring from the Ministry of
Environment and Forests should be maintained by the Department of
Information Technology and duly reflected in various documents like
Annual Reports of the Department. The Committee should also be
apprised of the position in this regard.
E. International Convention against cyber crimes/cyber terrorism
Recommendation (Para Nos. 28 and 29)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note from the data made available by the
Department that the total number of defacement of websites for
the year 2009-10 was 5000. The data with regard to web defacement
of Government websites was not available with the Department.
During the course of the deliberations, the Committee have been
informed that all serious attack activities originate outside the
country and it becomes difficult technically and legally to reach
out to the perpetrators. If the attack and the targets are both inside
the country, it is quite easy to track and book a person under the
provisions of Information Technology Act. However, in case of attack
9

originating outside the country, it is difficult to do the same. In
this connection, the Committee may like to highlight their
recommendation made in the Fiftieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on the ‘The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’ as
reproduced below:—
“Instead of taking recourse to piecemeal solution of entering into
MLATs with one country at a time, the Committee would prefer
that India should be a signatory to an omnibus International
Convention on the issue so that cyber crimes committed against
any country from anywhere are tackled with utmost promptitude
and without the technicalities of citizenship, etc. coming into play.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that India as one of the
world leaders in information technology, ought to take initiative
in materialising such an International Convention against cyber
crimes/cyber terrorism under the auspices of United Nations.
Accordingly, they desire that the Department should immediately
prepare a roadmap in consultation/coordination with the Ministries
of External Affairs, Law and Justice and Home Affairs for a suitable
International Convention. The Government may, in the meantime,
utilize their diplomatic channels for creating a movement in favour
of the Convention in the comity of nations. The Committee are
hopeful that such an initiative by the Government of India under
the auspices of United Nations will tackle the twin scourge of cyber
crimes and cyber terrorism to a substantial extent universally and
spare the Government from taking recourse to ad hoc approaches/
arrangements to counter a perennial problem.”
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
“Keeping in view the fact that scale and intensity of the problem
of cyber attacks from outside the country is increasing, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should
seriously consider the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee
which would definitely help in dealing with the problem of hacking
by the hackers originating from foreign countries.”
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
19. The Department has responded as under:—
“International cooperation in the form of mutual legal assistance
requires an international agreement or other similar arrangements
such as reciprocal legislation. Such provisions, whether multilateral
or bilateral, oblige the authorities of a contracting party to request
for mutual legal assistance in the agreed cases. But the legal
10

frameworks being different in different nations, cooperation still
does not permit sufficient support. The UN Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, at its Twelfth Congress held during
12-19 April, 2010 at Salvador, Brazil deliberated on this subject. The
Congress recommended considering to convene an open-ended
intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study
of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States,
the international community and the private sector, including the
exchange of information on national legislation, best practices,
technical assistance and international cooperation, with a view to
examining options to strengthen existing and to propose new
national and international legal or other responses to cyber crime.
India has been represented in the convention through MHA
which is also coordinating and examining all relevant issues in
this regard.”
Comments of the Committee
20. The Committee while taking note of the fact that all serious
cyber attacks/activities originate outside the country and it becomes
technically and legally difficult to reach out to the perpetrators
had desired the Department to consider one of the important
recommendation made in Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’ wherein the
Committee had desired that India as one of the world leaders in
Information Technology ought to take initiatives in materializing an
omnibus International Convention against cyber crimes/cyber terrorism
under the auspices of United Nations. In the aforesaid recommendation,
the Committee had also desired that the Department of Information
Technology should immediately prepare a roadmap in consultation/
coordination with the various concerned Ministries and the Government
may, in the meanwhile, utilize their channels for creating a movement
in favour of the said Convention. Since the recommendation of the
Committee was made way back in 2007, the Committee expected some
progress on the matter. However, the action taken note indicates
that the Department is not so eager in taking concrete action as
suggested in the recommendation. The Department on the one hand
has stated that in spite of such agreements, the legal framework being
different in different nations, cooperation still does not permit sufficient
support, on the other hand has tried to shift the responsibility by
stating that the Ministry of Home Affairs who represented in the UN
Commission as Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice held at
12-19 April, 2010 is also coordinating and examining all relevant issues
in this regard.
11

The Committee express serious concern over the way the
Department has dealt with such an important matter. The Committee
would like to emphasize that India is not the only country grappling
with the issue of cyber crime/cyber terrorism from outside the country
rather it is the world-wide phenomenon. There is an urgent need to
create a movement for an International Convention under the auspices
of United Nations. The Department of Information Technology being
the nodal Department in this regard has the great responsibility. Since
many Ministries like Home Affairs, External Affairs, Defence, Law
and Justice may be involved in the task, the Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation would like the Department to place their
recommendation before the Cabinet Secretary. The Department on its
own should also consult the various Ministries so that the concerted
action is taken at various levels. Besides, the Department should ensure
that the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee form part of the
agenda for deliberations at the various International Conferences held
on Information Technology in India and abroad. The concrete action
on the suggested lines should be taken and the Committee be kept
informed accordingly.
F. Definite time limit for disposal of cases by the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that as per the IT Act, any person aggrieved
by an order made by the Controller of Certifying Authorities or
by an Adjudicating Officer under the Act can appeal before the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT). Further, the Committee note that
out of four cases filed before Tribunal, during the year 2007 one
is still pending. With regard to the year 2008, the Department has
not furnished the information. In respect of the year 2009, all the
8 cases filed before the Tribunal are pending. The Department has
further informed that most of the cases pending before adjudicating
officers are those filed in 2009 except the State of Kerala where the
number of cases are pending since 2006. In this regard, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for long
pending cases in respect of the State of Kerala. Besides the
Committee would also like to recommend to the Department to
consider prescribing the definite time limit for disposal of the cases
which would definitely help in expeditious disposal of case by the
Tribunal.”
12

22. The Department has responded as under:—
“The following is the list of cases that have been filed in the Tribunal
from the year 2007:—
1. Appeal No. 1/2007 Disposed off on 05.11.2009
2. Appeal No. 1/2009 Disposed off on 26.05.2010
3. Appeal No. 2/2009 Stayed by the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi
4. Appeal No. 3/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
5. Appeal No. 4/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
6. Appeal No. 5/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
7. Appeal No. 6/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
8. Appeal No. 7/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
9. Appeal No. 8/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
10. Appeal No. 1/2010Filed on 13.05.2010. Pending
consideration before the Tribunal
No appeals were filed before the Tribunal in the year 2008 and
hence no details for the year 2008 were furnished.
At present there are only two appeals pending before the Tribunal,
i.e. Appeal No.2/2009 and Appeal No. 1/2010.
A definite time limit has already been provided in sub-section (6)
to Section 57 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 for disposal
of appeals by the Tribunal. The relevant sub-section reads:—
“The appeal filed before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as
possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the
appeal finally within six months from the date of receipt of
the appeal.”
Time limit has also been provided in the Information Technology
(Qualification and Experience of Adjudicating Officers and Manner
of Holding Enquiry) Rules, 2003 for disposal of complaints filed
before the Adjudicating Officer. Sub-rule (k) of Rule 4 of the
aforesaid Rules reads thus:—
“As far as possible, every application shall be heard
and decided in four months and the whole matter in six
months.”
13

Hence no further provision is required to be made in the Statute
or Rules regarding the time limit for disposal of complaint/s and
appeal/s filed before the Adjudicating Officers and the Tribunal.
As far as Kerala is concerned, there are no cases filed under the
IT Act, 2000 pending before the concerned Adjudicating Officers.
The number of cases shown to be pending in Kerala have been
registered under the various sections of chapter XI of the IT Act,
2000 and the Indian Penal Code. These cases have been registered
by the Concerned Police Station within whose jurisdiction the
crime/s have been committed. The power/authority to try these
cases rests in the court/s of competent jurisdiction in the State of
Kerala.”
Comments of the Committee
23. The Committee had recommended the Department to consider
prescribing the definite time limit for disposal of the appeal cases by
the Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT). The Department in this connection
has stated that a definite time limit has already been provided in sub-
section (6) to Section 57 of the ‘Information Technology Act, 2000’ and
sub-rule (k) of Rule 4 of ‘The Information Technology (Qualification
and Experiences of Adjudicating Officers and Manner of Holding
Enquiry) Rules 2003’. While going through the contents of the aforesaid
provisions, the Committee find that whereas the time limit of six months
has been provided for the disposal of the appeal cases, the words ‘as
expeditiously as possible’ and ‘as far as possible’ defeat the purpose
of providing the definite time limit. Further the Committee do not
understand the use of word ‘shall’ in the aforesaid provisions along
with the words ‘as expeditiously as possible’ and ‘as far as possible’
to the Tribunal with the use of the aforesaid words. The Committee
strongly feel that the aforesaid provisions need a relook by the
Department. The words ‘as expeditiously as possible’ and ‘as far as
possible’ should be deleted from the aforesaid provisions so that the
definite time limit for disposal of cases in true sense is provided in
the Act and Rules.
14

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The examination of the Demands for Grants for the year 2010-11
has revealed that the Department has been allocated Rs. 2660 crore at
the Budget Estimates stage for the Plan Schemes/Programmes against the
projections of Rs. 5817.47 crore which means that the gap between the
projections and allocations is to the tune of Rs. 3157 crore. Thus, the
Department has been allocated lesser than half of the projected Outlay
for the Plan Schemes during the year 2010-11. During the first three years
of the Eleventh Plan i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, the said gap was
to the tune of Rs. 592.08 crore, Rs. 820 crore and Rs. 190.50 crore
respectively. The aforesaid position indicates that the gap between the
projection and allocation during the year 2010-11 is quite substantial. If
the BE allocation for the year 2010-11 is compared to the allocation of
the previous year, it is Rs. 130 and Rs. 190 crore more respectively if
compared to BE and RE of the previous year. The Committee observe
that the Department is implementing important Plan schemes for creating
critical infrastructure as well as technological development in the field
of the information technology in the country during the Eleventh Plan.
Said Schemes include e-Governance in the Country and the National
Knowledge Network which when implemented would revolutionize the
existing system of governance and teaching in the country. As such the
Committee strongly recommend that adequate Outlay should be provided
for the Plan Schemes/Programmes of the Department so that these do
not suffer for want of resources.
Action Taken by the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted. The Department
will make all efforts to get adequate outlay for the Plan Schemes/
Programmes of the Department at RE and BE Stage. Action has been
initiated for enhancement of budget provision of the National Knowledge
Network in the financial year 2010-11 from present allocation of
Rs. 100 crore to the desired level of Rs. 1733.85 crore.
15

Recommendation (Para No. 2)
While reviewing the performance of the Department during the
year 2009-10 in the context of the financial achievement under the Plan
Schemes, the Committee find that the Department was allocated
Rs. 2530 crore at the BE stage. The allocation was reduced to Rs. 1700 crore
at RE stage by imposing the cut of Rs. 830 crore. The Department was
not able to utilize even the reduced allocation. The position of Actuals
was Rs. 890.97 crore by December, 2009 that is 52.41 per cent of the
allocation. While looking at the trends of the utilisation during the first
two years of the Eleventh Plan, the data indicates that during the first
year of the Plan, the utilisation was 89.43 per cent of the allocation.
During 2008-09, the Department achieved 104.60 per cent of the financial
achievement. Thus the financial achievement during the year 2009-10 was
the worst during the Eleventh Plan. From the aforesaid scenario, the
Committee conclude that the Department itself is responsible for the
huge cut at RE stage as well as for getting the allocation lesser than the
projection. While recommending for the higher Outlay, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Department has to ensure the optimum
utilisation of Outlay so that it can present its case for the adequate allocation
strongly to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. All the desired
initiatives should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
Consistent and sustained efforts are being made for optimum
utilization of outlay. Quarterly Review of financial targets is undertaken
for each Plan Scheme by DIT. Half Yearly Progress Review is also
undertaken by Planning Commission to review the physical and financial
progress of all Plan Schemes.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee find from the information made available to the
Committee that besides Plan allocations made out of the Government
funding, IEBR is generated by the Societies/Offices under the Department
through their R&D activities. In this regard, Rs. 2225.56 crore was the
approved IEBR for the Eleventh Plan. IEBR generated during the first
three years of the Eleventh Plan as per the data provided by the
Department is just Rs. 750.17 crore which is less than one third of the
approved IEBR of the Plan period. From the aforesaid position it is
apparent that the Societies would not be able to generate the approved
IEBR during Eleventh Plan at any cost. The detailed examination of the
data for IEBR further indicates that the year-wise approved IEBR do not
commensurate to the overall IEBR of the Eleventh Plan. During the
first three years of the Eleventh Plan, the approved IEBR is only
16

Rs. 793.07 crore. The Committee, therefore, would like the Department
to furnish the specific reasons for not projecting the IEBR commensurating
to the overall approvals of the Eleventh Plan alongwith the steps initiated
by the Department to ensure that the IEBR generated by the Societies
reach to the level of the overall approvals for the Eleventh Plan.
Action Taken by the Government
The details of IEBR with respect to Societies and Technology
Development Council (TDC) Scheme of DIT are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Name of IEBR Targets and Achievements
Society/Scheme2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target
ment ment ment
SAMEER 14.00 22.05 15.00 37.84 15.00 36.82 24.00
C-MET - - 5.60 5.28 5.60 26.26 11.10
C-DAC 175.00 96.55 145.00 183.42 145.00 160.24 200.00
Media Lab Asia - - 20.00 1.12 20.00 11.35 20.00
STPI 2.70 150.75*- 165.64*- 169.58*-
(unaudited)
ERNET - - 25.00 46.19 25.00 16.08 72.00
DOEACC 54.59 58.67 60.04 58.97 60.04 64.15 79.51
TDC 2.50 10.97*1.50 0.12*1.50 1.49* -
Total 248.79 338.99 272.14 498.58 272.14 425.97 406.61
* IEBR generated under TDC and STPI had not been reported earlier.
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the IEBR Targets and Achievement
Society/Scheme 11th Plan Targets during Achievements
Target the 1st three during the 1st
years of three years of
11th Plan   11th Plan
SAMEER 84.50 44.00 96.71
C-MET 30.20 11.20 31.54
C-DAC 1555.00 465.00 440.21
Media Lab Asia 150.00 40.00 12.47
STPI 16.49 2.70 485.97
ERNET - 50.00 62.27
DOEACC 372.37 174.67 181.79
TDC 17.00 5.00 12.58
Total 2225.56 792.57 1323.54
17

It is noteworthy that IEBR is fixed by the Planning Commission.
DIT submitted proposals for the 11th Five Year Plan for Rs. 20,386 crore
which included Rs. 2225.56 crore as IEBR. However, Planning Commission
reduced the proposed allocation to Rs. 12,496 crore with IEBR of the
same amount, i.e. Rs. 2225.56 crore. So, while the budgetary outlay was
reduced, the IEBR of Rs. 2225.56 crore which was based on the projected
outlay for the 11th Five Year Plan had not been reduced. That is the main
reason why the projected annual IEBR did not commensurate with the
overall IEBR of the 11th Plan. However, IEBR projected/generated by
most of the Societies during the last three years do commensurate with
the projected IEBR of the 11th Plan which are detailed below:—
SAMEER: The annual projection of IEBR commensurate well with
the overall approved figure for the 11th Plan. The actual IEBR generated
for the first three years of the 11th Plan, i.e. 2007-08 to 2009-10 is already
Rs. 96.71 crore. If this trend continues for the next 2 years, i.e., 2010-11
and 2011-12, the actual generation of IEBR will be well above the
11th Plan projection.
C-MET: The annual projection of IEBR commensurate well with
the overall approved figure for the 11th Plan. The actual IEBR generated
for the first three years of the 11th Plan, i.e. 2007-08 to 2009-10 is already
Rs. 31.54 crore. If this trend continues for the next 2 years, i.e., 2010-11
and 2011-12, the actual generation of IEBR will be well above the
11th Plan projection.
STPI: STPI is a self-supporting scheme and no recurring grant is
provided to STPI. As such, no IEBR is projected. However, STPI has
generated a sum of Rs. 485.97 crore during the first three years of the
11th Plan. STPI is also expecting to generate an estimated sum of
Rs. 163.00 crore during the year 2010-11.
ERNET: The actual IEBR generated for the first three years of the
11th Plan, i.e. 2007-08 to 2009-10 is Rs. 62.27 crore against the projected
Rs. 50.00 crore.
DOEACC Society: The Society has generated more IEBR
(Rs. 181.79 crore) than the IEBR approved for the first three years of the
XI Plan (Rs. 174.67 crore). The Society is making efforts to further
increase its revenue generation to reach the level of overall approved
IEBR for the XI plan.
TDC: Projects on Industrial Applications are funded through the
TDC budget head. Under these activities, National Mission on Power
Electronics Technology (NaMPET) is a major project which is being
implemented during the current Five Year Plan. In this project, EBRs
18

have been generated by way of project funding from various agencies
like Ministry of Power, Ministry of Railways and some private companies.
There is some small component of IR generation also in the form of
technology transfer receipts. During the first 3 years of the Plan, i.e.,
2007-10, a total amount of Rs. 12.58 crores have been generated as IEBR.
Constant endeavour will be made to achieve the pending amount for the
entire Five Year Plan during the next two years, i.e., 2010-12 of the
Five Year Plan.
C-DAC: As detailed above, in the first three years of 11th Five Year
Plan, C-DAC has achieved Rs. 440.21 crores against the targets of
Rs. 465.00 crores and during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, C-DAC will
achieve IEBR of Rs. 400.00 crores. As such the total achievement will be
approximately Rs. 840.00 crores. Regarding targets of Rs. 1555.00 crores
for the 11th Five Year Plan, it is stated that the IEBR was projected based
on budgetary support of Rs. 2700.00 crore. However, during the first
three years of the 11th Plan period, C-DAC has been sanctioned/released
plan grants of Rs. 304.00 crores only against which it has generated IEBR
amounting to Rs. 440.21 crore. Nevertheless, the Society is making efforts
to increase IEBR generation.
Media Lab Asia: As per the directives of Cabinet given at the time
of restructuring of Media Lab Asia (MLA) in May, 2003, the XI Plan
funding was to be decided on the recommendations of the
Empowered Steering Committee constituted by the Cabinet, based on
independent review of MLA. A Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. R. Chidambaram, PSA to the Government of India was constituted
to review the activities of MLA. The Committee submitted its report in
August, 2008 and recommended a funding of Rs. 67 crore for remaining
period of XI Plan which was also agreed to by the Empowered Steering
Committee. Further, the Steering Committee recommended that MLA
would attempt an IEBR of 50% of total grant from DIT during the
remaining 3 years of XI Plan. Media Lab Asia is expected to achieve the
IEBR of 50% of grant that will be received from DIT during the remaining
XI Plan period. 
To sum up, it will be seen from the above details that the approved
allocation for the 11th Plan period is Rs. 12,496 crore and the IEBR for
that period is Rs. 2225.56 crore which is around 18% of the allocation.
During the last three years (2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10) the total
allocation was Rs. 5710.00 crore and the actual IEBR for that period was
Rs. 1323.54 crore which is around 23%. It may also be seen from the
above table that the overall IEBR target for the first three years of the
Eleventh Plan have been achieved. Hence, there is no huge shortfall in
the IEBR.
19

Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee find from the data made available to the Committee
that during each year of the Eleventh Plan, there is shortfall in expenditure
as compared to the Outlay made available at RE stage. During the
year 2009-10 out of the Outlay of Rs. 170 crore provided at RE stage
the expenditure is Rs. 167.91 crore. Under the scheme Technology
Development Council, out of the allocation of Rs. 3 crore the expenditure
is Rs. 0.91 crore. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
reasons for under-spending under the aforesaid programme. Further, the
Committee note that under the Scheme Software Technology Park in
India and EHTP, the allocation made during the year 2008-09 and
2009-10 is nil. The Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons
for nil allocation under the aforesaid Plan Scheme. The Committee again
emphasize that all the steps should be taken by the Department for the
effective implementation of various schemes to ensure inclusive growth
of the IT sector in the country.
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding STPI and EHTP, the allocation is ‘nil’ during 2008-09
whereas the allocation was Rs. 2.51 crore during 2009-10. Software
Technology Park (STP) is a 100% export oriented scheme for the
development and export of computer software using communication links
or physical media and including export of professional services. At present
STPI has 51 centres across the country and the scheme is self-supporting
and, therefore, no recurring grant is provided to STPI.
Regarding Technology Development Council, the Department
continues its efforts to find suitable R&D opportunities in the NE region.
In the absence of suitable Research and Development project proposals
from the North-East, it has not been possible to utilize the entire allocation
budget for the North-East region.
Moreover, the observations of the Committee have been noted. The
Department has been making consistent efforts to ensure that the outlay
earmarked for development of North-Eastern region is utilized by the
implementing agencies to achieve the set objectives of the programmes.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
DOEACC Society is implementing the joint scheme of DIT and
AICTE i.e. DOEACC Scheme for Computer courses at ‘O’, ‘A’, ‘B’ and
‘C’ levels. With regard to number of candidates registered for ‘O’ and
‘A’ level courses, the Committee note that in the North-East Region, total
number of candidates registered in ‘O’ and ‘A’ level is 19844. During the
20

year 2008-09, total candidates registered for the aforesaid level courses
were 2215. During the year 2009-10 the number has declined to 1980. If
the performance is considered country-wise, the total number of candidates
registered in ‘O’ and ‘A’ level throughout the country is 727833. During
the year 2008-09 total number of candidates registered were 59407 which
declined to 47040 during the year 2009-10. The Committee express concern
over the declining number of candidates registered in ‘O’ and ‘A’ level
courses in the country as a whole and particularly in the case of
North-EastRegion. Since SC,ST,OBCandweakersectionsof the society and
the unemployed youth are being benefited by the programme, the
Committee strongly recommend that all the initiatives should be taken
so that more and more candidates take benefit of the aforesaid Scheme
which would certainly help in addressing the problem of unemployment
in the vulnerable sections of the society.
Action Taken by the Government
Shortfall in the registration of DOEACC O/A/B/C level courses is
mainly due to general recession in the IT industry and subsequent lack
of attraction for IT course in general during the year. As the market
conditions are improving now, more students are expected to join
DOEACC O/A/B/C level courses. Further, to attract more students, the
following steps are being taken:—
• Publishing of more advertisements throughout the country
for increasing the awareness about DOEACC courses among
the students and general mass.
• Consent of MHRD has been sought for opening of ‘O’ level
so that students possessing the required educational
qualifications can directly appear for the examination after
a year’s self-study using e-learning contents and other
materials. The matter is being pursued with MHRD.
• Creation of on-line content for ‘O’ level and making it available
free of cost on the website so that candidates from any part
of the country can learn the subject themselves and appear
for the examination.
• The matter regarding recognition of B (academic) and C level
is being pursued with MHRD/AICTE.
• In the N-E Region, a large number of students belong to
SC/ST and minority communities. To attract more students,
DOEACC Society offers free training or charges minimum
fee from these students under various schemes with the
financial support of various Ministries.
21

Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee further note that the success of the aforesaid
programme depends upon the interest taken by the students in learning
computers. Moreover, to ensure inclusive growth of IT sector, it is desirable
that the students from rural areas particularly from the remote and difficult
areas take interest in learning computers. Students would take interest
only when they possess the computers. The Committee during the
deliberations have been informed that Common Service Centres can
address the aforesaid problem. The Committee note that Common Service
Centres (CSCs) in rural areas are being opened with the objective of
providing Government and private services at the doorstep of the citizens.
The Committee fail to understand how the students who want to learn
computers can take benefit of CSCs when they have the different mandate
as stated above. The Department being the nodal Department for IT has
to play an important role in this regard. In view of the aforesaid position,
the Committee strongly recommend that Government has to think of
providing computers at subsidized rates to the children of BPL families.
Besides the Department has to pay more attention to make desktops cost
effective so that these are within the reach of the poor persons. All the
desired initiatives on the suggested line should be taken and the
Committee informed accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The CSCs have been primarily set up to provide services to
citizens. Computer education and e-learning are one of the services
that are being provided to citizens in rural areas by Service Centre
Agencies (SCAs) which are the private partners under the Scheme. The
objective of the Scheme is to provide e-services to citizens. In case of
e-learning, the courses are imparted to citizens rather than providing
computers at subsidized rates as the same is outside the scope of the
programme. Ministry of Labour and Employment is trying to use the
CSCs to impart ITI trade courses in various rural areas by e-learning
methodology.
SCAs are also exploring business opportunities to deliver computer
literacy programmes through the CSCs in rural areas. Some SCAs are
already offering computer education services at CSCs. There is no scheme
under Department of Information Technology for providing computers
to citizens or for children of BPL families at subsidized rates.
As regards making desktops cost effective, the levies in terms of
duties and excise have been kept at the minimum so that these do not
add unnecessary burden on the manufacturing cost.
22

Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that during the year 2009-10, Electronics
and IT exports are estimated to be Rs. 266330 crore as compared to
Rs. 247420 crore in 2008-09 showing a growth of 7.6 per cent. The domestic
demand in this regard is around USD 45 billion whereas production is
around USD 20 billion. The Secretary, during the course of deliberations,
has informed that as per the projections, the demand would increase to
USD 400 billion by 2020 and with the existing State of affairs, the
production would reach to USD 100 billion. The analysis of the initiatives
taken by the Department for the promotion of Electronics/IT hardware
manufacturing during the Eleventh Plan indicates that although an
allocation of Rs. 1100 crore was made during Eleventh Plan the Actual
expenditure is just Rs. 61.67 crore till date. During the year 2010-11, the
allocation has been made for a meagre amount of Rs. 2.5 crore which
amounts to only 1 per cent of the proposed allocation i.e. Rs. 250 crore.
The Committee note that the aforesaid allocation was made particularly
for meeting the requirements under Special Incentive Package Scheme
(SIPS). Under this Scheme, the applicants need to approach DIT for
disbursement after meeting the prescribed conditions. As regards the
financial performance of the Scheme during the year 2009-10
Rs. 2.30 crore were allocated. The allocation was reduced just to
Rs. 0.50 crore which was fully utilized. The aforesaid scenario indicates
that not much attention is being given to promotion of Electronics/IT
hardware manufacturing even when Rs. 1100 crore were allocated during
Eleventh Plan which have remained under-utilized substantially. Keeping
in view the fact that the demand for the sector would be to the tune of
USD 400 billion and the production would be only USD 100 billion, there
is an urgent need to provide adequate attention on hardware
manufacturing sector too, in order to have a pioneering and competitive
edge in line with the Software Sector. The Committee strongly emphasize
that the concrete strategy should be made for promotion of Electronics/
IT hardware manufacturing sector.
Action Taken by the Government
It may be noted that promotion of electronics hardware
manufacturing is a thrust area for the Government. As indicated
earlier, the allocation of Rs. 1100 crore for the Eleventh Plan was made
particularly for meeting the requirement under Special Incentive
Package Scheme (SIPS). The actual disbursement of incentive to the
eligible applicants under SIPS can start only after they have incurred the
threshold level of investment (i.e. Rs. 1,000 crore). None of the applicants
have reached that stage; hence no expenditure could be incurred on this
account, as on date. It is expected that during the remaining period of
23

the Eleventh Plan, some of the applicants could approach for disbursement
of incentive.
With reference to observation of the Committee that concrete
strategy should be made for promotion of Electronics/IT hardware
manufacturing sector, as indicated in the succeeding Para, a Task Force
was set up to look into all the aspects which impact both Electronics
hardware manufacturing as well as IT software sectors. Further necessary
action is being taken to implement the recommendations of the Task
Force.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee further note that Task Force was set up by the
Department in August, 2009 to address the problem of IT Hardware
manufacturing industry in a comprehensive manner, which submitted its
report on 11 December, 2009. Even when four months have passed since
the report was presented, the Department is still undertaking the analysis
of the recommendations. The Committee strongly recommend that the
various problems afflicting the IT Hardware manufacturing industry
should be identified and the recommendations made by the Task Force
in this regard analyzed and the action taken within the stipulated time
frame so as to make the country self sufficient in hardware manufacturing
sector. All the initiatives should be taken and the Committee informed
accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The Report of the Task Force was examined and it has been observed
that 198 recommendations for IT/ITES sector and Electronic Hardware
Manufacturing Industry, including Strategic Electronics have been made
while some of these recommendations fall within the purview of the
Department of Information Technology, a substantial number of these
recommendations pertain to other Central Ministries/Departments/
State Governments. Department of Information Technology will, wherever
required, coordinate with the concerned Central Ministries/Departments/
State Governments for working out specific details and implementation
modalities.
Inter-Ministerial consultations on the recommendations contained
in the report have been held. Further, Government has decided to
constitute a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) for facilitating examination
and implementation of the recommendations of the Task Force on a fast
track basis. The process of obtaining the views of the concerned Ministries/
Departments has been undertaken and a meeting of the Committee of
Secretaries is expected to be held shortly.
24

 Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee are further concerned to note that the sale of laptops
in the country during the year 2008-09 has declined from 18,22,139 to
15,16,459. The productions for the year 2009-10 are for Rs. 19,00,000. The
Committee strongly recommend that the detailed analysis with regard
to decreasing trend of sale of number of PCs should be done by the
Department and the Committee apprised accordingly. Besides, the
Committee would also like to be apprised about the position with regard
to number of sale of laptops during the year 2009-10.
Action Taken by the Government
The sale of Personal Computers (PCs) (desktops and laptops) in
India declined during 2008-09 due to the impact of the global economic
slowdown. However, as per information provided by the Manufacturers’
Association for Information Technology (MAIT), the sale of PCs during
2009-10 is back on the growth path and is projected to increase by
7-10% compared to the year 2008-09. As far as sale of laptops is concerned,
the same is projected to increase to about 19,00,000 numbers during
2009-10 vis-à-vis 15,16,459 numbers in 2008-09.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the adverse impact of global recession is
now being felt in the Software and Service sectors. The growth in
this regard which was 25.9 per cent during 2008-09 has declined to
10.4 per cent in 2009-10. The Committee strongly recommend that all the
issues related to slowdown of growth in IT and ITES should be addressed
seriously. The Department should examine the recommendations made
by the Task Force in this regard expeditiously and immediate action
should be taken to implement the recommendations of the Task Force.
The Committee should be kept apprised about the action taken in this
regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Information Technology had set up a Task Force
in August 2009 to suggest measures to stimulate the growth of IT and
ITES and Electronics Hardware manufacturing industry in the country
in the backdrop of significant challenges faced by the IT industry owing
to the global economic crisis. It had submitted its report in December
2009.
Inter-Ministerial consultations on the recommendations contained
in the report have been held. Further, Government has decided to
25

constitute a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) under the chairmanship of
Cabinet Secretary for facilitating examination and implementation of the
recommendations of the Task Force on a fast track basis. The process of
obtaining the views of the concerned Ministries/Departments has been
undertaken and a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries is expected
to be held shortly.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that Electronic Governance is one of the
important programme of the Department for which substantial part of
the allocation for Plan Schemes is being provided. During the
year 2009-10, Rs. 900 crore were allocated at BE stage. The amount was
reduced to Rs. 330 crore i.e. a little more than 1/3rd of the allocation at
RE stage. With regard to the status of utilisation, the Department has
informed that as on 22nd March, 2010 outlay to the tune of Rs. 309 crore
has been released for e-Governance Projects. When asked about the reasons
for drastic reduction of outlay at RE Stage the Department on the one
hand has stated that it is due to non-compliance of the conditions/
requirements by State Governments for release of funds and non-initiation
of e-District and e-Bharat projects. On the other hand it has been stated
that the State Governments which are implementing the e-Infrastructure
projects like SWAN, SDC, CSC, State Portals and SSDG have sufficient
funds. Not only that the releases made by the Department are not being
meaningfully utilized i.e. substantiated by the fact that the Utilisation
Certificates for the substantial amount are still pending from the
Implementing Agencies from various States. If the data of 2008-09 in
respect of which the UCs have also become due is added, the situation
becomes more grim. The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates the
unsatisfactory status of one of the most important programmes of the
Government. The Committee note that the National e-Governance Plan
is the major initiative of the Government for ushering e-Governance and
is expected to change the entire concept and system of governance in
the country. The Committee while expressing serious concern over the
dismal performance of the programme would like to strongly recommend
to analyze the performance critically State/UT-wise so as to identify the
problems being faced by the States/UTs in implementation of the
programme. The Committee exhort the Department to take all the
corrective action in this regard expeditiously and inform the Committee
accordingly. In this regard, the Committee may also like the Department
to consider providing free software regarding e-Governance to the users
so as to make it cost effective.
26

Action Taken by the Government
As a part of UC liquidation drive, 28 UCs amounting to Rs. 227.00 crore
have been received. We expect to reduce the pending UCs considerably
during this year as programmes SWAN, SDC, CSC and Capacity Building
have started yielding noticeable results.
The funding pattern was submitted earlier. The reasons for delay
in respect of major programmes, which in turn causes delay in submission
of UCs are given below:—
SWAN: SWAN projects are being implemented at the State/UT level,
under supervision of the State/UT level Implementation Committee.
Department of IT, as a Member in these Committees, regularly
attend the meetings and pursue for meeting the deadlines, as
indicated by the respective State/UT Implementing Agency. Also
problems faced in the implementation of SWAN are being discussed
in the same Committee.
In line with the above and also taking into considerations of the
status of actual progress of implementation in some of the States/
UTs, the date of complete roll out for SWAN has been revised in
the past which was also reflected in the periodical reports sent to
the Cabinet Secretariat/PMO.
In the States of Rajasthan, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram and UTs
of D&D and D&NH, after the tender document was approved by
DIT, implementation process has been very much delayed at the
State/UT level due to various reasons, including delay in engaging
consultant, delay in the entire bid process, court case, State election
(Rajasthan), non-availability of power and leased line connectivity
at remotely located Block areas, etc.
CSC: The States have been advised not to delay release of revenue
support due to the SCAs. Besides “Monitoring Tool” installed in
the CSCs will now facilitate in determination of revenue support
and expeditious disbursal by the State Designated Agency (SDA).
SDC: All efforts are being made to ensure that the States take up
the work on priority and complete the same in a time bound manner.
In order to monitor the progress of scheme on regular basis, a
Project Implementation Committee (PIC) at the State level has been
formed under the chairmanship of Secretary (IT).
The delaying factors for the SDC programme are mainly related
to the State issues like site availability and its suitability for SDC,
27

raw power supply provisioning, RFP finalization, etc. Further,
approvals within the State sometimes take more time than
anticipated to finalize placement of order on the successful bidder.
All this results in non-utilization and further release of funds as
planned in our budgetary requirements/allocations. The States have
been advised to expedite the process of bid process management
and placement of orders so that the funds as planned and allocated
can be utilized.
The IPR for all software developed under NeGP remains with DIT/
State Government and these are shared with State Governments as
per their requirements. In E-District national rollout strategy, it is
envisaged that application developed in pilot States will be shared
with other States.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had noted that e-District and e-Bharat
components of NeGP were in trouble. In case of e-District there were
problems in implementation of the pilot projects. Besides in case of
e-Bharat the Government of India was carrying out dialogue with
World Bank for possible programme management and financial
support. However, the World Bank advocated a newer look to be
adopted inter-alia suggesting termination of the preparation of
“e-Bharat” Project. The examination of Demands for Grants (2010-11) has
indicated that there is no headway on both the Projects and the
projects could not be initiated due to the problems as given above. The
Committee note that e-District is an important MMP whose objective is
to target certain high volume services delivered at the district level which
are not covered by any other MMP and also to undertake backend
computerisation of these services through Common Service Centres.
Besides, e-Bharat is expected to contribute to improve Government
effectiveness, increasing fiscal revenues and reducing public procurement
cost etc. Keeping in view the importance of e-District and e-Bharat as
stated above, the Committee strongly recommend that all the issues
concerning these two components should be addressed in a stipulated
time frame so that the projects are initiated on a full scale basis throughout
the country.
Action Taken by the Government
e-District: The Department is constantly monitoring the progress
of the Pilot projects and there has been good progress since the status
was last reported. The Department has approved 15 Pilot e-District Projects
28

covering 40 districts. In Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Tamil Nadu and Bihar,
pilot project has been launched/gone live. In Madhya Pradesh and Orissa
application development is completed. In West Bengal, Kerala, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Mizoram, application development is under progress.
In Uttarakhand and Haryana, NIC has been selected as the application
developer. In Punjab, selection of application development agency is under
way and in Rajasthan, preparation of as-is report is under progress. States
have taken much more than the stipulated time in completing the
tendering process to select the System Integrators whose main job is to
develop the application and integrate with hardware, digitized data and
other facilities to deliver the electronic services under e-District. Progress
is slow in Haryana, Uttarakhand and Punjab and it is being pursued with
these States at the highest level. It is also to be noted that e-District
project involves services across several departments and also incorporate
BPR for improvement of service quality.
The Department is already in the process of finalizing National
rollout scheme. In this context:—
(a) To assess the implementation of e-District of UP, Assam and
Tamil Nadu, senior officers from this Department visited these
States.
(b) IIM Ahmedabad was commissioned by DIT for baseline
assessment of the manual service delivery process in
17 districts of 5 States.
(c) Learnings from the Pilot projects are being included so that
delays can be minimized. Such measures include inter alia,
sharing of application software amongst States, empanelment
of System Integrators, Standard Government Orders to enable
electronic services, ensure availability of NeGP infrastructure,
and to provide ready templates, guidelines and process,
amongst others.
(d) For national roll-out of e-District, in principle approval of
Planning Commission has been obtained and we are in the
process of completing initial work for submitting the proposal
to EFC.
e-Bharat: Deliberations between DIT/DEA and the World Bank are
continuing to take this project forward. A programmatic framework
approach for the Bank’s proposed support for NeGP is currently being
deliberated upon under Development Policy Loan approach. The World
Bank Team has visited DIT in May and June, 2010 to finalise the
Development Policy Loan Document.
29

Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee have consistently been raising concern over the
shifting of deadlines of implementation of various components of
e-Governance programmes viz. Common Service Centres (CSCs),
State Wide Area Network (SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs) and Mission
Mode Projects (MMPs). Under CSC the target was for setting up of
1 lakh CSCs in various States. Inspite of shifting the deadlines several
times out of the target of 1 lakh CSCs, 71078 CSCs could be rolled out
by February, 2010. With regard to SWAN, it has been completed in
19 States/UTs and 5 States are in advance stage of completion. Now the
Department has stated that implementation in all the States is likely to
be completed by end of August, 2010. In respect of SDCs, the bid process
has been completed in 11 States, out of which award of contract has been
issuedby9Statestotheselectedbidders.Furtherbidprocesshasbeen
initiatedin5Statesand in theremainingStatestheRFPisundervarious stages
of preparation/finalization or approval. Now the Government expect that
SDC would be complete in 12 States by December, 2010. On the issue
of MMPs, Immigration MMP (Central MMP), e-Procurement (Integrated
MMP) and 5 State MMPs are still waiting approval/finalization. Taking
note of the slow progress of implementation of various components of
e-Governance Programme, the Committee strongly recommend that the
Department has to work on a Mission Mode to ensure that these
components of e-Governance are completed expeditiously. The
Department should ensure that the deadlines are not shifted again and
again which makes the fixing of deadlines as a futile exercise. There is
an urgent need to have a proper coordination with the State Governments
and Line Ministries to identify the basic issues affecting the
implementation of various components of NeGP. The concerted action
on the suggested lines should be taken and the Committee informed
accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The status is given below:—
1. SWAN: SWAN projects are being implemented at the State/
UT level, under supervision of the State/UT level
Implementation Committee. Department of IT, as a Member
in these Committees, regularly attend the meetings and
pursue for meeting the deadlines, as indicated by the
respective State/UT Implementing Agency. Also problems
faced in the implementation of SWAN are being discussed
in the same Committee. The SWANs in 23 States/UTs have
been declared operational.
30

In line with the above and also taking into considerations of
the status of actual progress of implementation in some of
the States/UTs, the date of complete roll out for SWAN has
been revised in the past which was also reflected in the
periodical reports sent to the Cabinet Secretariat/PMO.
In the States of Rajasthan, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram
and UTs of D&D and D&NH, after the tender document was
approved by DIT, implementation process has been very much
delayed at the State/UT level due to various reasons, including
delay in engaging consultant, delay in the entire bid process,
court case, State election (Rajasthan), non-availability of power
and leased line connectivity at remotely located Block areas,
etc. The current deadline of December, 2010 has been
estimated keeping in view of all these facts.
2. CSC: SCAs and also SDAs from time to time are being
impressed upon for concerted action at their end for
expeditious rollout of CSCs. The problems of Broadband
Connectivity, deficiency of power and need to supplement
with Solar Power and availability of adequate G2C services
are being looked into and discussed for remedial measures.
As on 30th June, 2010, 80669 CSCs have been established.
3. SDC: Considering the urgency and importance of the SDC,
the States have been advised to expedite various activities
and placement of orders on the successful bidder ensuring
timely implementation of the SDC. The programme is being
monitored closely with the States.
DIT would like to inform that the SDC program has since
progressed considerably. RFPs of 22 States viz. Orissa, Tripura,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Nagaland, West Bengal, Puducherry,
Sikkim, Meghalaya, Haryana, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Kerala,
Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, Andaman and
Nicobar Island, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Jammu and Kashmir,
Madhya Pradesh and Mizoram have been approved by the
DIT and out of these 16 States have completed the bid
evaluation, and 12 States (Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tripura, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu) have issued the award
of contract to the selected bidder, 1 State (Manipur) has issued
the LoI to the selected bidder and the remaining 3 States
(Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand and Kerala) are in the process
of issuing LoI to the selected bidder. Bid process is in
progress in 4 States (Andaman and Nicobar, Karnataka,
31

Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh) while 2 States
(Jammu and Kashmir and Mizoram) are yet to release the
RFP, RFP of 2 States (Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh)
are under review/finalization for approval by the DIT.
4. MMPs:
(i) Central MMPs: Schemes for all 9 Central MMPs stand
approved. The Scheme for the Immigration MMP was
approved by the CCEA in May, 2010.
(ii) Integrated MMPs: All project schemes, except
e-Procurement, have been approved. In case
e-Procurement MMP, out of the two Pilot States,
Himachal Pradesh has opted out and has decided to join
the e-procurement portal of DGS&D. In case of Kerala,
bids received are being evaluated.
(iii)State MMPs: Schemes for seven out of eleven State MMPs
have been approved. EFC Note for Employment Exchange
MMP has been circulated. The EFC Note on Backward
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) has been circulated which
includes computerization of Panchayats. Similarly, the
EFC Note for Agriculture and e-District have been
circulated.
Steps taken by DIT
Strategic Level
Apex Committee Meeting: A half day long Apex Committee
meeting chaired by Cabinet Secretary was held on 16th July 2010,
wherein all the MMPs were discussed in detail with special focus
on MMPs that are yet to be approved. Reasons for delays were
deliberated and appropriate actions suggested. Members of the
PM’s Committee on NeGP, Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI,
Dr. Sam Pitroda, Advisor to PM on Public Information Infrastructure
and Innovations, Shri Kiran Karnik, former President NASSCOM
and Shri Som Mittal, President, NASSCOM attended this meeting.
The meeting was also attended by State IT Secretaries.
Implementation Level
Council of Mission Leaders: DIT has constituted a Council of
Mission Leaders to discuss to collaborate and discuss challenges
being faced by various MMPs and solutions to these. Two meetings
of the Council have been held.
32

PMIS: DIT is also in the process of developing a PMIS to keep
track of committed timelines and any slippages thereafter. The
first version of this application is expected to be ready by end of
July 2010.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note that the Department has issued guidelines for
setting up of District e-Governance Societies. The basic objective of these
societies is to coordinate all components of NeGP. As on February 2010,
as per information made available by State Governments, 208 District
e-Governance societies have been formed across 12 States. The Committee
strongly recommend that the Department should pursue with the
remaining States for setting up of District e-Governance Society
expeditiously and the Committee be kept informed about the progress
made in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
As of now 220 district e-Governance societies have been set up.
The States are being requested to constitute district e-Governance societies
expeditiously.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Department has informed that in order to build synergy
with Panchayats, Department of Information Technology has issued
directions to all States to set up CSCs in the Panchayat premises as
far as possible. Further, the Committee note that Gujarat, West Bengal
and Jharkhand had issued directions with regard to setting up of
CSCs in the Panchayat premises. The Department has also informed
that approximately 76 per cent of CSCs have been set up in Panchayat
premises. The Committee would like to be informed State-wise
data of CSC which have been set up in Panchayat premises. Besides,
the Department should pursue with the remaining States to issue
instructions for setting up of CSCs in the Panchayat premises. The desired
action in the regard should be taken and the Committee informed
accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
DIT has already advised State Governments/SCAs to set up CSCs
in Panchayats wherever feasible. Further, under the proposed Bharat
Nirman Common Service Centres, it is planned repositioning CSCs in
all Panchayats of the country.
33

The state-wise data of CSCs set up in Panchayats is as under:—
Name of State Number of CSCs in Gram Panchayats
Andhra Pradesh 21913
Arunachal Pradesh 1744
Assam 2489
Bihar 8463
Chhattisgarh 9600
Goa 189
Gujarat 13695
Haryana 6183
Himachal Pradesh 3243
Jammu and Kashmir 3439
Jharkhand 4562
Karnataka 5628
Kerala 991
Madhya Pradesh 23040
Maharashtra 28553
Meghalaya NA (as no Gram P anchayats)
Mizoram 673
Manipur 165
Nagaland NA (as no Gram P anchayats)
Orissa 6234
Puducherry 164
Punjab 12445
Sikkim 163
Rajasthan 9154
Tamil Nadu 12618
Tripura 1038
Uttarakhand 7227
Uttar Pradesh 51977
West Bengal 3351
34

Recommendation (Para No. 22)
From the information made available by the Department, the
Committee note that as on February 2010, 71708 CSCs have been rolled
out in 28 States/UTs. As on 28th February 2010, a total of 50,201 CSCs
have connectivity through Broadband or VSATs. Other CSCs are using
datacards, GPRS of various Telecom Service Providers (Airtel, Reliance,
Tata Indicom) for connectivity. The Committee feel that besides setting
up CSCs, it is of utmost importance that proper connectivity is provided,
so that CSCs are operational. As such, the Committee strongly
recommend that all the initiatives should be taken to coordinate with
BSNL so that connectivity to all the CSCs is provided within a definite
time frame.
Action Taken by the Government
As on 30th June, 2010, 80669 CSCs have been rolled out in
29 States. The working group set up on Broadband Connectivity for CSCs
is regularly monitoring this matter for provisioning of connectivity for
CSCs expeditiously. A special Tariff Plan package is also being suggested
by DIT to BSNL for CSCs.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that the timelines for facilitating
services through CSCs by enabling implementation of State Portal,
SSDG, e-Forum Application and Gap Infrastructure has been given as
March, 2010 in the Outcome Budget. With regard to the existing
position, the Committee have been apprised that proposals from 29 States
have been approved by DIT and funds have been released to them.
28 States have appointed consultants and a majority of these States
are in an advanced stage of preparing the Request for Proposals (RFPs)
for selection of Implementation Agencies (IAs). The Committee feel
that the success of CSCs depend upon the fact that users are actually
using the CSCs. Again in the case of facilitating services through CSCs
the deadlines of March, 2010 do not seem to be adhered to keeping in
view the status as given above. The Committee strongly recommend that
all the initiatives should be taken so that the CSCs become actually
functional.
Action Taken by the Government
The State Portal, SSDG, e-form application and gap infrastructure
project was initiated in 2009 with the project implementation timelines
up to March 2011. The scheduled timelines for the delivery of services
are January 2011 onwards.
35

Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee find that Commercial Taxes is a State Mission Mode
Project and had to be implemented by individual States. Cabinet has
already approved the MMP and the Ministry of Finance has requested
the States to prepare and submit State Specific DPRs for funding by the
Ministry. So far proposals of only 11 States have been approved for
funding. The Committee strongly recommend that the remaining States
should be pursued so that ‘Computerization of Commercial Taxes’ and
‘Automation of Central Excise and Service (ACES) Tax’ which have already
been rolled out throughout the country is facilitated expeditiously to
enable the Government to roll out GST successfully in all the States by
the stipulated timeline i.e. April, 2011.
Action Taken by the Government
As already mentioned, proposals of 11 Sates have been approved
with an overall outlay of Rs. 586.64 crore of which Rs. 407.40 crore will
be Central share. First instalment of Central share (Rs. 145 crore) has
been released to these 11 States. The Department of Revenue has
considered 11 more projects on 14th June, 2010.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note that for setting up of Software Technology
Park of India in the country, the State Government has to provide 3 acres
of land, 10000 sq. ft. of built up space and Grant-in-aid of Rs. 1 crore
to STPI. The status with regard to setting up of STPI as given by the
Department indicates that most of the States have not signed MoU and
land has not been allotted. In some of the cases, State contribution has
not been received. The Committee strongly recommend that the respective
State Governments should be pursued so that STPI in these States are
set up expeditiously.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department along with STPI is pursuing with the respective
State Governments for setting up of the approved new STPI centres. The
STPI centre at Behrampur (Orissa) is ready for commencing operations. The
status regarding setting up of each of the new STPI centre is given below:—
S.No. States STPI Centres Status
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Madhya Gwalior Construction work awarded to CPWD
Pradesh and work is in progress.
36

2. Madhya Bhopal Land is allotted but the request is
Pradesh pending with the State Government for
providing developed land. In this regard
letter dated 15/03/10 sent by AS(RS), DIT
to Chief Secretary, Government of
Madhya Pradesh. The matter is being
pursued.
3. Tripura Agartala State contribution in terms of Land and
built up space is not received so far. In
this regard a letter dated 08,06/10 sent
by AS(RS), DIT to Chief Secretary,
Government of Tripura.
4. Mizoram Aizawl State contribution in terms of Land and
built up space is not received so far. In
this regard a letter dated 08,06/10 sent
by AS(RS), DIT to Chief Secretary,
Government of Mizoram.
5. Gujarat Surat Centre approved but no State
contribution has been received so far. The
matter is being pursued with the
Government of Gujarat.
6.
Jharkhand
Jamshedpur Letter received from State Government
regarding their contribution. In this
regard, DG STPI has sent a letter dated
9/6/2010 to Secretary, Government of
Jharkhand for survey of land.
8.
Uttar Pradesh
Varanasi Centre approved but no State
contribution is received so far. In this
regard a letter dated 11/05/2010 sent by
AS(RS), DIT to Chief Secretary,
Government of Uttar Pradesh.
10. Karnataka Gulburga Centre approved but no State
contribution is received so far. In this
regard a letter dated 17/06/2010 sent by
AS(RS), DIT to Chief Secretary,
Government of Karnataka.
11. Goa Goa Centre approved but no State
contribution is received so far. In this
regard a letter dated 22/05/2010 sent by
DG STPI to Secretary IT, Government of
Goa.
12. Orissa Berhampur Centre is ready for inauguration.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Dhanbad7.
Agra9.
37

Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that sunset clause for STPI units has been
extended upto 31st March, 2011. The Committee have further been
informed that the Department has proposed a new modified STPI Scheme
according to which new and existing STP units may be provided with
the same level of fiscal incentives, for a level playing field, for a period
of 15 years without a sunset clause, based on the date of starting its
operation. The Department has further informed that the proposal has
not been included in the Finance Bill 2010. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue further on the issue so that the ‘Modified STP
Scheme’ is implemented expeditiously.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to provide a level playing field to the STP units and to
sustain the export growth rate of IT-ITES sector, it is important that the
benefits currently available under the SEZ scheme are extended to STP
units under a modified STP scheme beyond 31 March 2010 for a 15 years
period without any sunset clause. The proposal has not been included
in the Finance Bill 2010. However, the Department has continued to pursue
implementation of the “Modified STP Scheme”.
Post Budget developments — In a meeting convened by the Principal
Secretary to PM in March 2010 on the issue of parity in tax incentives
between IT units located in Software Technology Parks under STPI and
those located in SEZs, it was agreed that the Department of Revenue and
DIT would share their views on the proposed modified STP scheme.
Subsequently, in a meeting held in March 2010 between the Secretary
(DIT) and the Secretary (Department of Revenue), it was noted that
most of the large companies have foothold in the SEZs. On the other
hand, the SME companies are disadvantaged as they are largely
unable to benefit from the SEZ Scheme mainly on account of locational
constraints and higher operational costs in SEZs. Compared to this, the
STP Scheme, which the SMEs have effectively leveraged, is location and
size agnostic.
Department of Revenue appreciated the logic of the DIT on the
importance of continuing with fiscal incentives and providing parity with
IT SEZ units due to unique nature of this sector. However, they stated
that they are constrained in not supporting the case on account of the
38

need to raise tax revenues to reduce the high fiscal deficit and issues
arising out of the proposed Direct Tax Code (DTC) and Goods and Services
Tax (GST).
DIT has forwarded a note on the above meeting to PMO on 5.4.2010.
DIT is awaiting further advice in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 was notified
on 27th October, 2009. The draft Rules in respect of various Sections of
the Act are at the various stages as per the information provided by the
Department. The Committee strongly recommend that such Rules should
be notified expeditiously so as to deal with the emerging challenges with
regard to cyber crimes in the country.
Action Taken by the Government
The following Rules pertaining to sections 52, 54, 69, 69A and 69B
respectively of the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 are
notified:—
1. Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and Other
Terms and Conditions of Service of Chairperson and
Members) Rules, 2009.
2. Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Procedure for Investigation of
Misbehaviour or incapacity of Chairperson and Members)
Rules, 2009.
3. Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for
Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information)
Rules, 2009.
4. Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards to
Blocking for Access of Information by Public) Rules, 2009.
5. Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for
Monitoring and collecting traffic data or information) Rules,
2009.
The other rules are under finalisation and will be notified at the
earliest after following consultation with public.
39

Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee in their reports have consistently been drawing the
attention of the Department towards attrition rate of manpower in
C-DAC. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants of the previous year had been informed that attrition rate was
lower with the implementation of the recommendations of Sixth Pay
Commission. Now the Committee have been informed that during the
year 2009-10, 29 persons have left C-DAC. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the category of the aforesaid persons who left
C-DAC during 2009-10 along with the comparative data of attrition for
different category of officials in C-DAC during the last three years so
as to have the clear cut position in this regard. The Committee would
also like to recommend that the impact of the recommendations of the
Sixth Pay Commission on the attrition rate in C-DAC should be carefully
analyzed and the Committee informed accordingly.
Action Taken by the Government
The requisite category-wise information regarding persons who
left C-DAC during 2007-10 (three years) is as given below:—
S.No. Pay Band Grade Pay Resignations during
the year
(1) (2) (3) (4)
2009-10
1. PB-4 GP 8700 and above 3 a
2. PB-3 GP 5400 to 7600 20 b
3. PB-2 GP 4200 and 4600 2
4. PB-1 GP 1300 to 2800 4
Total 29
2008-09
1. PB-4 GP 8700 and above 2 c
2. PB-3 GP 5400 to 7600 45 d
3. PB-2 GP 4200 and 4600 0
4. PB-1 GP 1300 to 2800 1
Total 48
40

2007-08
1. PB-4 GP 8700 and above 6 e
2. PB-3 GP 5400 to 7600 62 f
3. PB-2 GP 4200 and 4600 3
4. PB-1 GP 1300 to 2800 4
Total 75
a 2 members in 16400 grade and 1 member in 14300 grade.
b 16 members in 8000 grade, 2 members in 10000 grade and 2 members in 12000
grade.
c 2 members in 14300 grade.
d 3 members in 12000 grade, 9 members in 10000 grade and 33 members in 8000
grade.
e 1 member in 16400 grade and 5 members in 14300 grade.
f 29 members in 8000 grade, 28 members in 10000 grade and 5 members in
12000 grade.
C-DAC has observed that there have been two major contributory
factors in containing the attrition at C-DAC during the year 2009-10:—
(i) C-DAC implemented the recommendations of the Sixth
Central Pay Commission in the year 2009. Due to this, the
salaries of staff members at C-DAC have gone up considerably.
(ii)Due to the recession prevailing for more than a year and a
half, the number of staff members resigning from C-DAC
and joining the industry have been minimal.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee note that during the year 2009-10, Rs. 600 crore
were allocated for the National Knowledge Network. The allocation was
reduced to Rs. 240 crore at RE stage which was fully utilized. During
the year 2010-11, Rs. 100 crore have been allocated against the
projections of Rs. 2318 crore. The Committee during the course of
deliberations have been informed that Cabinet on 25 March, 2010 has
finally approved the project. Under the NKN, 1500 premier institutions
would get covered across multiple sectors and it includes 400 universities.
The Committee note that National Knowledge Network is a backbone
for the e-Governance. Now when the programme has finally been
approved by the Government, all the initiatives should be taken to
implement the same expeditiously. Besides all the desired allocation for
(1) (2) (3) (4)
41

the year 2010-11 should be made available so that the programmes do
not suffer for want of resources. The concerns of the Committee in this
regard should be adequately communicated to the Ministry of Finance.
Action Taken by the Government
The concerns of the Committee that the NKN programme should
not suffer for want of resources has been taken into account and the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission has been requested for an
additional allocation of Rs. 1633.85 crore. A proposal for supplementary
grant of Rs. 1633.85 crore for implementation of NKN has also been
submitted to Ministry of Finance for inclusion in the 1st Batch of
Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2010-11.
42

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee find that the data with regard to import/export of
hardware/software has been indicated in US dollar in the various Budget
documents. The Committee recommend that the aforesaid data should
also be indicated in the Indian Rupee so as to have a clear cut position
of these parameters in the Indian currency.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee for indicating data in Indian
Rupee has been noted for compliance.
43

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee have consistently been raising their concern
over the persistent problem of pendency of the Utilisation Certificates
and unspent balances. As per the information provided by the
Department 1143 UCs amounting to Rs. 1545.22 crore are pending from
the implementing agencies. As per the clarification given by
the Department, in accordance with the provisions made under
Rule 212(1) of the General Financial Rules, the Utilisation Certificate in
the prescribed Performa is required to be submitted within 12 months
of the closure of the financial year by the institution or the
organization concerned. Thus, even if the pendency after 1.4.2009,
is not taken into consideration, 804 UCs amounting to Rs. 1060.30 crore
which is the substantial amount are due from the implementing
agencies. More disturbing is the fact that the substantial number of
implementing agencies have been allocated the first installment and
have neither submitted the utilization certificate nor demanded the
further allocation. The aforesaid practice clearly defeats the purpose of
the programme. The Committee strongly recommends that the
monitoring of the different programmes should further be strengthened.
The provision of the release of the next installment only after the receipt
of the utilisation certificate do not address the case where the
implementing agency after release of first installment and is least interested
in demanding the next installment. Urgent steps should be taken to recover
the money from the implementing agencies who have not spent the
allocation made by way of the first installment effectively. Besides, the
accountability for keeping the money with the implementing agencies
without implementing the project should be fixed and the Committee
informed accordingly.
44

Action Taken by the Government
The concrete actions taken by the Department to liquidate pending
UCs/unspent balances are:—
• Periodic reviews were undertaken to liquidate the pending
UCs at various levels in the Department of Information
Technology.
• Every release of next installment is subject to receiving the
Utilization Certificate for the amount already released.
• Special drives have also been organized to facilitate
co-ordination between PAO and Programme Divisions of DIT
in liquidating pending UCs/unspent balances.
• All Group coordinators and heads of all Autonomous Bodies
have been requested for the early liquidation of pending UCs.
•  Communications have also been issued to all GCs/Heads of
all Autonomous Bodies under DIT apprising them of UCs
pending with them and have been requested to put in sincere
efforts to ensure clearance of pending UCs. It has also been
reiterated that proposal for further releases (including core
grant) will not be processed in case of non-clearance of
pending UCs by all concerned.
• Recommendation of the Project Review and Steering Group
(PRSG) for release of next installment of Grants-in-aid is also
insisted upon, so as to ensure that releases are linked with
the progress made in the project.
• All the Group Coordinators (GCs) have been requested to
take action immediately in liquidating the pending UCs,
particulary with those agencies which had been released grant
in a single installment. The institutions with single installment
have been identified and all the concerned HoDs have been
requested to pay special attention to them.
• One to one meetings with implementing agencies having huge
unspent balances have also been held to liquidate the unspent
balances.
• Secretary, DIT has directed all the Programme Divisions to
constitute Committees under the chairmanship of HoDs of
respective Divisions to review the pending UCs/unspent
balances and undertake special directives for their liquidation
and submit the progress for discussion at a senior level
meeting.
45

All these efforts have resulted in reducing the number of pending
utilization certificates/unspent balances to some extent as given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
As on No. of Pending Amount of Amount
UCs (Due)  Pending UCs Liquidated
22.03.2010 804 1060.30 0
01.04.2010 798 1057.51 2.79
19.07.2010 486 764.78 295.52
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Gross Budgetary Support is provided for the different Schemes/
Programmes of the Department under the three sectors viz. Research and
Development, Infrastructure Development and Human Resource
Development. The trend of the allocations made at RE stage to these
sectors indicates that under the Infrastructure Development Sector, the
Outlays are considerably being reduced at RE stage during each of the
three years of the Eleventh Plan. More apparent is the reduction during
the year 2009-10. Under the other two sectors, the Outlay have been
slightly increased at RE stage. Under the Infrastructure Sector, the
important Schemes/Programmes viz. Electronics Governance, Cyber
Security, Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing are being
implemented which are very crucial for the information technology sector.
The Committee would like the Department to explain the main reasons
for reduction of Outlay at RE stage in the Infrastructure sector, particularly
when the other two sectors are not being subjected to the cut at RE stage.
The Committee strongly recommend that keeping in view the importance
of the Programmes which include NeGP being implemented under the
Infrastructure Sector, no cut should be imposed at the RE stage. The
concerns of the Committee in this regard should be communicated to the
Ministry of Finance, at the same time the Committee also expect the
Ministry to ensure effective utilisation of the Outlay provided for the
different Programmes/Schemes.
Action Taken by the Government
The major programme under the infrastructure sector is
e-Governance Programme. A sum of Rs. 900 crore was earmarked in
BE 2009-10. Implementation of this programme is mainly dependent
upon State-level Implementing Agencies, release of State share by
46

State Governments, etc. Despite the efforts of this Department to
implement the programme faster, the total amount spent under this
programme during the first two quarters of 2009-10 was quite less which
is why a cut was imposed during RE stage. DIT is making all possible
efforts for effective utilization of the outlay and to avoid any cut at
RE stage. The concerns of the Committee will be communicated to Ministry
of Finance during the pre-budget discussions at RE stage.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee find that the Department have proposed a new
Scheme called Skill Development in IT for the year 2010-11. The National
Skill Development Policy has set a target of providing skill development
in IT to 500 million persons by 2022. In this regard, DIT has been given
a target of skill development of 10 million persons by 2022 in the domain
of IECT. As a preparation for the Scheme, the Department has worked
out a roadmap for expansion of the capacities of the DIT’s organizations
viz. DOEACC Societies and C-DAC and submitted the same to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission too has examined the
proposal and accorded in principal approval for the same. As informed
by the Department, action has been initiated to work out detailed project
report covering various implementation aspects, inputs required etc. to
seek an approval of the competent authority. During the year 2010-11,
a token provision of Rs. 1 crore has been made for the aforesaid
programme. While taking note of the steps being initiated by the
Department for the launch of the Scheme, the Committee emphasize that
all the preparations should be completed expeditiously so that the
programme start in full swing from the year 2010-11 itself. The Department
should seek the requisite allocations of Outlay after the Scheme is formally
approved so as to implement the Scheme in the year 2010-11.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee further note that for the successful implementation
of the programme ‘Skill Development in IT’, there are various issues like
connectivity, trained man power to impart skill development in IT as
well as the modules for the programme. Since the programme would be
implemented by different societies like DOEACC and C-DAC, the
Committee strongly recommend that common module should be prepared
by the Department in coordination with the other Ministries/Departments
involved in imparting skill development in IT as per the National Skill
Development Policy. Besides, the other issues like connectivity and trained
47

man power should also be taken into consideration and the effective
steps taken to address the aforesaid issues. The concrete action taken in
this regard should be communicated to the Committee.
Action Taken by the Government (of Para Nos. 8 and 9)
Government of India announced the National Skill Development
Policy which has set a target of skilling 500 million by 2022. Department
of Information Technology has been listed as a part of the skill
development initiative and has been given a target to train 10 million
persons by the year 2022. As a follow up action for implementation of
Skill Development in IT, discussions are in progress with various
stakeholders – DOEACC Society, C-DAC, etc. Detailed Project Report is
under preparation. DIT would seek the requisite allocations of Outlay
after the Scheme is formally approved.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are concerned to note that even when the
Government propose to launch a full-fledged scheme for skill development
in IT, the Department has not bothered to maintain the data with regard
to computer literacy in the country. Besides even when the Department
has an important role in e-waste management and creating awareness on
e-waste, the Department has shown the ignorance of the data with regard
to e-waste generated in the country. The Committee note that the
Department of Information Technology is the nodal Department with
regard to various issues related to information technology. As such the
Department should maintain various data indicating the overall scenario
of the issues related to IT in the country. The urgent action should be
taken to maintain the data with regard to literacy rate in computer as
well as e-waste.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Committee on maintaining data on
literacy rate in computers have been noted for compliance.
As regards data on e-waste, it is stated that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency for policy, planning,
promoting and coordinating the environmental programmes and is
involved in enacting laws, guidelines referring to e-waste. Department
of Information Technology is involved in the process of technological
solutions to the e-waste management.
48

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee note from the data made available by the
Department that the total number of defacement of websites for the year
2009-10 was 5000. The data with regard to web defacement of Government
websites was not available with the Department. During the course of
the deliberations, the Committee have been informed that all serious
attack activities originate outside the country and it becomes difficult
technically and legally to reach out to the perpetrators. If the attack and
the targets are both inside the country, it is quite easy to track and book
a person under the provisions of Information Technology Act. However,
in case of attack originating outside the country, it is difficult to do the
same. In this connection, the Committee may like to highlight their
recommendation made in the Fiftieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
the ‘The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’ as reproduced
below:—
“Instead of taking recourse to piecemeal solution of entering into
MLATs with one country at a time, the Committee would prefer
that India should be a signatory to an omnibus International
Convention on the issue so that cyber crimes committed against
any country from anywhere are tackled with utmost promptitude
and without the technicalities of citizenship, etc. coming into play.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that India as one of the
world leaders in information technology, ought to take initiative
in materialising such an International Convention against cyber
crimes/cyber terrorism under the auspices of United Nations.
Accordingly, they desire that the Department should immediately
prepare a roadmap in consultation/coordination with the Ministries
of External Affairs, Law and Justice and Home Affairs for a suitable
International Convention. The Government may, in the meantime,
utilize their diplomatic channels for creating a movement in favour
of the Convention in the comity of nations. The Committee are
hopeful that such an initiative by the Government of India under
the auspices of United Nations will tackle the twin scourge of cyber
crimes and cyber terrorism to a substantial extent universally and
spare the Government from taking recourse to adhoc approaches/
arrangements to counter a perennial problem.”
49

Recommendation (Para No. 29)
Keeping in view the fact that scale and intensity of the problem
of cyber attacks from outside the country is increasing, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Department should seriously consider the
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee which would definitely help
in dealing with the problem of hacking by the hackers originating from
foreign countries.
Action Taken by the Government (of Para Nos. 28 and 29)
International cooperation in the form of mutual legal assistance
requires an international agreement or other similar arrangements such
as reciprocal legislation. Such provisions, whether multilateral or bilateral,
oblige the authorities of a contracting party to request for mutual legal
assistance in the agreed cases. But the legal frameworks being different
in different nations, cooperation still does not permit sufficient support.
The UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, at its
Twelfth Congress held during 12-19 April, 2010 at Salvador, Brazil
deliberated on this subject. The Congress recommended considering to
convene an open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a
comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it
by Member States, the international community and the private sector,
including the exchange of information on national legislation, best
practices, technical assistance and international cooperation, with a view
to examining options to strengthen existing and to propose new national
and international legal or other responses to cybercrime.
India has been represented in the convention through MHA which
is also coordinating and examining all relevant issue in this regards.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee note that as per the IT Act, any person aggrieved
by an order made by the Controller of Certifying Authorities or by an
Adjudicating Officer under the Act can appeal before the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal (CAT). Further, the Committee note that out of four cases filed
before Tribunal, during the year 2007 one is still pending. With regard
to the year 2008, the Department has not furnished the information. In
respect of the year 2009, all the 8 cases filed before the Tribunal are
pending. The Department has further informed that most of the cases
pending before adjucating officers are those filed in 2009 except the
50

State of Kerala where the number of cases are pending since 2006. In this
regard, the Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for
long pending cases in respect of the State of Kerala. Besides the Committee
would also like to recommend to the Department to consider prescribing
the definite time limit for disposal of the cases which would definitely
help in expeditious disposal of case by the Tribunal.
Action Taken by the Government
The following is the list of cases that have been filed in the Tribunal
from the year 2007:—
1. Appeal No. 1/2007 Disposed off on 05.11.2009
2. Appeal No. 1/2009 Disposed off on 26.05.2010
3. Appeal No. 2/2009 Stayed by the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi
4. Appeal No. 3/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
5. Appeal No. 4/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
6. Appeal No. 5/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
7. Appeal No. 6/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
8. Appeal No. 7/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
9. Appeal No. 8/2009 Disposed off on 28.05.2010
10. Appeal No. 1/2010Filed on 13.05.2010. Pending
consideration before the Tribunal
No appeals were filed before the Tribunal in the year 2008 and
hence no details for the year 2008 were furnished.
At present there are only two appeals pending before the Tribunal,
i.e. Appeal No. 2/2009 and Appeal No. 1/2010.
A definite time limit has already been provided in sub-section (6)
of Section 57 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 for disposal of
appeals by the Tribunal. The relevant sub-section reads:—
“The appeal filed before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as
possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the
appeal finally within six months from the date of receipt of the
appeal.”
51

Time limit has also been provided in the Information Technology
(Qualification and Experience of Adjudicating Officers and Manner of
Holding Enquiry) Rules, 2003 for disposal of complaints filed before the
Adjudicating Officer. Sub-rule (k) of Rule 4 of the aforesaid Rules reads
thus:—
“As far as possible, every application shall be heard and decided
in four months and the whole matter in six months.”
Hence no further provision is required to be made in the Statute
or Rules regarding the time limit for disposal of complaint/s and
appeal/s filed before the Adjudicating Officers and the Tribunal.
As far as Kerala is concerned, there are no cases filed under the
IT Act, 2000 pending before the concerned Adjudicating Officers.
The number of cases shown to be pending in Kerala have been
registered under the various sections of Chapter XI of the IT Act, 2000
and the Indian Penal Code. These cases have been registered by the
Concerned Police Station within whose jurisdiction the crime/s have been
committed. The power/authority to try these cases vests in the court/s
of competent jurisdiction in the State of Kerala.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I)
52

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE
– NIL –
NEW DELHI;  RAO INDERJIT SINGH,
15 November, 2010 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1932 (Saka)Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
53

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2010-2011)
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th October, 2010 from
1500 hours to 1720 hours in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
 3. Dr. Charles Dias
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
6. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
8. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji
9. Shri Dhananjay Singh
10. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri M.P. Achuthan
12. Shri Mohammad Adeeb
13. Shri Salim Ansari
14. Shri P. Rajeeve
15. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
54

S ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Shri. H.R. Kamboj —Additional Director
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
2. The Committee then took up the following three draft Reports
for consideration and adopted the same without any modifications:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii)*** *** *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Department of Information Technology (Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology).
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft Reports and present the same to the House on the date
convenient to him.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.***Matter not related to this Report.
55

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR
SEVENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:—
Paragraph Nos: 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31 and 32
Total : 23
Percentage : 71.87
(ii)Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:—
Paragraph No: 14
Total : 01
Percentage : 3.12
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:—
Paragraph Nos: 3, 5, 8, 9, 11, 28, 29 and 30
Total : 08
Percentage : 25.01
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of
interim in nature:—
Paragraph No: Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : 00.00
56