1 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
16 


2 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
10 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
30 
CHAPTERIV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
33 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
35 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
*I. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of the Committee held on 11th August, 
2015  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
            40 
 
*Not appended with the cyclostyled copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15) 
 
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma Additional Director 
 
         *    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
(ii) 

5 
 
     INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2014 -2015), having 
been authorised by the Committee, do present the Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2014 -15)’ of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was prese nted to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
22nd December, 2014.  The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on                        
18th March, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
11th August, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Fo urth Report (Six teenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting for the year 2014-2015. 
 
2.  The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2014 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 17 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations /Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  and are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 15.  
   
   
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4  
   
   
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply  of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee  
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 7  
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are  still awaited 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  5,  13, 14,  16 and 17  
   
   
 
 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that  the final replies in respect of recommendations for which 
only interim replies have been given by the Government included in Chapter -V of this Report 
and replies to recommendations made in the Chapter -I of this Report may be furnished to 
them within three months of presentation of the Report to Parliament. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Launching of New Channels for North East                          
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that at present there is a single 24X7 North -East channel which is 
inadequate to meet the aspirations and needs of the vast North -Eastern Region of the country, 
comprising 8 States where multiple languages and dialects are followed. Accordingly, it has 
been proposed by the Prasar Bharati that the existing North East channel  be trifurcated by 
launching two additional 24X7 satellite channels for North Eastern Region designated as DD – 
“Arun Prabha” (Itanagar) and DD – “Ma-Mi-Na” (Aizawl). The proposal is under finalization for 
circulation to appraisal agencies. The proposed Ar un Prabha Channel will cater to the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim and the second channel will cater to the States of Nagaland, 
Mizoram and Manipur and the third to Assam and Meghalaya. Taking into consideration the 
geographical isolation of the fa r-flung North–Eastern States of the country, the Committee find 
it a praiseworthy initiative of the Government for launching these two additional channels. The 
Committee, at the same time, recommend that these projects are needed to be implemented 
on a pri ority basis and specific time -frames be prescribed within which the channels would be 
operationalised. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.”  
 
7. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Note, have inter-alia 
stated as under:- 
 
 
o “Starting of three new additional 24x7 satellite channels for North East Region 
under existing Plan Scheme.  ‘Arunachal Pradesh – Sikkim(Arunprabha); Manipur – 

3 
 
Mizoram – Nagaland(Ma-Mi-Na) and Assam - Meghalaya is going t o be a software 
intensive exercise as content will need to be customized to the requirement of North 
eastern states.    
 
o DD-Arunprabha’, ‘DD-Ma-Mi-Na’ and ‘DD -As-Me’ are new channels in addition 
to those existing which gets contribution from all 8 States of North East. Hence the 
projected amount under SFC for software needs be analyzed in terms of three channels.   
 
o As soon as DD-Arunprabha’, ‘DD-Ma-Mi-Na’ and ‘DD -As-Me’ go on air we will 
be able to telecast more and more local programmes including films and local tribal 
content keeping in view the border Area.  
 
o The basis of the proposal for trifurcation of the North East Channels is to: 
 To provide a strong platform to showcase the rich and diverse cultural and 
linguistic identity of the North Eastern States of India. 
 To cater to the population of the North East India to create overall awareness 
and a drive for development. 
 To play a catalytic role for the prosperity and health of the tribal community of 
the North Eastern India. 
 To provide authentic,  quality and useful information and analyses in 
languages/dialects comprehensible to the North East India.  
 To regenerate and rejuvenate the cultural ethos and spirit of the people of the 
North Eastern region. 
 To promote the cause of gender equality, weake r sections and differently abled 
persons of the region.  
 To inculcate scientific temper, self -respect, self -confidence, and mutual trust 
amongst citizens of NER. 
 To ensure that all the States in the North East get adequate representation 
through the creation of 3 focused, 24x7 Channels instead of the existing single 
North East Channel which is insufficient for the purpose.” 
 

4 
 
8.       Taking into consideration the proposal of Prasar Bharati to trifurcate the existing  single 
24x7 North East channel int o DD-Arunprabha’, ‘DD -Ma-Mi-Na’ and ‘DD -As-Me’, the 
Committee had recommended   that  these  projects   be implemented   on a  priority  basis 
and operationalised with in  specific time frame s. In their Action Taken Note, Prasar Bharati 
has merely stated that the starting of these three channels involves software intensive 
exercise as content needs to be customized.  Further, Prasar Bharati is yet to finalize the 
budget provision for this Project .  Evidently, there is  a clear lack of progress in taking these 
important Projects forward.  Keeping in view that these channels will cater to the needs of 
the entire North Eastern region, the Committee want the Ministry to implement the projects 
expeditiously. W hile reiterating  their earlier recommendation, the Committee urge  the 
Ministry to accord top priority to these projects as well as to fix time frames to operationalise 
them. The Committee will like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
B.    Modernization of AIR and Doordarshan  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“One of the focal points of successive Reports of the Committee have been the modernization 
of All India Radio and Doordarshan, the two constituents of the Prasar Bharati. The Committee 
note that for the Twelfth Plan period, the Government have allocated Rs . 2252 crore for All 
India Radio for modernisation /expansion of its infrastructure which include Rs. 1020 crore for 
the New schemes under the Twelfth Plan and Rs. 1232 crore for the continuing schemes of the 
Tenth and Eleventh Plans. In regard to the mode rnization of Doordarshan, the Committee have 
been informed that it is a continuous process and various schemes for modernisation are 
formulated and implemented from time to time. At present, the schemes which are under 
implementation include Digitalization  of Transmitters and Studios in Doordarshan Network, 
High Definition Television (HDTV), Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of 
Transmitter and Studio equipment, Modernization, Augmentation and Replacement of Satellite 
Broadcast equipment and DTH Se rvice, etc. The Committee recommend that the remaining 
works related to digitisation of Medium Wave (MW) and Short Wave (SW) Transmitters, studios 
and digitisation of connectivity are completed within the time limits prescribed under the 
Twelfth Plan. The Committee also take a serious note of the fact that for complete digitisation 

5 
 
of AIR networks and 100 per cent coverage by FM signal, inadequate funds were allocated 
during the Eleventh Plan and even during the Twelfth Plan, the requisite requirement of Rs . 
4179 crore allocation has not been met and as a result, the digitization plan has been shifted 
further and is expected to be completed only by December, 2018. The Committee note that 
both AIR and Doordarshan, as national broadcasters, are playing a cruci al role in the socio -
economic development of the country because of their extensive reach across the masses, 
particularly in the rural and far flung areas of the country. The Committee, therefore, find it 
very crucial to rejuvenate and revitalize Prasar Bh arati by improving its efficiency, effectiveness 
and quality of broadcasting through complete digitisation. However, looking at the 
unsatisfactory performance during the Eleventh Plan, the Committee recommend that earnest 
efforts must be made to see that a ll the planned schemes for modernization of AIR and DD are 
implemented during the Twelfth Plan period.” 
 
10. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Note, have inter-alia 
stated as under:- 
 
1. “It is the endeavour of Doordarshan to complete the projects at the earliest & utilize 
its facilities optimally within the constraint of available resources and manpower.  
Every possible step is being taken by Doordarshan to complete the projects within 
the time frame. 
 
2. Expansion of DD Freedish, DTH platform of Doordarshan from 59 to 97 channels has 
been undertaken.  Equipment has been installed & tested.  Conditional Access 
System is under consideration. 
 
3. Digital Terrestrial Television: Replacement of Analogue transmitters by Digital is one 
of the thrust areas of Five Year Plans.  In XI & XII Plan, 63 Digital transmitters were 
sanctioned. Currently 19 Digital transmitters are under installation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. HDTV component has almost been achieved. 
 

6 
 
As regards All India Radio ( AIR), digitization of AIR MW network is on fast track.  All 
Transmitters provided for in the Plan have been procured and installation is under way.  
This is likely to be completed within the Plan Period. 
 
FM: The listenership of Radio has moved over to FM which not only provide s high 
quality reception but is also available on mobile phones numbering 900 million (approx).   
However, current FM coverage is only 45% by population. It is imperative that to 
interest listeners, AIR needs to bring its Primary, Vividh Bharati & Gold/Rainbow services 
on FM on Pan India basis.” 
 
11.  In view of  the fact that  both AIR and Doordarshan are national broadcasters which 
play a crucial role in the socio -economic development of the country due to their extensive 
outreach to masses, the Committee h ad recommended that the  Prasar Bharati be 
rejuvenated and revitalized by improving their efficiency, effectiveness and quality of 
broadcasting through complete digitization.  The Committee had also urged the Ministry to 
make earnest efforts so that all planned schemes for modernization of AIR and Doordarshan 
are implemented during the Twelfth Plan Period.  The Committee appreciate that several 
measures have been taken in this regard, like  expansion of DD  Freedish, undertaking DTH 
platform of Doordarshan from 59 to 97 channels, replacing analogue transmitters by digital 
ones and installing transmitters for AIR MW network , etc. to completely digitize AIR and 
Doordarshan to improve effectiveness and quality of broadcasting.  The Committee , at the 
same time, will like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry/AIR to bring its Primary, 
Vividh Bharati & Gold/Rainbow services on FM on Pan India basis in view of the current FM 
coverage which is only 45% by  population.  The Committee also note that step s are being 
taken by the Ministry to complete all planned schemes for modernization of AIR and 
Doordarshan during the Twelfth Plan Period.  The Committee trust that through these efforts, 
AIR and Doordarshan will be digitized and all planned schemes will be implemented during 
the Twelfth Plan Period which will certainly enhance efficiency, effectiveness and  the quality 
of broadcasting. 
 
 
 

7 
 
C. Digitisation of Cable TV Networks  
 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
12.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee note that Phase I of the digitization of Cable TV Networks was completed by 
31st October, 2012. Out of the four metro cities planned to be digital, digitization has been near 
total in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata. Chennai is yet to undergo the digital transition due to 
several pending court cases. Phase II of digitization was concluded by 31st March, 2013 in 38 
cities spanning 14 states and one union territory. The Committee, however, note that the 
process of digitisation under Phase I and Phase II was not smooth as there  was strong 
opposition from cable operators  Associations, non -acceptance of revenue sharing 
arrangements between cable operators and MSOs and between  MSOs and broadcasters, delay 
in filling of Consumer Application Forms, monopoly of few selected STBs manufacturers and 
service providers and opposition from some State Governments. In this regard, the Committee 
note that in order to implement the final phases in a professional manner, the Ministry have 
proposed constitution of a new Task Force exclusively to provide policy direction and to take 
stock of the progress on a regular basis. The Phase III and IV digitization process is now planned 
to be completed by Decem ber, 2015 and December 2016 respectively. In view of the past 
experience of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that suitable steps be taken proactively 
to address the concerns of all the stakeholders in achieving the final phases of digitization 
within the envisaged time frame.”  
 
13.   The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Note, have inter-alia 
stated as under:- 
 
“In order to timely implementation of final phases i.e. Phase III & IV in a professional manner, 
following multi-pronged strategy has been planned: 
(1) Constitution of a new Task Force 
 
Task Force has been constituted for implementation of Phase III & IV. The Task Force 
provide policy directions and take stock of the progress made on a regular basis. Five 

8 
 
meetings of the Task Force already held. Hon’ble MIB addressed the members of the 
Task Force in the 1st meeting. 
 
(2) Launch of an intensive Communication Campaign  to enhance the consumer 
awareness about the benefits of digitization and the need for installation of Set Top 
Boxes. 
 
 A Publicity Campaign Committee has been constituted. 
 Print advertisement issued in all newspapers. 
 Video Spot on benefits of digitization  has been developed and  DDn and 
all regional channels are carrying this spot. 
 AIR is giving radio jingles on digitization.   
(3) Registration of MSOs 
 
A print advertisement was issued in leading newspapers inviting applications from 
interested parties for operation in Phase III areas in a time bound manner. Over 500 
fresh applications received. 
 
(4) Involvement of State Governments  through Nodal Officers and capacity 
building of stakeholders especially Nodal Officers to carry out digitization. 
 
15 State Governments  have already nominated State level as well as District level 
nodal officers. Remaining State Governments have being reminded to nominate. 
 
Workshops at the national as well as regional level with nodal officers have been 
planned to sensitise them about their role in the digitization exercise. 
 
A meeting with Resident Commissioners was held on 24.02.2015 to sensitize them 
about the role of State/UT Govts.  
 
(5) Setting up of Regional Units by the Ministry to take up digitization in a mission 
mode. 
12 Regional units would be set up for coordination.  
 

9 
 
(6) Meetings with MSO and LCOs: Sub groups of MSOs have been created and 
meeting schedules prepared for meeting with these Sub -groups. 1st meeting with 5 
sub-groups of MSOs already held. A sub group of LCOs  have also been constituted. 
Regular meetings with national MSOs, independent MSOs and LCO Associations 
have been planned. 
(7) Seeding plans:  Seeding plans of STBs are being collected from registered MSOs 
to monitor their readiness and progress.  
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is now all set to meet the target of 31 st Dec 2015 for 
Phase III and 31st Dec 2016 for Phase IV of cable TV digitisation.” 
 
14.   While observing that the implementation of Phase I and  Phase II of digitization  of 
Cable TV Networks was not smooth, the Committee had desired  that  suitable   steps  should 
be taken by the Ministry proactively to address the concerns of all stakeholders in achieving 
the final phases  of digitization, i.e. Phase III and IV  by December 2015 and December 2016 , 
respectively. The Committee find from the reply furnished by the Ministry that  various steps 
have been  taken by them for the timely implementation of the final phases of digitization 
which, inter alia, include constitution of a new Task Force,  launching an intensive 
Communication Campaign, registration of Multi System Operators ( MSOs), involvement of 
State Governments through Nodal Officers and  capacity building of stakeholders, setting up 
of Regional Units, meetings with MSO s and Local Cable Operators ( LCOs) and Seeding plans. 
While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry, t he Committee hope that the final phases 
of digitization will be achieved within the envisaged timeframe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Demands for Grants for 2014-15 
 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that as per Demand No. 61 in respect of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, the Budgetary allocation is for a total amount of Rs. 3316 crore 
wherein the Plan section accounts for Rs. 1005 crore and the Non -Plan section constitute Rs. 
2311 crore. When compared to the Budgetary support for the year 2013 -14 at BE stage,  which 
was Rs. 3035.65 crore (Plan Rs. 905 crore + Non -Plan Rs. 2130.65 crore), the Committee find 
that the overall Budget for the year 2014 -15 has been increased by Rs. 280.35 crore over the 
budgetary provision for the year 2013 -14, representing an increa se of 9.23 per cent. The 
Committee observe that though the Ministry have been able to utilize a significant proportion 
of funds at the RE Stage, there is a shortfall in expenditure at the BE Stage. The Committee take 
note of the contributory reasons for lo w expenditure at BE Stage, like delay in approval of 
schemes, regulatory guidelines of the Ministry of Finance the tempo of implementation gaining 
momentum in the second half of the year, etc. Giving due credence to the reasoning advanced 
by the Ministry, the Committee would like to emphasize that the planning process can further 
be reoriented to deal with procedural activity to see that the pace of expenditure during the 
first half of the Plan year is increased. In the opinion of the Committee, regulatory mechanism 
devised by the Ministry of Finance is to be viewed as a measure through which the 
Administrative Ministry excel in their implementation of planned activities and incur 
expenditure prudently. In order to achieve the objective, the Committee desire  the Ministry to 
further streamline the measures which include periodic review, mid -term appraisal of all major 
schemes and    regular monitoring of expenditure. Taking note of the decent pace of utilization 
during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, the Committee view t hat the recent steps taken by the Prasar 
Bharati to improve the planning and implementation of its schemes by suitable delegation of 
financial powers are measures in the right direction. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should attach top priority to utilize Gross Budgetary support for the year 2014 -15 by 

11 
 
implementing all the Plan schemes effectively and efficiently to achieve the financial and 
physical targets.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 The Ministry is making all efforts to utilise the Gross Budgetary Support for the year 
2014-15 by implementing plan schemes effectively and efficiently to achieve financial and 
physical targets.  The Ministry has been able to utilise 55 % of Budget Es timates 2014-15.   The 
Ministry expects to utilise funds allocated at Revised Estimates, 2014 -15 stage in entirety.  In 
order to ensure the same the Ministry has taken steps such as: 
(i) Streamlining of the planning & approval of schemes to ensure quicker appr oval of 
schemes; 
 
(ii) Weekly review of plan implementation in Senior Officers’ meeting taken by 
Secretary (I&B); 
 
(iii) Additional Secretary /Joint Secretaries regularly monitoring the implementation of 
various schemes under their charge.   
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. G-30014/1/2015-PC dated: 19.01.2015) 
Thrust Areas in Twelfth Five Year Plan 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 2) 
The Committee note that for the Twelfth Plan Period, the Ministry of I& B have got Plan 
outlay of Rs.8583 crore, including Internal and External Budgetary Resources (IEBR) of Rs.1000 
crore from the Prasar Bharati. The thrust areas identified for the Twelfth Plan include, 
Modernization of Prasar Bharati through digitization of All India Radio (AIR) and Doordarshan, 
improving coverage of AIR and Doordarshan in the border areas, expansion of FM Services and 
Community Radio Services, content development of Prasar Bharati, effective dissemination of 
Government policies and programme s through integrated media campaign, National Film 
Heritage Mission, Launching Kisan Channel, etc. The Committee note that the Ministry followed 
a very proactive approach with the commencement of the Twelfth Plan and completed the 
requisite evaluation for continuation of schemes from the Eleventh to the Twelfth Plan period 
in time. Further, pending finalization of the Twelfth Plan outlay, an innovative approach was 
adopted by the Ministry to get the appraisal and approval of the ongoing component of new 

12 
 
schemes done for the first year outlay and accordingly implementation of schemes began well 
in advance in the first year. With the approval of the Twelfth Plan outlay, action was taken for 
20 new Plan schemes, out of which 12 have already been approved so far, and the rest 06 are in 
the advanced stage of appraisal and approval. Two schemes of the broadcasting sector are 
proposed to be dropped. The Committee do appreciate the improvement made in the planning 
process during the Twelfth Plan over the Eleventh Pla n. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should continue to find innovative ways to achieve the defined targets in each Plan 
year with specific emphasis on the optimum utilization of Plan funds. The Committee stress that 
the performance of the Prasar B harati through implementation of its schemes will play a vital 
role in determining the objectives envisaged in the 12th Plan document for the Ministry of I&B. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
With t he Budget announcement of 2014 -15 a new scheme ‘Kisan Channel’ has been 
added taking the number of plan schemes, of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, from 
26 to 27.  Out of 20 new plan schemes, 15 plan schemes have already been approved and the 
remaining are in advanced stages of appraisal/approval. 
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. G-30014/1/2015-PC dated: 19.01.2015) 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR)  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the Internal and Extra Budgetary Reso urces (IEBR) generated 
by the Prasar Bharati during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 were Rs. 1552.90 crore and 1622.84 crore, 
respectively, for the first two Plan years. The corresponding expenditures during the aforesaid 
period were Rs.1350.35 crore and Rs.1541.32 cr ore. According to the Ministry, funds were 
utilized towards meeting administrative expenses, including power supply charges, payment to 
Armed Guard, Office expenses, satellite payment, programme expenses and sometimes even 
on meeting excess expenditure on implementation of Plan schemes. The Committee are 
concerned to note that there has been a progressive shortfall in IEBR generation against the 
projections of the Prasar Bharati over the years. The net surplus of IEBR towards GBS support 
after meeting opera ting and programme expenses is very meager. This is the reason why IEBR 
support to GBS has got a downward revision from the initial projection of RS.1000 crore at the 

13 
 
beginning of the Twelfth Plan to Rs.200 crore from the year 2013 -14. The Committee are gi ven 
to understand that various steps are being taken by the Prasar Bharati to increase revenue, 
which include adopting an aggressive marketing strategy, gearing up the recovery mechanism 
for realization of outstanding dues, exploring new areas of possible revenue generation and 
touching upon untapped areas, and advising Ministries/Departments to use All India Radio and 
Doordarshan for releasing their advertisements for bringing out policies, programmes and new 
initiatives concerning their Ministries in a mo st cost effective manner. The Committee 
recommend that steps taken by Prasar Bharati need to be intensified in the desired direction of 
garnering more revenue. While the Committee are fully aware of the fact that Prasar Bharati 
need not be guided purely by  commercial motives and act in the spirit of the PB Act, 1990, but 
it is essential that it becomes self -reliant by garnering the much needed revenue and becomes 
less dependent on Government grants.  
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed that with several obligations that no other Broadcaster in 
India has to perform, like operating from Kargil, A & N Islands, Kanyakumari and extreme 
borders of China and Pakistan, Prasar Bharati, therefore, cannot be  principally guided by 
commercial motives. The  income generated under the Head ‘Internal and Extra Budgetary 
Resources (IEBR)’ is  a part of its normal performance of broadcasting across the country, which 
is done mainly  through sale of air time on its various channels and other miscellaneous sources  
of revenue. The income generated is utilized towards meeting ‘Administrative Expenses’ 
including rent, power supply charges, payment to armed guards, payment to 
professionals/contractual staff, office expenses and sometimes even on meeting excess 
expenditure on implementation of Plans schemes. 
2. As per decision taken by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 14.09.2012 on proposal for 
Financial Restructuring of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) and filling up of 
essential posts based on the r ecommendations of the Group of Ministers, during the next five 
years from 2012-13 to 2016-17 the Government Non-Plan support may be made available to PB 
for meeting 100% expenses towards salary and salary related expenses.  Expenditure details for 
Plan & Non-Plan for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 are given below: 
        

14 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Non-Plan Plan Total excess 
expdr. incurred 
from IEBR 
(col.4+7) 
RE Actual 
Expdr. 
Excess 
expdr. 
incurred 
from IEBR 
RE Actual 
Expdr. 
Excess 
expdr. 
incurred 
from IEBR 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
2012-13 1650.00 1796.56 146.56 412.50 434.99 22.49* 169.49 
2013-14 1730.00 1864.66 134.66 410.00 434.77 37.84** 173.84 
Total refund expected from 
MIB 
Rs.281.22   Rs.60.33*** Rs.342.33# 
* Prasar Bharati had already refunded  Rs. 12.40 crore during 20-12-13 to the Ministry. 
** Prasar Bharati had already refunded Rs. 14.53 crore during 2013-14 to the Ministry.  
*** The total amount may be recouped to PB under Plan is Rs. 74.25 crore. 
#  Hence the  total amount may be  recouped to PB under  Plan and Non -Plan is Rs. 355.47 
crore. 
 
3. Prasar Bharati has informed that since IEBR is primarily from sale of Free Commercial 
Time (FCT) of its inventory, diversion is at the cost of funding quality content in order to attract 
more eyeballs and listeners across the nations for efficacious dissemination of public messages 
as mandated in section 12 of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990. 
4. Prasar Bharati has been taking various measures to increase its revenue besides setting 
up of Marketing Divisions: 
i. Improving content of DD and AIR has been a priority area. 
 
ii. Different stations have been given the task of producing in -house customized quality 
programmes in order to attract clients to invest more money. 
 
iii. Marketing Executives have been hired by the Market ing Divisions to tap the untapped 
clients. 
 
iv. To bring in more scientific way of marketing methodology, Prasar Bharati has also 
appointed Marketing Experts. 
    
v. Programmes based on the rich archival material are also being produced and have been 
marketed even before its launch. 
 

15 
 
vi. Publicity of Prasar Bharati programmes has been given priority and presence in the 
media space is being made visible through News paper ads and hoardings etc. However, 
non availability of sufficient funds has restricted revenue generation. 
 
vii. The digital survey is being carried out initially for Delhi region. It would also be 
undertaken in other parts of the country that would be a permanent assets record in 
digital format and will be useful for future planning and asset management/comme rcial 
use of extra space. 
5. However, the sale of FCT depends heavily on content and its quality which in turn 
depends on funding, imagination and conceptualizing which is a great problem in PB. 
6. On account of various initiatives, Prasar Bharati has been  witnessing gradual growth in 
the overall revenue being generated year after the year as detailed Directorate -wise 
hereunder: 
                                                                                                     (Rs in crore) 
Year Revenue generated Total 
AIR DD Misc. 
2011-12 304.42 993.03 112.09 1409.54 
2012-13 299.37 1138.23 115.30 1552.90 
2013-14 366.42 1145.44 110.98 1622.84 
2014-15 (upto 
Jan, 2015) 
323.25 828.81 106.23 1258.29 
The Commercial revenue receipts are inclusive service tax. 
Measures to Secure Strategic Funding for Prasar Bharati 
7. Prasar Bharati has informed that the best device to secure strategic funding for Prasar 
Bharati, to meet expenditure on expansion and modernization of its broadcasting infrastructure 
and services, is to establish a Prasar Bharati Technology Development and Operations Fund, 
within the Public Account of India. The following streams of income can also contribute to this 
Fund: 

16 
 
a) Funds generated through unlocking economic value of existing as sets viz., Land, 
building, transmission infrastructure, archived software; 
b) Monetization of idle capacity of programme generating infrastructure; 
c) Compensation by the Government in lieu of likely compression of spectrum usage by 
Prasar Bharati and possible vacation of spectrum for other remunerative usage; 
d) Generation of commercial revenue on a continuing basis for which Prasar Bharati needs 
to be encouraged to use market friendly strategies and processes.   
e) Fee on the pattern of USOF in the Telecom Sector tha t will be leviable on private sector 
broadcasters, service providers in the broad casting sub -sector as a small percentage of 
their gross annual revenue.   
f) Funds provided by different Ministries of Government of India for generating 
programme software  lik e multi -media campaigns devoted to literacy,  right to 
education, population education, sanitation, public health messages and others; 
g) Income from creative resources like fees on sharing of programmes/ content, royalty 
from archives etc., and  
h) Private donations. 
 
Prasar Bharati has intimated that instead of following static card rate system, it needs to 
introduce flexibility in marketing free commercial time (FCT) so as to match the dynamics of 
advertising market. It needs to recruit from the open market hum an resource that is conducive 
to its aims and operations and gives it an edge in meeting the challenges it is faced with, 
particularly from the Private Sector Media Channels.  
Recovery of outstanding dues 
8. As informed by Prasar Bharati, at present, Prasa r Bharati has on its list of debtors large 
number of Government departments and private sectors producers. While some of these 
entities owe Prasar Bharati substantial dues and rest of such dues are insignificant in value and 
therefore considered immaterial.  Time and effort likely to be spent in recovering these dues, if 
at all, will hardly be commensurate with the expected realization of dues. 
9. On the other hand, there are large number of high value debtors in whose case the 
Prasar Bharati will have to p roactively engage with the parties concerned and find ways of 

17 
 
recovering outstanding dues which are pragmatic and mutually acceptable. This will involve 
reconciliation of accounts and incentivisation of speedy payment by way of waiver of penal 
interest.   Prasar Bharati is already seized of all such matters and is trying to work out a 
mechanism to deal with the situation. 
(Ministry of I&B, B-Finance Section, O.M. No. G-20019/2/2014-B (Fin) Dated: 13.03.2015) 
Kisan Channel  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have proposed to launch a new scheme, namely 
the “Kisan Channel” under the central the sector scheme, with an outlay of Rs.100 crore. DD 
Kisan will be a free -to-air satellite channel. The objective of the channel is to telecast content 
relevant to the farmers, both in terms of day -to-day tips and information and the short and 
long term requirements of the farmers. The Committee have been informed that sufficient 
projections will be made in the budget of the concerned yea rs as per the approved year -wise 
phasing of expenditure of the scheme. It is further planned that the programming of the 
channel will be of such quality that it will be able to garner advertisement support so that 
commercial revenue can be ploughed back in to the channel. The channel is to be launched by 
end of the financial year 2014 -15. Regarding the progress made in this regard, the Committee 
note that the Empowered Finance Committee (EFC) Memo pertaining to the launch of Kisan 
Channel is under finalizati on for circulation to appraisal agencies and the process is on for 
content identification. Several steps have already been taken to identify studio, locate 
manpower and procure video material for the channel on a war footing, which would ensure 
adherence to the stipulated timeline. The Committee appreciate the launching of the proposed 
channel by the Government exclusively for the welfare of the farming sector. The Committee 
recommend that as far as possible, emphasis should be laid on local dialect on regi onal basis so 
that farmers all across the country are able to access the channel in their local language/dialect, 
thereby getting benefited by this laudable initiative of the Government. They would await 
efficacy of this channel in delivering utility services to the target groups.  
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed that:- 
 The SFC for Kisan Channel for Rs.294.20 crores as a total outlay for the Plan period of 
2014-15 to 2016 -17 was considered in the meeting held on 05.11.2014 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. Administrative 
approval of the competent authority for launch of the Kisan channel was duly conveyed 
vide Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi’s letter No.N -
37013/3/2014-B(D) dated 10.02.2015 
 
 Rs. 26 crores allocated for the current year has been released.   
 
 There has been considerable progress in respect of Kisan channel in terms of content 
identification and the fixed point chart of the channel has already been drawn keeping in 
mind the targeted audience.  In addition, the channel also caters to entertainmen t 
quotient of the rural population and other viewers.    
 
 The generation of in house content has already been started at the Central Production 
Centre (CPC), Khel Gaon, New Delhi’s studio of the Kisan channel. More than 100 pilot 
episodes have been received from outside producers also  under self financing 
commission scheme which is awaiting evaluation by the expert Committee. 
 
 Studio and other requisite equipments besides all technical facilities to telecast 
programmes of the channel have been put in place at CPC, New Delhi. 
 
 Requisite manpower both in house and hired contractual professionals are being inducted 
to efficiently launch and functioning the channel. 
 
 Six hourly trial run of the channel has been started w.e.f. 16.2.2015 and is running 
smoothly Soft launch of the channel is proposed on 23.3.2015 and the channel is 
expected to be finally launched on 14.4.2015 i.e on the Baisakhi day. 
 
 This channel is being launched as a Hindi National channel exclusively for welfare of the 
farmers and the rur al population of India.  However, certain programmes would be 
telecast through the Regional Kendras of Doordarshan as per relevance through dubbing, 
voice over or subtitle in regional languages for larger benefit of the farmers across the 
country.     
 
(Ministry of I&B File No.-N-18013/1/2015-B(D) Dated 04.03.2015 ) 
 
 

19 
 
Modernization of AIR and Doordarshan  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
One of the focal points of successive Reports of the Committee have been the 
modernization of All India Radio and Doordarshan, the two constituents of the Prasar Bharati. 
The Committee note that for the Twelfth Plan period, the Government have allocated Rs. 2252 
crore for All India Radio for modernisation /expansion of its infrastructure which include Rs. 
1020 crore f or the New schemes under the Twelfth Plan and Rs. 1232 crore for the continuing 
schemes of the Tenth and Eleventh Plans. In regard to the modernization of Doordarshan, the 
Committee have been informed that it is a continuous process and various schemes for  
modernisation are formulated and implemented from time to time. At present, the schemes 
which are under implementation include Digitalization of Transmitters and Studios in 
Doordarshan Network, High Definition Television (HDTV), Modernization, Augmentatio n and 
Replacement of Transmitter and Studio equipment, Modernization, Augmentation and 
Replacement of Satellite Broadcast equipment and DTH Service, etc. The Committee 
recommend that the remaining works related to digitisation of Medium Wave (MW) and Short  
Wave (SW) Transmitters, studios and digitisation of connectivity are completed within the time 
limits prescribed under the Twelfth Plan. The Committee also take a serious note of the fact 
that for complete digitisation of AIR networks and 100 per cent cov erage by FM signal, 
inadequate funds were allocated during the Eleventh Plan and even during the Twelfth Plan, 
the requisite requirement of Rs. 4179 crore allocation has not been met and as a result, the 
digitization plan has been shifted further and is ex pected to be completed only by December, 
2018. The Committee note that both AIR and Doordarshan, as national broadcasters, are 
playing a crucial role in the socio -economic development of the country because of their 
extensive reach across the masses, parti cularly in the rural and far flung areas of the country. 
The Committee, therefore, find it very crucial to rejuvenate and revitalize Prasar Bharati by 
improving its efficiency, effectiveness and quality of broadcasting through complete 
digitisation. However, looking at the unsatisfactory performance during the Eleventh Plan, the 
Committee recommend that earnest efforts must be made to see that all the planned schemes 
for modernization of AIR and DD are implemented during the Twelfth Plan period. 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed that as regards Doordarshan:- 
1. It is the endeavour of Doordarshan to complete the projects at the earliest & utilize its 
facilities optimally within the constraint of available resources and manpower.  Every 
possible step is being taken by Doordarshan to complete the projects within the time 
frame. 
 
2. Expansion of DD Freedish, DTH platform of Doordarshan from 59 to 97 channels has 
been undertaken.  Equipment has been installed & tested.  Conditional Access System 
is under consideration. 
 
3. Digital Terrestrial Television:  Replacement of Analogue transmitters by Digital is one of 
the thrust areas of Five Year Plans.  In XI & XII Plan, 63 Digital transmitters were 
sanctioned. Currently 19 Digital transmitters are under installation. 
 
4. HDTV component has almost been achieved. 
 
 As regards All India Radio  (AIR), digitization of AIR MW network is on fast track.  All 
Transmitters provided for in the Plan have been procured and installation is under way.  This is 
likely to be completed within the Plan Period. 
 
FM: The listenership of Radio has moved over to FM which not only provides high quality 
reception but is also available on mobile phones numbering 900 million (approx).   However, 
current FM coverage is only 45% by popula tion. It is imperative that to interest listeners, AIR 
needs to bring its Primary, Vividh Bharati & Gold/Rainbow services on FM on Pan India basis.    
 
(Ministry of I&B File No. N-18013/1/2015-B(D) Dated 04.03.2015 ) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 Digitisation of Cable TV Networks  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that Phase I of the digitization of Cable TV Networks was 
completed by 31st October, 2012. Out of the four metro cities planned to be digital, digitization 
has been near total in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata. Chennai is yet to undergo the d igital 
transition due to several pending court cases. Phase II of digitization was concluded by 31st 
March, 2013 in 38 cities spanning 14 states and one union territory. The Committee, however, 

21 
 
note that the process of digitisation under Phase I and Phase II was not smooth as there was 
strong opposition from cable operators ‟ Associations, non -acceptance of revenue sharing 
arrangements between cable operators and MSOs and between MSOs and broadcasters, delay 
in filling of Consumer Application Forms, monopoly  of few selected STBs manufacturers and 
service providers and opposition from some State Governments. In this regard, the Committee 
note that in order to implement the final phases in a professional manner, the Ministry have 
proposed constitution of a new Task Force exclusively to provide policy direction and to take 
stock of the progress on a regular basis. The Phase III and IV digitization process is now planned 
to be completed by December, 2015 and December 2016 respectively. In view of the past 
experience of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that suitable steps be taken proactively 
to address the concerns of all the stakeholders in achieving the final phases of digitization 
within the envisaged time frame.  
Reply of the Government 
In order to timely implementation of final phases i.e. Phase III & IV in a professional 
manner, following multi-pronged strategy has been planned: 
(1) Constitution of a new Task Force 
Task Force has been constituted for implementation of Phase III & IV. The Task Force 
provide policy directions and take stock of the progress made on a regular basis. Five 
meetings of the Task Force already held. Hon’ble MIB addressed the members of the 
Task Force in the 1st meeting. 
 
(2) Launch of an intensive Communication Campaign  to enhance the consumer 
awareness about the benefits of digitization and the need for installation of Set Top 
Boxes. 
 A Publicity Campaign Committee has been constituted. 
 Print advertisement issued in all newspapers. 
 Video Spot on benefits of digitization has been developed and DDn and all regional 
channels are carrying this spot. 
 AIR is giving radio jingles on digitization.   
(3) Registration of MSOs 
A print advertisement was issued in leading newspapers inviting applications from 
interested parties for operation in Phase III areas in a time bound manner. Over 500 
fresh applications received. 
 

22 
 
(4) Involvement of State Governments  through Nodal Officers and capacity building of 
stakeholders especially Nodal Officers to carry out digitization. 
 
15 State Governments h ave already nominated state level as well as District level 
nodal officers. Remaining state Governments have being reminded to nominate. 
 
Workshops at the national as well as regional level with nodal officers have been 
planned to sensitise them about their role in the digitization exercise. 
 
A meeting with Resident Commissioners was held on 24.02.2015 to sensitize them 
about the role of State/UT Govts.  
(5) Setting up of Regional Units by the Ministry to take up digitization in a mission 
mode. 
 
12 Regional units would be set up for coordination.  
 
(6) Meetings with MSO and LCOs : Sub groups of MSOs have been created and meeting 
schedules prepared for meeting with these Sub -groups. 1st meeting with 5 sub -
groups of MSOs already held. A sub group of LCOs  have also been constituted. 
Regular meetings with national MSOs, independent MSOs and LCO Associations 
have been planned. 
 
(7) Seeding plans:  Seeding plans of STBs are being collected from registered MSOs to 
monitor their readiness and progress.  
 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is now all set to meet the target of 31 st Dec 2015 
for Phase III and 31st Dec 2016 for Phase IV of cable TV digitisation. 
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 7/54//2013-BP&L Dated 27.02.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Domestic manufacturing of Set Top Boxes  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 10 & 11) 
The Committee note that during Phase I and Phase II of the Cable TV Digitization 
process, the indigenous manufacturers were able to supply only 15% of the total requirement 
of STBs and the rest were imported from various countries, mainly from China. As a result, 
complaints were received about the poor quality of STBs, their non -compliance to BIS 

23 
 
standards, and absence of service/repair centres for STBs. In this regard, to meet the growing 
demand of Set Top Boxes in the country, the Ministry have reportedly  taken a number of steps 
to promote the indigenous manufacturing of STBs which include increasing import duty on 
imported STBs from 5% to 10%, declaring STBs as a part of “Telecommunications Networks” by 
the Department of Telecommunications on 30th June, 2 014 and confirmation by the 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance on 13th August, 2014, by extension of the same 
under Sec 8(3) (b) of the Central Sales Tax, 1956 thus fulfilling the major demand of the 
indigenous STBs manufacturers for the creation o f a level playing field vis -à-vis importers. 
Moreover, the Department of Electronics and Information Technology have now made it 
mandatory for the STBs to be BIS compliant for safety certification w.e.f. January, 2014. In 
addition, the DeitY have also ente red into contract with a domestic company to develop 
Conditional Access System (CAS)’ domestically vide its order dated 24th July, 2014 which would 
be made available to the domestic vendors @ USD 0.5 as against the current value of USD 2 or 
more. The Commi ttee also note that in order to give time to the domestic manufacturers of 
STBs, the Government have extended the cut -off dates of digitisation which for Phase III has 
been extended from 30 September, 2014 to 31 December, 2015 and for Phase IV, from 31 
December, 2014 to 31 December, 2016. The Committee observe that about 50% of the further 
demand of 11 crore STBs required under the final phases of digitization is likely to be met by 
the domestic manufacturers, which is certainly an encouraging proposition.  
 
Interoperability of STBs is an issue which engaged the attention of the Committee. In 
this regard, the Committee note that the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) found 
technical interoperability of STBs expensive and hence recommended financial  interoperability. 
Regulations notified by TRAI provide an exit option for a subscriber to change the 
operator/platform for any reason. The Committee have also been informed that DeitY have 
issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) for the development of an indi genous Conditional Access 
System (CAS) to make interoperability of STBs possible. Indian CAS is expected to be ready in 
about a year’s time. The Committee would like to be apprised of progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Electronics and Information Technology (Deity) has informed that 
steps to promote indigenous manufacturing of Set Top Box (STB) for Cable/DTH TV, keeping in 
view the huge indigenous requirement on account of roadmap for digitalization of the 
broadcast s ector are being taken. Development of Indian Conditional Access System (CAS) 
which forms an integral part of STB manufacturing is one of them.  
 Based on the recommendations of a Committee of Experts, the specifications of the 
proposed Indian CAS were fina lized. After following due tendering processes, M/s ByDesign 
India Pvt. Ltd., Banglore was shortlisted for the development and implication of the Indian CAS 
in association with the Centre for Development of Advance Computing (C -DAC). C-DAC will be 
primarily responsible for design review, code review, monitoring, testing and validation of the 
entire project. A Tripartite Agreement has been executed between DietY, C -DAC and M/s 
ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore on 18.11.2014. CAS system is required to be bui lt, tested and 
be ready for integration and deployment by 15.11.2015. 
 
To monitor development and implementation of Indian CAS, a Project Review and 
Steering Group (PRSG) has been constituted by DietY with members from M/o Information and 
Broadcasting, IISC, Bangalore, Doordarshan, BEL, CEAMA & C -DAC. The Committee is reviewing 
the progress. First meeting of committee was held on 18.02.15.  
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. 7/54/2013-BP &L Dated 27.02.2015) 
Community Radio 
 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee observe that a new scheme namely „Supporting Community Radio 
Movement in India ‟ has been introduced in the Twelfth Plan to strengthen community radio 
movement in India and providing financial support to the Community Radio Stations. The size of 
the scheme is Rs. 100 crore under the component Community Radio Support Scheme (CRSS) for 
providing support to at least 100 new CRS and 30 existing CRS every year. The scheme has two 
components, namely, the Community Radio Support Scheme (CRSS) and the IEC Activities for 
Community Radio. The Committee note that the Ministry have already issued 398 permissions 

25 
 
to set up CRS; out of them, 176 have started broadcasting. 205 Grant of Permission Agreement 
(GOPA) have been signed. According to the Ministry, 289 ap plications are pending 
consideration for Grant of Permission at various stages. The Committee note that the 
Community Radio provides an opportunity to the community to speak about issues concerning 
their lives, besides playing a crucial role in creating aw areness and contributing to the 
development of the people as a whole. The Community Radio Stations have also helped 
communities during calamities and natural disasters. The Committee feel 44 that there is a 
huge potential for establishing a large number of  Community Radio Stations in India, given the 
vast landscape, numerous languages, diverse cultures, etc. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government may take all necessary steps to encourage the Community 
Radio Movement in India by simplifying the existing procedures and launching awareness 
campaigns. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
being the sole authority responsible for spread of Community Radio Movement should 
coordinate with the Ministries/Agencies concerned for early clearances of pending applications 
so that Community Radio services can reach out fast across the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has taken following important steps to strengthen community radio movement 
in India: 
 
1. Coordination meetings with Concerned Ministries : To fast track the permission process 
monthly co -ordination meetings are regularly held with the concerned Ministries. Co -
ordination meetings have helped to expedite the clearances and avoid communication 
gaps, So far 47 coordination meetings have been held. The pendency in concerned 
Ministries has come down. As on date 60 applications are pending in concerned Ministries 
at various stages.  
 
2. Financial assistance to CRS:  Under the 12 th Plan Scheme namely “Supporting Community 
Radio Movement in India” applications were invited from operational Community Radio 
Stations/LOI holders to provide financial support. Advertisements were given in 
newspapers in multiple languages for wider publicity of the scheme. 90 applications were 
received from operational stations/LOI holders for financial assistance for acquisition/up 
gradation of equipment under the plan scheme “Supporting Community Radio Movement 
in India”.  In -principle approvals have been issued to 20 applicants. The total financial 
assistance to these applicants will be around Rs.1.0 Crore. The funds will be released to 

26 
 
them after purchase of equipment by applicants and submission of claim form in Ministry 
of I & B.  
 
3. Registration for attending Awareness Workshops : An advertisement was published 
inviting Not-for-Profit organizations, interested to set up CRS, to register themselves on 
www.cronlinindia.net and submit details for attending CR awareness workshops. The last 
date of registration was 31.07.2014. The venues of workshops were finalized on the basis 
of response received from orgnaisations. Priority was given to areas not covered so far. 
 
4. Publicity of the scheme through awareness workshop:  To popularize the scheme and 
spread awareness among masses, 8 awareness workshops were scheduled during the 
year 2014-15 at following places: 
 
i) Lucknow, U.P. 
ii) Wayanad, Kerala 
iii) Bhuj, Gujarat   
iv) Mussoorie, Uttarakhand  
v) Pune, Maharashtra 
vi) Kolkata, West Bengal 
vii) Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 
viii) Guwahati, Assam 
 
Out of them, 7 workshops have already been organized. 8th workshop at Guwahati is 
scheduled to be held from 27th Feb to 1st March 2015. Around 400 organisations who 
registered for attending workshops participated in these workshops. 
 
5. Two Regional Sammelans of Operational CRS:   The Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting (MIB) introduced Regional Sammelans for Community Radio Stations in the 
country. This decision owes its genesis to a desire expressed by Community Radio Stations 
at the National Community Radio Sammelan so that regional CRS could better be 
represented. Regional Sammelans aim to provide a platform to the operational CRS to 
share their grass root stories, successes, issues and good practices. 
 
The first three-day Regional Sammelan of Community Radio stations was organised by the 
Ministry in collaboration with One World Foundation India at Puducherry from 28 -30 
September, 2014. Forty Community Radio Stations from southern states namely - Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Telangana, Maharashtra, Odisha and 
Puducherry participated in it. 
 

27 
 
The second three -day Regional Community Radio Sammelan was held at Lucknow from 
10-12 October, 2014, supported by MIB and hosted by Community Radio Association 
(CRA). Out of 90 stations licensed in north India, 65 Community Radio Stations 
participated in the sammelan. Two representatives from each CRS were invited to 
participate in Regional Sammelan. 
 
6. Facilitation Centre to help CRS applicants: A Facilitation Centre has been set up in the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, in association with One World Foundation India. 
It facilitates both new applicants as well as operational CRS. The trained staff in 
Facilitation Ce ntre helps CR applicants/visitors to complete documentary requirement 
and fill up online applications for Frequency allocation and SACFA clearances in WPC 
Wing. A toll free number, 1800-11-6346, has also been set up for this purpose. 
 
7. 5th National Sammelan  of operational CRS:  The 5th National Sammelan of operational 
CRS is scheduled to be held at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi from 6 -18th March 2015. 
Representatives of all operational CR stations, practitioners, stake holders, Policy makers 
and various Government Ministries/Departments will come together to take stake of the 
progress made and challenges in the sector. 
 
National CR awards will be presented in the National Sammelan and 5th edition of CR 
Compendium will also be released. 
 
8. Peer review/evaluation of CR Stations: The peer review process was undertaken by the 
Ministry to promote self -assessment and co -learning among the community radio 
stations. There were three toolkits designed by different stake holders viz. 
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (CEMCA) in association with UNESCO 
Chair on Community Media and UNICEF.  
 
In two phases 68 Community Radio Stations participated voluntarily. All stations were 
oriented to conduct self assessment of their stations using toolk its. One representative 
from each station visited 2 other CR stations. The end line experience sharing workshop 
for the first phase was held in New Delhi from 13 -15 May, 2014 and the detailed report 
has been published. For the second phase end line worksho p was held in December 2014. 
In the experience sharing workshops all 68 CRS who participated in the process informed 
that they were able to identify strengths and challenges in their own CRS as well as the 
ones they visited and drew up plans for self-improvement in the short, mid and long term. 
Also, informal networks to learn from each other have begun to be set -up. For instance 
exchange of documentation process, logging software, archiving retrieval systems and 
exchange of programme ideas have begun. 
 
9. Support to Content Sharing Platform: The need was felt to create a platform for sharing 
of content among various Community Radio Broadcasters. Several Radio stations are 
broadcasting programmes in various languages and dialects on various themes. These 
could be effectively shared in similar regions for broadcast by stations. This would help in 

28 
 
reducing costs for production and at the same time it will help CR stations to learn from 
each other.  
 
One World foundation India was operating and maintaining a con tent sharing platform 
www.edaa.in.  Ministry of Information & Broadcasting has decided to support One World 
Foundation India to maintain Content Sharing Platform www.Edaa.in. 
 
(Ministry of I&B CRS Cell, O.M. No. 403/103/2015-CRS, Dated 20.02.2015) 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal multimedia 
advertising central agency to execute publicity campaigns through advertisements, etc. on 
behalf of various Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, Autonomous Bodies and 
Public Sector Undertakings. The Committee note with satisfaction that there has been 100 per 
cent utiliza tion of RE funds by DAVP during the year 2013 -14. The Committee are, however, 
concerned to observe that the total outstanding dues to DAVP from various 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for the year 2013 -14 is approximately 
Rs.35.75 crore. Regarding settlement of dues, the Committee note that in meeting of the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) held on 17.7.2014 and chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, it has 
been decided in principle that almost 85 percent of the cost of campaigns must be provided  to 
DAVP in advance. In order to bring transparency in the functioning of DAVP, the Committee 
have been informed that the various stages like receipt of Bills, their processing and their final 
payment have become online in DAVP, besides providing unique us er-ids to newspapers and 
other agencies to directly log -in and see all the communications sent by DAVP. The Committee 
desire that the decision of COS be implemented at the earliest to streamline realization of the 
cost of campaigns done through DAVP. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) The recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS), including 85% of advance 
payments by client Ministries, conversion of non -paying / partly paying clients to fully 
paying clients etc., have already  been circulated to all Minist ries / Departments in Govt. 
of India on 10.10.2014, with a request to follow the same in letter and spirit. 
 

29 
 
(ii) For realization of the outstanding dues, DAVP has been continuously taking up the issue 
with the Ministries / Departments concerned at various levels.  
 
(iii) Highlighting the recommendations / observations made in the 4 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on IT,  Secretary (I&B) has written to the Secretaries of approximately 87 
defaulting client Ministries / Departments on 6.2.2015 to clear the outstanding dues at 
the earliest. The details of the outstanding dues has also been sent to the client Ministries 
/ Depa rtments.  Further, these Ministries / Departments have also been requested to 
make arrangement to provide 85% of the cost of campaigns to DAVP in advance as per 
the decision of CoS.  
 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. M/10/2013-MUC Dated 04.03.2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER –III 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Human Resource 
 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
  The Committee observe that human resource is an important asset for the smooth and 
efficient functioning of any professional organization. However, as per the information made 
available by the Ministry, the Committee are constrained to find that against th e sanctioned 
staff strength of 46,756 in AIR & DD, 16,763 posts are lying vacant. As admitted by the Ministry, 
the Committee note that due to inadequate staff strength, many facilities of the Prasar Bharati 
are not able to function to their full potential.  In this regard, the Committee note that on the 
recommendation of the Group of Ministers on Prasar Bharati, the Department of Expenditure 
had approved filling up of 3067 essential category posts. The Committee have been informed 
that some group “B” & “C” posts of Engineering Assistant, Technician, Transmission Executive, 
Programme Executive & Production Assistant are being filled up following examination 
conducted through the Staff Selection Commission. The Committee further note that 195 
Group „A‟ posts were not processed for filling up by the Prasar Bharati as these posts were to 
be filled up by the Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board, which is in the process of being set up. 
The Committee recommend that pending implementation of the recommendations of the Sam 
Pitroda Committee, which also touched upon HR issues, suitable steps be taken to ensure that 
the Prasar Bharati work does not get hampered due to lack of essential work force.  
Reply of the Government 
Steps taken in the organization are as follows:- 
(i) The Group of Ministers (GoM) on Prasar Bharati had recommended filling up 3452 
essential category of posts in consultation with the Department of Expenditure. The 
Department of Expenditure has approved filling up of 3067 posts. The Ministry is now 
processing another request of Prasar Bharati for revival of balance 385 posts, in 
consultation with the Department of Expenditure. 
 
(ii) Recruitment through Staff Selection Commission: 
 

31 
 
 Government has approved a one -time dispensation for recruitment through 
Staff Sel ection Commission to Group B and C category critical posts of Prasar 
Bharati as approved by the Group of Ministers. 
 
 On the basis of the examination conducted by Staff Selection Commission, result 
for Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts of Engineering Assistant, Technician, Transmission 
Executive, Programme Executive & Production Assistant has been declared and 
Staff Selection Commission’s selection lists have been received by Prasar Bharati. 
Recruitment action for recommended candidates is in progress. 
 
(iii) Revival of 38 posts of IB(P)S cadre 
 
 Approval of Department of Expenditure has been obtained for revival of 06 posts in 
SAG level and 32 in JAG level of Indian Broadcasting (Programme) Services Cadre, to 
be filled up by deputation. 
 
(iv) Creation of 60 posts for Prasar Bharati Secretariat 
 
 
Proposal of Prasar Bharati for creation of 60 posts for Prasar Bharati Secretariat has 
been referred to Department of Expenditure (DOE). Reply of DOE is awaited. 
 
(v) Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board 
 
 Draft Cabinet Note for establishment of Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board (PBRB), was 
circulated for inter -Ministerial consultation. The comments of various departments 
are under examination, in consultation with Prasar Bharati, for drafting a fresh Cabinet 
Note. 
 
(vi) Recruitment Regulations for Prasar Bharati employees 
 
On the directions of Group of Ministers (GOM) on Prasar Bharati to frame and notify 
new Recruitment Regulations (RRs) for Prasar Bharati employees, till date, out of 125 
number of posts for which RRs are to be framed, RRs in respect of 09 categories of 
posts viz. PEX, TREX, Engineering Assistant, Head Clerk, Technician, Cameraman 
Grade-II and News Reader–cum-Translator (NRT) cadres (viz. NRT Grade -I, NRT Grade-
II and NRT Grade -III) have been notified with the concurrence and approval of  
Department of Perso nnel & Training (DOP&T), Department of Expenditure (DOE) and 

32 
 
Ministry of Law. RRs pertaining to the remaining 116 posts are under inter -Ministerial 
consultation/ consultation with Prasar Bharati. 
 
(vii) Besides Prasar Bharati has informed that to overcome the shortage of manpower they 
are appointing Casuals/ Contractuals in the following categories: 
i. Highly qualified/ experienced professionals designated as Special assignees who 
are paid keeping in view their professional expertise and market conditions; 
 
ii. Contractuals engaged on monthly basis particularly for the news channels which 
have been necessitated to cope up with the increased work pressure on account of 
evolution of 24x7 news channel;  
 
iii. Retired Government servants who are engaged to look afte r day to day functions 
due to acute shortage of manpower;  
 
iv. Casual Assignees such as Radio Jockeys, Announcers, Comperes etc., who are 
retained on panel and are given assignment upto six days a month.  
 
(Ministry of I&B, File No. –H-11013/8/2014-BAP Dated 19.02.2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Launching of New Channels for North East  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that at present there is a single 24X7 North -East channel which is 
inadequate to meet the aspirations and needs of the vast North -Eastern Region of the country, 
comprising 8 States where multiple languages and dialects are f ollowed. Accordingly, it has 
been proposed by the Prasar Bharati that the existing North East channel be trifurcated by 
launching two additional 24X7 satellite channels for North Eastern Region designated as DD – 
“Arun Prabha” (Itanagar) and DD – “Ma-Mi-Na” (Aizawl). The proposal is under finalization for 
circulation to appraisal agencies. The proposed Arun Prabha Channel will cater to the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim and the second channel will cater to the States of Nagaland, 
Mizoram and Manipur  and the third to Assam and Meghalaya. Taking into consideration the 
geographical isolation of the far -flung North–Eastern States of the country, the Committee find 
it a praiseworthy initiative of the Government for launching these two additional channels.  The 
Committee, at the same time, recommend that these projects are needed to be implemented 
on a priority basis and specific time -frames be prescribed within which the channels would be 
operationalised. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Prasar Bharati has informed that:- 
o Starting of three new additional 24x7 satellite channels for North East Region under 
existing Plan Scheme.  ‘Arunachal Pradesh – Sikkim(Arunprabha); Manipur – Mizoram – 
Nagaland(Ma-Mi-Na) and Assam- Meghalaya is going to be a software intensive exercise 
as content will need to be customized to the requirement of North eastern states.    
 
o DD-Arunprabha’, ‘DD-Ma-Mi-Na’ and ‘DD-As-Me’ are new channels in addition to those 
existing which gets contribution from all 8 states of North East. Hence the projected 
amount under SFC for software needs be analyzed in terms of three channels.   
 
o As soon as DD-Arunprabha’, ‘DD-Ma-Mi-Na’ and ‘DD -As-Me’ go on air we will be able 
to telecast more and more local programmes including films and local tribal content 
keeping in view the border Area.  
 

34 
 
o The basis of the proposal for trifurcation of the North East Channels is to: 
 To provide a strong platform to showcase the rich and diverse cultural and linguistic 
identity of the North Eastern States of India. 
 
 To cater to the population of the North East India to create overall awareness and a 
drive for development. 
 
 To play a catalytic role  for the prosperity and health of the tribal community of the 
North Eastern India. 
 
 To provide authentic, quality and useful information and analyses in 
languages/dialects comprehensible to the North East India.  
 
 To regenerate and rejuvenate the cultural ethos and spirit of the people of the 
North Eastern region. 
 
 To promote the cause of gender equality, weaker sections and differently abled 
persons of the region.  
 
 To inculcate scientific temper, self -respect, self -confidence, and mutual trust 
amongst citizens of NER. 
 
 To ensure that all the states in the North East get adequate representation through 
the creation of 3 focused, 24x7 Channels instead of the existing single North East 
Channel which is insufficient for the purpose. 
 
(Ministry of I&B, File No. –N-18013/1/2015-B (D) Dated 04.03.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Review of Institutional Framework of Prasar Bharati  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the Prasar Bharati has been suffering from financial problems 
as well as human resource related issues for the last so many years. In this background,  the 
Committee note that for the purpose of reviewing the institutional framework of the Prasar 
Bharati, including its relationship with Government, an expert Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Sam Pitroda was constituted by the Government which had given its 
report in February, 2014. The Committee submitted 26 recommendations in the areas of           
(i) Governance and Organisation, (ii) Funding, (iii) Human Resources, (iv) Content,                       
(v) technology, (vi) Archiving, (vii) Social Media and (viii) Global Outreach. The 
recommendations address issues of financial and administrative autonomy of Prasar Bharati to 
ensure that it is approximately positioned to execute its role as a genuine public broadcaster. 
As a matter of follow -up acti on, the Ministry have placed the report on their website for 
inviting suggestions from public. The Government is reportedly examining suggestions received 
from different quarters. Further, Prasar Bharati has been asked to prepare an action plan for 
undertaking certain reviews/studies/Audits suggested by the Sam Pitroda Committee, which, 
according to the Ministry, have a critical bearing on future action plan of the Government. The 
Committee would like to point out that functioning of the Prasar Bharati is b eing reviewed 
separately by the Committee and the issues, including action taken by Government on the 
recommendations of the Sam Pitroda Committee will be examined by this Committee in due 
course. In the meantime, the Ministry may apprise the Committee abo ut the progress of the 
action plan on the part of the Prasar Bharati.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry had requested Prasar Bharati to prepare an action plan for undertaking 
suggestions/ review/ audits etc. as recommended by the Sam Pitroda Committee. 
 

36 
 
Further, the suggestions/ comments received from the public/ stakeholders on the 
report of the Sam Pitroda Committee were also forwarded to Prasar Bharati to furnish its 
comments. Reply of Prasar Bharati is awaited. 
 
Prasar Bharati has informed that it has undertaken several internal assessments towards 
providing course of action for implementation of the broad objectives of Sam Pitroda 
Committee and that it is likely to submit course of action plan after obtaining approval of the 
Prasar Bharati Board. 
The recommendations of the Sam Pitroda Committee can be concretized only after the 
studies on manpower, technology and funding are completed by Prasar Bharati and a vision for 
Prasar Bharati is prepared on the basis of the outcome of the studies. 
 
(Ministry of I&B, File No. H-11013/8/2014-BAP Dated 19.02.2015) 
Information Sector 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) is an 
autonomous organization under the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to provide 
knowledge and skills to communicators in a variety of disciplines like print, photography, rad io 
and television, development communication, etc. The Plan scheme “Opening up of new 
Regional Centres of IIMC” was included in the Twelfth Five Year Plan and approved for an 
amount of Rs. 94.20 crore, out of which the Government grant support is Rs. 90 cr ore. In this 
regard, the Committee note that during the year 2013-14, against the proposed outlay of Rs. 15 
crore for IIMC, the allocation at BE stage was Rs. 6.8 crore, which was further reduced to Rs. 
3.55 crore at RE stage and the same was utilized full y. The allocation at BE stage for the year 
2014-15 under the scheme has been enhanced to Rs. 21.5 crore after taking into consideration 
the advanced stage of construction work for Aizawl Centre as well as area development and 
construction of additional bui ldings at IIMC, New Delhi (HQ). The Committee note that the 
Regional Centres at Aizawl (Mizoram) and Amravati (Maharashtra) became operational from 
August 2011 whereas the centres at Kottayam (Kerala) and Jammu (J&K) became operational 
from August 2012. Ho wever, the Committee note that at present, these centres are operating 

37 
 
from temporary premises. Permanent campuses are at different stages of construction and the 
Committee desire that efforts should be made to expeditiously complete the construction of 
the campuses.  
Reply of the Government 
Under the Plan Scheme “Opening up of New Regional Centres”  IIMC had entered into a 
MOU with CPWD and an amount of ` 7.00 crore has already been placed with them as deposit 
work to enable them to start the process of con struction of permanent infrastructure at Aizawl 
(Mizoram).  So far as Kottayam (Kerala) is concerned, survey work of the land allotted by State 
Government has been completed and a detailed Project Report is under preparation which is 
anticipated to be read y by the end of March 2015. Once the DPR is approved, IIMC will enter 
into MOU with CPWD and entrust the construction work to them as deposit work which is 
expected to commence by middle of the next financial year.  State Governments of J&K and 
Maharashtra are in the process of completing formalities for handing over the identified land at 
Jammu and Amravati respectively.  Necessary steps regarding pre -investment activities would 
be started by IIMC once the identified land is transferred to IIMC, free of co st by the respective 
State Governments.    
(Ministry of I&B, File No. M-16012/6/2014-IP&MC Dated 28.01.2015) 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 14) 
As regards the upgradation of courses in the Indian Institute of Mass Communication, 
i.e. transition from diploma to d egree courses, the Committee note that the Ministry are in the 
process to declare IIMC as “An Institution of National Importance” through an Act of 
Parliament. Once the Act is passed, IIMC would be able to start Two -year PG Degree courses in 
the related fi elds. The Committee have been given to understand that action is underway to 
introduce the requisite Bill in Parliament. The Committee may be apprised of further progress 
made in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 After incorporating the Comments of the concerned Ministries/Departments and 
comments of this Ministry thereupon, the revised draft Note for the Cabinet has been 
forwarded to the Department of Legal Affairs in November 2014 for their examination from the 
legal and constitutional angles. The concerned File has also been referred to Legislative 
Department for taking necessary action for finalisation of the Bill. This Ministry is in regular 

38 
 
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Departmen t) for finalisation of the 
draft Bill in the matter. The Bill is likely to be finalised by the Legislative Department shortly 
whereafter the same will be introduced in the Parliament at the earliest possible, after 
obtaining the approval of the Cabinet on the same.  
(Ministry of I&B, File No. M-16012/6/2014-IP&MC Dated 28.01.2015) 
Film Sector 
Film and Television Institute of India/ Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute 
 
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 16) 
The Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), set up in 1960 under the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, provides higher and professional education and technical 
expertise in art and technique of film making and television production. The Comm ittee note 
that a proposal to upgrade (FTII) has been included in the 12th Plan Scheme “Infrastructure 
Development Programme Relating to Film Sector” and that the total allocation for upgradation 
of FTII is Rs. 80 crore during the XII Plan. An amount of Rs . 25 crore has been allocated for the 
year 2014 -15. Also, the FTII has taken up implementation of ‘Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP)’ as an important tool of e -Governance to improve all aspects of its functioning for 
bringing in transparency and streamlining of its various processes for optimum utilization of 
various resources. The Committee also find that it is proposed to declare the FTII, Pune, and 
Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute, Kolkata, as institutions of national importance through 
an Act of Parliament. According to the Ministry, action is underway for introducing the Bill in 
Parliament. Recognizing the important role bei ng played by these premier institutions, the 
Committee find it laudable that the Government are in the process of granting these 
institutions the status of national importance. The Committee desire that early action be taken 
for expeditious introduction of the Bill in the House. 
Reply of the Government 
 Film & Television Institute of India, Pune & Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute, 
Kolkata are proposed to be declared as institutions of National Importance through 
introduction of a bill in the Parliam ent. Comments from concerned Ministries on draft Cabinet 
note have been received. The draft bill was vetted and approved by Ministry of Law. The 

39 
 
Cabinet Note was approved by Hon’ble Minister of I&B for submission to Cabinet. Now, the 
Cabinet Note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat for Consideration of Cabinet. 
(Ministry of I&B, File No. 07/34/2014-DO(FTI) Dated 17.01.2015) 
 The Cinematograph Act, 1952  
(Reccommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee note that the Cinematograph Act, 1952 is almost a six decades’ old 
legislation and has since been amended several times. However, in view of many technological 
advancements in the field of cinema, the proliferation of TV channels, cable network, advent of 
new digital technology, increase in piracy and copyright violations, etc., the Act has lost much of 
its relevance and the Government are in the process of replacing it with a new legislation. For 
this purpose, the Committee note that the Government constituted an Expert Committee under 
the chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal in 2013 which submitted its Report on 28.9.2013 and 
many of the recommendations contained in that Report have been taken into consideration by 
the Government while drafting the new Cinematography Bill, 2014. Recognizing the need to 
replace the existing Cinematography Act, the Committee desire that all the procedural 
requirements for introduction of the proposed Bill are completed at the earliest so that the Bill 
is introduced in the Parliament without any further delay. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is in the process of circulation of the draft cabinet note on introduction of 
the Bill for Inter-Departmental consultation.  On receipt of their comments, the draft Bill would 
be finalised in consultation with Ministry of Law before seeking th e approval of the Cabinet for 
placing the draft Bill before the Parliament.   
(No. M-11014/9/2014-DO(FC), Dated 04.03.2015) 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
 Information Technology.  
 
 

40 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FOURTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1,2,3,6,8,9,10,11,12 and 15  
 Total 10 
 Percentage 58.83 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- 4  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.88 
 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  7  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.88 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  5,13,14,16 and 17  
 Total 05 
 Percentage 29.41 
 