1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
10 


2 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2015  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 August, 2015 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 


3 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE NO.. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
 ABBREVIATION (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION (iv) 
 PART I  
 REPORT  
 Introductory 
 
1 
a.  Genesis and need of IT Induction and Modernization in the 
Department of Posts 
1 
b.  Financial Inclusion in rural areas of the country through IT 
Induction Project 
6 
c.  Transparent delivery of social security schemes, including DBT 
through IT Project 
7 
d.  Improved decision making by Department of Posts 7 
e.  Launch of new projects/services after successful roll -out of IT 
Project 
7 
f.  Challenges in roll-out of IT Induction and Modernization Project 8 
g.  Allocation/Utilization of funds under the IT Project 9 
h.  Role of Software Development Centre, Mysore in IT Project 
 
14 
i.  Task Force on Leveraging India‟s Post Office Network – Key 
Recommendations relating to IT Project 
14 
j.  Focus on Banking, Insurance and e-Commerce 19 
k.  Data Centre Facility (DCF) and Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) 
 
20 
l.  Need to reorient the Workforce to function in an IT enabled 
environment  
21 
m.  Project Governance Structure  
 
22 
 PART II  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  23 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11th November, 2014 
 
 37 
II.* Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 5th August, 2015  
 
* Minutes not Appended in the cyclostyled copy. 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15) 
  
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Shri Abhishek Sharma Executive Assistant 
 
         *    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 
11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
 
(ii) 

5 
 
 ABBREVIATIONS 
BPM Branch Post Master 
CBS Core Banking Solution 
CEPT Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology 
CICs Commercially Important Clients 
CIM Customer Interaction Management 
CM Change Management 
CoD Cash on Delivery 
CPCS Circle Processing Centers 
CSC Common Service Center 
CSI Core System Integrator 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DC Data Center 
DCF Data Center Facility 
DoP Department of Posts 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DRC Disaster Recovery Center 
EoI Expression of Interest 
FSI Financial Services Integrator 
IVR Interactive Voice Response 
LAN Local Area Network 
MIS Management Information System 
MNOP Mail Network Optimization Project 
MOH Mail Operation Hardware 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NI Network Integrator 
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India 
PBI Post Bank of India 
PLI Postal Life Insurance 
RFPs Request for Proposals 
RH Rural Hardware 
RICT Rural Information Communication & Technology 
RPLI Rural Postal Life Insurance 
RSI Rural System Integrator 
WAN Wide Area Network 
(iii)

6 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Comm ittee on Information Technology (2014-2015), 
having been authorised by the Committee , do present the Tenth Report on the subject 
„IT Induction and Modernization in the Department of Posts ‟ relating to the Mini stry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts) on                     
11th November, 2014.  
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Department of Posts  for appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing 
information desired by the Committee in connection with the issues relating to the 
subject. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
5th August, 2015. 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
New Delhi                                                           Chairperson, 
 5 August, 2015                                             Standing Committee on 
14 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)                                                Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
Introductory 
 
The IT Modernization Project in the Department of Posts aims at modernization and 
computerization of all post offices in the country , including more than 1,30,000 branch 
post offices in rural areas. It is an ambitious transformation project undertaken by the 
Department. By setting up an IT infrastructure spanning all post offices, including branch 
post offices in rural areas, the Department will be able to harness the benefits of 
consolidated real time information and capabilities across various functional silos as well 
as geographical reach. The transformation  of the physical network to a digital network 
will also provide a national asset for all users , apart from post offices , including various 
Government Departments, business houses and citizens to use the IT enabled country 
wide network for communication, ba nking, insurance and service delivery nee ds with 
transaction data.  The P roject will create a national asset of 1, 55,000 networked post 
offices. This mega IT driven transformation is the first of its kind undertaken by any 
postal operator in the world as well as by any Government Department in the country. It 
involves development of scalable, integrated and modular software covering all 
operations of the Department of Posts, including Post O ffice Savings Bank, Postal Life 
Insurance, Mail Operations , along w ith the establishment of the required IT 
infrastructure, including Data Centre, Disaster Recovery Centre, WAN Networking of the 
Departmental Post Offices, development of rural information  communication technology 
(Rural ICT) in rural post offices and prov iding rural post offices with  handheld devices 
which are „Aadhaar‟ enabled  and will also act as micro -ATMs, besides transacting PO 
Savings. This Project will equip  the Departme nt of Posts to play a more  pro active role 
towards transforming the rural eco nomic landscape in the country, in addition to  
providing  value added mail and financial services to the urban customers.  
a. Genesis and need of IT Induction and Modernization in the Department of 
Posts 
 
2. During the early 1990s, with the advent of technology that led to electronic 
substitution of mail, introduction of core banking and easy accessibility to mobile and 
internet based services, the Department of Posts started inducting technology by way of 

2 
 
supplying Hardware to Post Offices and implement ing standalone software solutions for 
various operations in a LAN based environment. A software development centre was set 
up at Mysore to cater to the needs of the Post Offices.  
 
3. To improve  the quality of its services in line with  the public expectations and 
competition, it was necessary to upgrade technology in Post Offices for providing  the 
best in -class products and services at par with global standards. For achieving this 
vision, the Department decided to improve an d augment their IT  infrastructure and 
introduce a new integrated software platform for their operations through an end-to-end 
IT Project. The India Post IT Project was  designed to realize the vision and t he Project 
was approved by the Government  with a to tal outlay of Rs. 4909 crore in November 
2012. 
 
4. The entire scope of the India Post 2012 Project has been structured into the 
following eight  streams which were to be implemented through eight Request For 
Proposals: 
  
# Project Scope 
1 Data Center 
Facility (DCF) 
Hosting of Primary Data Center (DC) & building the 
Disaster Recovery Center (DRC) for the Department of 
Posts 
2 Network 
Integrator (NI) 
Provide connectivity for each departmental post office 
location from 2 different network service providers in 
order to ensure  uninterrupted network connectivity 
(~ 28,000 locations) through one single WAN.  
3 Financial 
Services 
Integrator (FSI) 
 Implementation of   the solutions for Core 
Banking in all departmental Post Offices. 
 Implementation of   the solutions for Postal Life 
Insurance. 
 Provide  Multiple delivery channels - internet,  
Interactive Voice Response (IVR), Mobile, ATM & 
SMS 
4 Core System 
Integrator (CSI) 
Implementation of  the solutions for  Mail Operation, 
Retail, Logistics Post, Philately, Finance & Accounts & 
Human Resources and integration with other SIs 
5 Change 
Management 
(CM) 
To prepare the work force for the complete change in 
Department‟s working after the implementation of the 
IT project. 
6 Rural Hardware 
(RH) 
Providing connectivity, hardware & solar power panels 
to extra departmental Rural Post Offices. 
7 Rural System 
Integrator (RSI) 
Implementation of the solution for integrating all the 
FSI/CSI applications to the Branch Offices. 
8 Mail Operation Providing Handheld devices to delivery Postman 

3 
 
Hardware (MOH) and Providing Hardware for Mail offices 
 The earlier programmes of induction of technology and computerization of Post 
Offices and introduction of core banking for post office saving bank operations were 
merged in this new project. 
 
5. To a query as to  how the IT Induction &  Modernization Project will improve the 
overall functioning of the postal department such as increased revenue and reduced 
operation cost, the Department,  in a note, stated:- 
 “Faster and more reliable services in postal, logistics, banking, insurance and 
retail operations thus improving service delivery to customers. 
 Bringing Financial/banking services to the doorsteps of the customers through 
multiple delivery channels like internet, mobile banking, ATMs, telephone, etc. 
 All WAN locations are equipped wit h primary and secondary bandwidth 
connectivity. Hence, if the primary link is down, the availability of secondary link 
ensures immediate restoration of seamless connectivity. 
 Simplification of processes and almost immediate transfer of accounts and 
certificates. 
 No data entry required for the reporting SOs and BOs. 
 ATMs would be installed at HOs and high-volume SOs.  
 “Anytime Anywhere Banking” through multiple channels, e.g. Internet, ATM and 
mobile.  
 Interoperability with other banks/Financial Institutions 
 Improved MIS and reporting leading to efficient controls, monitoring & planning 
 Potential new services possible leading to Growth of Business.  
 Improved & timely administrative services with centralised and accurate employee 
information. 
 Efficiency in inventory management & procurement.  
 Reduction in operational times and costs.  
 Technology will enable better services & hence more customers.” 
 
6. On the likely tangible and measurable benefits to an average customer who avails 
the services offered by the Department of Posts after implementation of the lT Induction 
and Modernization Project, the Department informed as under:- 
 
 "Multiple channels of access to the customers through Post Office counters, 
internet, mobiles, call centres and ATMs, etc. 
 Faster and more reliable services in postal, logistics, banking, insurance and 
retail operations. 
 New products and services, e.g. NEFT, RTGS, bill payments, 3rd party 
products. 
 “Anytime Anywhere Banking” through multiple channels, e.g. Internet, ATM 
and mobile. 
 Debit cards for Post Office Savings Bank account holders. 

4 
 
 Better financial inclusion for the common man in the rural and semi -urban 
locations through mobile remittances, mobile banking, mobile insurance , 
etc.  
 Better visibility of various articles in the mail s tream by upgrading the track 
and trace facility and introducing SMS alerts 
 Improved customer satisfaction due to faster and more reliable services in 
mails, banking, insurance and money remittance/transfer operations.  
 Availability of information on real time basis. 
 Transparency in financial services by introducing core banking and core 
 insurance  solutions. 
 Effective and transparent delivery of the social security and 
 employment guarantee  schemes by the Government. 
 Improvements in service level for transfer of accounts and certificates. 
 Potential new services possible due to induction of RICT solution”. 
 
Status of implementation of the IT Project  
 
 7. The Project is being implemented through eight different RFPs, the status 
being as under:- 
SL 
NO. 
NAME OF THE           
SEGMENT 
                            STATUS AS ON 20-03-15 
1 Change Management  
(CM ) 
RFP process completed and work awarded. 
Implementation started on 15 -10-12. Training 
activities are in progress. Training is  concurrent 
with the implementation of various other streams 
of the Project.  
2 Data Centre Facility 
(DCF) 
RFP process completed and work awarded. Data 
Centre is operational w.e.f. 3 rd April 2013 at Navi 
Mumbai. 
Disaster Recovery 
Centre (DRC) 
Civil work completed. Site Acceptance Test of 
DRC is completed. Operation to start shortly  
3 Financial Services 
Integrator (FSI) 
RFP process completed and work awarded. 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. 
Pilot Roll out of Core Banking (CBS) and Life 
Insurance (PLI) - Completed. 
So far, 2148 POs for CBS and 7026 Post Offices 
for CIS have been migrated. ATM Services - 
installed and commissioned at 11 Post Offices.  
Circle Processing Centers (CPC s) have been 
commissioned in all the 22 Circles.  
4 Network Integrator 
(NI) 
RFP process completed and work awarded. 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. So far, 27095 
locations out of ~28000 have been net worked on a 
single Wide Area Net work (WAN). 

5 
 
5 Core System 
Integrator (CSI) 
RFP process completed and work awa rded. 
Implementation started on 15 -04-13. Installation 
and commissioning of Central Hardware 
completed.  Detail Design Documents has been 
completed. User acceptance t esting of common 
infrastructure solution completed .  UAT  cycle II 
for Human Resource, Mail Operations and Finance 
& Accounts completed on 06-12-14. Roll out is in 
progress. 
6 Rural Hardware (RH) RFP process completed. Contract signed with the 
Vendor   on 24 -11-14. Commissioning of RH 
devices will start during this year. 
7 Rural System 
Integrator (RSI) 
RFP process completed and work awarded. 
Contract signed on 28 -02-13. Implementation in 
alignment with Rural Hardware (RH)   
8 Mail Operation 
Hardware (MoH) 
RFP process completed. The successful bidder M/s 
HCL Info systems Ltd expressed in ability to sign 
the contract. LoI annulled on 26 -09-14 and M/s 
HCL Info system has been blacklisted for 5 years 
on 25 -11-14. Action is being taken for 
procurement of Mail Operations Hardware through 
DGS&D Rate Contract  after approval of 
competent authority.” 
 
 
8. The achievements in respect of the on-going components of the scheme during 
the Eleventh Plan are as follows:- 
 
 Department of Posts  has the largest network in the country with over 27000 
offices connected to Data Centre on WAN 
 Data Centre Facility functional, Disaster Recovery Center to be ready soon 
 2148 Post Offices are working on core banking  
 7026 Post Offices are working on core insurance service 
 Core Operations: Email, ESB and SMS Gateway rolled out.  
 
9. The tentative timelines for i mplementation of the various components of the lT 
Induction and Modernization Scheme for the entire Twelfth Five Year Plan are as 
follows:- 
 
# Project Timeline 
1 Data Center Facility (DCF) operational 
in respect of Data Recovery Centre (DRC)  
 
June 2015 
2 Network Integrator (NI) in remaining 
locations 
June 2015 

6 
 
3 Financial Services Integrator (FSI) June 2016 
4 Core System Integrator (CSI) June 2016 
5 Change Management (CM) October 2015 
6 Rural Hardware (RH) March 2017 
7 Rural System Integrator (RSI) March 2017 
8 Mail Operation Hardware (MOH) March 2016 
 
  
10. On whether the Network Integrator (NI) will also provide connectivity to extra -
departmental/rural post offices, the Committee have been  informed that NI is not 
providing connectivity to Extra Departmental Post Offices.  The computerization of extra-
departmental/rural post offices will be done through handheld mobile devices working on 
SIM. The Rural Hardware vendor will provide the connectivity to these mobile handheld 
devices. 
  
b. Financial Inclusion in rural areas of the country through IT Induction 
Project 
 
 When asked about the multiple channels of access available to the customers 
after roll -out of the IT Modernization Project, the Department stated that 
multiple types of access would be a vailable to the customers for getting 
information, availing services and for redressal of grievances. The channels 
which have been provisioned in the IT Modernization Project  related to 
Customer Interaction Management Portal (CIM) , Interactive Voice Respon se 
(IVR), Call Centre, ATM, e-Banking, Mobile phones, Post office counters , and 
Payment gateway. 
 
11. Asked as to  how the Project is likely to improve financial inclusion , especially in 
rural areas of the country, the Department, in a note, submitted as under:- 
 
“The implementation of Rural ICT Solution (RH & RSI) and Core Banking 
Solution (CBS) will enable Department of Posts to rollout DBT through a 
network of 1.55 Lakh Post Offices in rural as well as urban Post Offices. Rural 
post offices will be enabled with a Hand Held device with biometric identification 
and Micro ATM enablement, wireless network, thermal printer to provide 
immediate receipts to customer and solar powered battery to charge and 
operate the Micro ATM. 
 
The Rural Information Communication &  Technology (RICT) involves 
computerization and digitally connecting all the Gramin Dak Sewak Post Offices, 
including those in rural areas. The objective is to provide a technology solution 
(ICT Device) to each Branch Postmaster (BPM) which will enable eac h of 

7 
 
approximately 130,000 Branch Post Offices (BOs) to improve the quality of 
services being offered to rural customers. It will increase the rural reach of the 
Department and enable Branch Post Offices to increase traffic of all financial 
remittances, savings accounts, cash certificates and Rural Postal Life Insurance 
(RPLI). This is being enabled through the Rural System Integrator (RSI) and 
Rural Hardware (RH) solutions.  
 
The ease of of transactions will encourage rural citizens to avail the services o f 
Post Offices thereby having a positive impact on the rural economy , besides 
improving financial inclusion.”   
 
c. Transparent delivery of social security schemes, including DBT through IT  
Project 
 
12. The Committee enquired as to how the lT Induction and Modernization of Post 
Offices is likely to lead to transparent delivery of social security schemes , including 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) . The Department stated that the disbursement of Social 
Security Scheme shall be done through biometric identificatio n using the mobile hand 
held devices. That will not only lead to transparency but shall also reduce the number of 
complaints of wrong payment and fraudulent transactions , besides eliminating the 
middlemen in the system. Online monitoring shall also be fast er and without any 
manipulation. 
d. Improved decision making by Department of Posts 
 
13. The Committee have been informed that the Department ‟s decision making 
process will be facilitated in the following manner after roll -out of the Modernisation               
Project :- 
 
 Implementation of IT Modernization Project will improve the visibility in day -to-
day operations and enable real-time interventions in case of operational problems, 
e.g. mail movements. 
 Automatic data updation will enable verified data/report availability/generation  
 Operational planning and decision making will be facilitated by availability of 
reliable and up-to-date data.   
 Efficiencies in Inventory Management and Procurement. 
 Financial monitoring/planning will be easier. 
 Human Resource Management will improve. 
 
e. Launch of new products/services after successful roll-out of IT Project 
 
14. The new products/services proposed to be offered by the Department after roll -
out of IT Induction and Modernization Project are as follows:- 
 

8 
 
1. Exponential growth in e-Commerce riding on seamless track & trace, including 
returns, and immediate remittance of collections on delivery.  
2. e-Commerce(give orders/view commodity rates) 
3. Utility Bill payments- phone/electricity, etc. 
4. Commission/Fee Collection Booking and reservation of train ticket & air tickets 
5. Data for other organisations 
6. Distribution of social security benefits 
7. Common Service Centre services.” 
 
f. Challenges in roll-out of IT Induction and Modernization Project 
 
15. The following are the major problems/challenges being faced in the roll -out of the 
IT Induction and Modernization project across different postal circles of the Department: 
 
 Public procurement process in Government of India is time consuming 
and Department‟s experience has been that in some cases (e.g. MOH & 
RH), when the selected vendor decided not to take up the work, the 
Project suffered major delays. 
 Availability of telecom network connectivity in the country , particularly 
in the areas like No rth East, Chhatti sgarh, Uttarakhand, Ladakh and 
Island territories.  
 Pan-India geographical spread 
 25,000 Departmental POs and approximately 130,000 BOs.  
 Migration from almost 56 stand -alone applications presently being used 
in the Department to an integrated IT platform. 
 Managing a workforce of almost 4.66 la kh persons, who have been 
working in a manual environment all through their service tenure. 
 
16. When asked about how the Department propose to meet those challenges, 
the Department stated that they have developed a focused and time-bound plan to 
meet the aforesaid challenges. These are enumerated below:  
 
 Change Management vendor is working for creation of a new work 
culture. 
 Training is being imparted to employees working at all levels. 
 The processes are being simplified so that manual processes are not 
replicated in an IT environment. 
 A large number of Rules and procedures have been simplified and 
brought in sync with the new IT working environment 
 Project Monitoring Units have been set up right up -to the Divisional 
levels (district level) in order to implement the Project in a synchronized 
manner. 
 
 

9 
 
 
g. Allocation/Utilization of funds under the IT Project 
 
17.  The Project is an important scheme of the Department of Posts that got the 
maximum outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all the schemes for the Twelfth Five 
Year P lan. The detail s of allocation relating to IT Induction and Modernization 
Scheme for the past four years and 2014-15 are as follows: 
 
Sl 
No 
Year Proposed 
allocation 
BE RE Actual 
Exp 
% of 
Achievement 
when 
compared 
with BE 
1 2010-11 600.66 414.97 210.90 188.88 45.52 
2 2011-12 917.97 676.41 196.82 164.40 24.31 
3 2012-13 1437.28 516.00 109.36 26.13 5.06 
4 2013-14 842.01 532.21 295.74 254.85 
(up to 
March, 
2014) 
47.88 
5 2014-15 1910.18 506.39 --  ---- 
 
18. Enumerating the reasons for reduction of funds from BE to RE stage for all the 
years beginning from 2010 -11 in the I T I nduction and Modernization scheme and its 
impact on the implementation of the Project, the Department submitted as under:- 
 
“Delay in finalization of some RFPs as well as award of work due to unforeseen 
reasons from 2010 -11 to 2012 -13, led to reduced utilization of allotted Plan 
funds.  Detailed reasons for delay in operationalization of R FPs under the IT 
Modernisation Project are explained below:- 
 
(i) The IT Modernisation Project is a project involving public procurement of 
hardware and software for 1,55,000 post offices along with mail, 
accounts, administrative, motor vehicle and store depot offices. The 
process of finalization of RFP is complex and time consuming. 
 
(ii)  Because of the complexity and dimensions of the work involved, which 
is unparalleled, the work was split up into 8 silos for implementation 
through 8 RFPs. However, the eight  RFPs are inter -dependent. 
Finalization of one RFP would not lead to the completion of one 
functionality/silo. E.g. RSI could not start till RH had been on-boarded. 
 
(iii)  Two vendors, M/s Sai in case of RH and M/s HCL India Ltd . in case of 
MOH, did not c omplete the formalities for signing the contract even 

10 
 
after being finally selected. In case of RH , it led to re -tendering twice 
and consumed a lot of time. 
 
(iv) The Department has nominated cross -sectional committee members 
from DIT/NIC and experienced em inent resource persons from various 
IITs/IIITs in all the RFP management committees, in order to gain from 
their expertise and domain knowledge. RFP meetings had to be 
convened as per their schedule to ensure their presence. This process 
has affected the t ime lines of the RFP committee meetings on 
deliberation, evaluation of RFPs and their finalisation. 
 
(v) Due to the complex nature of RFPs many queries and clarification s were 
sought by the bidders to understand and to prepare the bid documents. 
Accordingly, last date of submission of bid documents ha d been 
extended several times in almost all RFPs to give ample opportunity to 
ensure maximum participation of bidders. 
 
(vi)    Many clarifications were sought during pre -qualification and technical 
evaluation stages by the RFP Management Committees. Bidders had to 
be given reasonable time to answer and provide additional documents to 
ensure fair and transparent evaluation of bids, which were a must 
process and could not have been over looked or cut short or eli minated 
and were absolutely necessary to ensure a complete, transparent and 
comprehensive evaluation process. This , however, caused considerable 
delay in evaluation of RFPs. 
 
(vii)  Some complaints were received by the Department regarding certain 
aspects of the Project. For a certain period, the P roject was on hold 
when the complaints were being examined. The issues were ex amined 
at higher level and the P roject could be moved forwar d only after the 
complaints were closed.  
 
19. The financial details of P lan schemes in lT Induction and Modernization are as 
under:- 
S.No.  Particulars of 
Scheme/Activity 
BE 
2012-13 
RE 
2012-
13 
Actua
l 
2012-
13 
BE 
2013-
14 
RE 
2013-
14 
Actual 
2013-14 
BE 
2014-
15 
1 Supply of Mail 
Office Hardware 
& Rural H/W 
140.00 
 
17.90 18.15 0.02 00 00 55.01 
2 Development & 
deployment of 
Rural ICT 
solution 
24.00 00 00 95.98 00 00 50.00 

11 
 
3 Development & 
Deployment of 
Banking and PLI 
solution 
100.00 30.00 00 179.0
0 
85.00 193.529
* 
86.40 
4 Data Centre and 
Disaster 
Recovery Centre 
05.00 0.46 00 13.00 4.10 4.0944 16.60 
5 Network 
Integration 
100.00 34.00 00 235.2
8 
50.00 45.0805 159.38 
6 Development 
and deployment 
of integrated 
scalable software 
& Change 
Management 
activities 
126.00 15.00 00 0.02 143.75 00* 114.00 
7 PMU –PPS  04.00 1.50 00 5.00 9.98 9.8932 14.00 
  PMU- OE 12.00 9.00 0.82 1.31 1.31 1.1289    2.55 
 PMU-FTE 01.00 00 00 0.60 0.60 0.2612    0.10 
 PMU-TE 01.00 01.00 3.85 1.00 1.00 0.7945    1.40 
 PMU- Tools & 
equipment 
03.00 0.50 0.36 1.00 00 00    6.95 
8 Total 516.00 109.36 23.18 532.2
1 
295.74 254.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
78 
506.39 
 
20. The details of physic al targets and achievements of P lan schemes in lT Induction 
and Modernization are as under:- 
 Sl. 
No. 
Particulars of 
Scheme/Activity 
Physical Target 
2012-13 
Achiev
ement 
2012-13 
Physical 
Target 
2013-14 
Achievem
ent 
2013-14 
Physical Target 
2014-15 
1 Supply of Mail 
Office Hardware 
& Rural H/W 
Supply of H/W 
to 49000 ED 
BOs, 346 Mail 
Offices, 234 
TMOs, 336 
Record offices, 
146 Speed Post 
Hubs 
NIL Supply of 
H/W to 
45000 ED 
BOs, 346 
Mail Offices, 
234 TMOs, 
336 Record 
offices, 146 
Speed Post 
Hubs 
NIL Supply of Mail 
office hardware 
to 346 Mail 
Offices, 234 
TMOs, 336 
Record offices, 
146 Speed Post 
Hubs and 
postman 
handheld 
devices to 850 
POs.  
Supply of RH 
hardware to 

12 
 
45000 BOs 
2 Development & 
deployment of 
Rural ICT 
solution 
Deployment of 
application and 
deployment of 
hardware 
NIL Deployment 
of application 
and 
deployment 
of hardware 
NIL Deployment of 
application and 
deployment of 
hardware 
3 Development & 
Deployment of 
Banking and PLI 
solution 
Deployment of 
application and 
deployment of 
hardware 
NIL Deployment 
of application 
and 
deployment 
of hardware 
Achieved. 
CBS in 
124 POs 
and PLI 
220 POs 
gone live. 
Completion of 
Phase 1 roll -
out. 
Operation and 
maintenance. 
4 Data Centre and 
Disaster 
Recovery Centre 
Installation and 
commissioning 
of DC 
NIL Installation 
and 
commissioni
ng of DC 
Data 
Centre 
commissi
oned 
w.e.f.  
03-04-13. 
DRC 
work in  
 
progress. 
Installation and 
commissioning 
of DRC 
5 Network 
Integration 
Networking of 
8000 Post 
Offices on 
WAN 
NIL Networking 
of 18000 Post 
Offices on 
WAN 
Achieved. 
27095 
locations 
have been 
networked  
WAN roll out 
in remaining 
Post Offices. 
 
6 
 
Development 
and deployment 
of integrated 
scalable software 
& Change 
Management 
activities 
 
Continuous 
activation of 
trainings, 
workshop and 
surveys, etc. 
 
NIL 
 
Continuous 
activation of 
trainings, 
workshop 
and surveys , 
etc. 
 
achieved 
 
Continuous 
activation of 
trainings, 
workshop and 
surveys, etc. 
7 PM Tool & 
Equipment  
Deployment of 
application 
NIL Deployment 
of application 
NIL Deployment of 
application 
  
 
Implementation of Eight Requests for Proposals (RFPs) 
 
21. The status/timelines for roll -out of the eight components of lT Induction and 
Modernization Project are as follows:- 
 

13 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the segment Completion of 
Implementation  
Completion of Operation 
and Maintenance 
1 Rural System Integrator March 2017 Oct.    2025 
2 Core System Integrator June 2016 June  2021 
3 Financial Solution June 2016 May   2021 
4 Data Centre & DR DC Functioning. 
DRC –Very shortly July   2020 
5 Network Connectivity June  2015 Dec.   2020 
6 Rural H/W & 
Connectivity March 2017 Oct.    2021 
7 Mail Operation 
Hardware March   2016 Sep.   2020 
8 Change Management Oct.    2015 Oct.   2015” 
 
  
22. On the current status of the procurement of hardware and software under IT 
Induction and Modernization scheme, the Department submitted as under :- 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
segment 
Setting up 
of network 
connectivity 
Implementing 
agency 
Completion of 
Implementation  
Completion of 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
1 
Rural System 
Integrator  
will be 
completed 
by March 
2017 
M/s Infosys March 2017 Oct.    2025 
2 Core System 
Integrator NA 
M/s Tata 
Consultancy 
Services  Ltd. 
June 2016 June  2021 
3 Financial 
Solution NA M/s Infosys June2016 May   2021 
4 Data Centre & 
DR Done 
M/s Reliance 
Communication 
India Ltd. 
DC Functioning. 
DRC –Very 
shortly 
July   2020 
5 Network 
Connectivity 
Completed 
at 27095 
locations 
M/s  SIFY June  2015 Dec.   2020 
6 
Rural H/W & 
Connectivity 
will be 
completed 
by March 
2017 
M/s TCIL & 
RICOH India 
Ltd. 
March 2017 Oct.    2021 
7 Mail 
Operation 
Hardware 
NA Through 
DGS&D March   2016 Sep.   2020 
8 Change 
Management NA 
M/s Tata 
Consultancy 
Services  Ltd. 
Oct.    2015 Oct.   2015” 

14 
 
  
h. Role of Software Development Centre, Mysore in IT Project 
 
23. On the contribution of the Department's Software Development Centre at Mysore 
towards the lT Induction and Modernization P roject, the Department , in a note , 
submitted as under:- 
 
“Department‟s software development centre at Mysore (Centre for Excellence 
in Postal Technology)  had developed most of the  application software that 
are still being used by the post offices . In addition, CEPT Mysore also housed 
the first in-house data centre of the D epartment. The software developed by 
CEPT is also working in the post offices of many friendly countries. 
 
In addition, data sanitization work required for roll -out of Core Banking 
Services (CBS) and Core PLI is also being done throughout the country under 
the overall supervision of CEPT Mysore. CEPT Mysore has the following role in 
lT Induction and Modernization Project: 
 Knowledge Transfer of existing Applications. 
 Assistance in roll-out and Data migration 
 Acceptance Testing of respective solutions of all RFPs. 
 Operation and Maintenance.” 
 
i. Task Force on Leveraging India‟s Post Office Network  - Key 
Recommendations relating to IT Project 
 
24. The Department of Posts constituted a Task F orce on 21.08.2014 to study 
and make recommendations regarding leveraging the post  office network in India.  
The Task F orce made a total of 181 recommendations. The key recommendations 
of the Task Force concerning IT induction and modernization domain in particular 
are as under:  
 
Para 4.2.4: As part of the IT Modernization and Rural ICT Projects, the Task 
Force wishes to underline that the soft -ware for the Hand Held Mobile 
Computing Devices to be made available in Branch and rural POs should be 
versatile and universal, based on non -proprietary and open standards, 
without being locked to any vendor or particular operating system. 
 
Para 8.1.8 India Post may conduct a comprehensive study of the viability and 
feasibility of transmitting unregistered mail through e -mail rather than 
through physical transportation as at present. 
 
Para 9 .2.12: The strategic strengths of India Post (reach of network and 
century plus experience in delivering mail) should be aggressively leveraged 
in the growing e -commerce and e -retail market,   particularly at the back -

15 
 
end of the delivery chain in rural areas s o that it becomes the premier Pan -
India delivery service provider.  
India Post should also leverage its unique strengths to conversely extend the 
supply chain for products emanating from local markets and rural areas 
(ethnic, traditional and artisanal prod ucts, handicrafts, etc.,) to all parts of 
India and even beyond. 
 
Para 9.2.16: Under the IT Modernization P roject, India Post should seek to 
integrate its information systems with those of the major e -commerce 
companies in order to facilitate two-way information exchange.   
 
India Post should enter into Agreements and Understandings with e -
commerce companies and online retailers to deliver their consignments and 
collect cash on their behalf. 
 
Para 9 .2.17: To support e -commerce sales, sophisticated logistics  and 
warehouse planning, as well as robust routing and tracking & security and 
delivery systems, should be instituted so as to allow the shipper, India Post 
and the consumer to track the delivery and time line of the parcel on a real -
time basis, accessible through any device or channel. 
 
Para 9 .2.18: Agreements or tie -ups with e -commerce companies should 
include a clause which will e nable the booking of product delivery through 
India Post / Parcel at the time the product is purchased on the e-commerce 
portal, so that the customer purchases the product and simultaneously books 
its delivery through India Parcel. 
 
India Post may seek to incorporate the above clause into its existing MOUs 
with e-commerce retailers and also incorporate it in MOUs which it may enter 
into in future. 
 
Para 9 .2.19 India Post should set up a n e -Commerce Portal that allows 
manufacturers, SMEs, village craftsmen, offline retailers, etc. to list and sell 
their products.  
  
The India Post portal should, in particular, provide consumers from Tier II 
and Tier  III cities access to a catalogue of goods for sale in their local 
language, along with ratings and reviews, similar to that offered by industry -
leading portals today. 
   
Agents and advertisers should also be provided access to this portal. 
   
The portal should have a payments gateway allowing payments through 
credit and debit cards, the Post Office Savings Bank and RuPay cards. 
   

16 
 
Para 9.2.20: Customer interaction and service channels such as Interactive 
Voice Response (IVR) and Call Centres should be provided as required to 
support e-Commerce activities. 
Additionally, a mobile solution should be provided to the end -consumer to 
track and trace a delivery across the India Parcel system, and to allow 
scheduling of appointments for delivery of goods and services. 
 
 
Para 9.2.23 The delivery of parcels should be de -linked from normal postal 
services and a separate vertical link should be created from the Directorate 
to the field with a dedicated, nodal and mechanized delivery system.  
 
Parcel Kiosks should be set up at important locations and delivery staff 
should be equipped with Hand -held Mobile Computing Devices which can 
immediately register the delivery of parcels and log them into the tracking 
system in real time.    
 
Introduction of sa me day delivery service, return logistics, standard and 
secure packaging at the booking point are areas where reliable systems need 
to be put in place. 
 
Para 9.2.25 Strong IT back-end support for all activities of India Post and its 
Subsidiaries is critical and could be achieved by tying up with one of the 
leading Indian IT Companies to develop a world class user-friendly portal.  
  
The portal should provide end -to-end track and trace service with 
authentication of the loop being completed on the customer receiving 
delivery, after sales service, key accounts management, BI tools and API 
based integration with e-commerce players, road and rail transport agencies, 
airlines and other freight forwarders.  
  
A strong online monitoring system with capabilities to diagnose and resolve 
issues on a real time basis should be put in place with the aim of providing 
world class customer services. 
 
Para 9.2.26 A strong security system should be instituted at all levels of mail 
and parcel service.  
  
In particular, the security system should ensure absolute cyber security and 
payment security.  
 
Security at parcel handling centers should be enhanced through installation 
of CCTV Camera s with live streaming capabilities, installation of metal 
detectors, X-ray screening, frisking, etc.    
              

17 
 
Security in transit should be ensured through GPS tracking and containerized 
movement of parcels.  
    
Suitable training should be provided to the security and other personnel to 
create awareness and establish protocols of operation and standard operating 
procedures.   
 
Para 10 .2.2: The Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Telengana are 
operating MeeSeva, an IT -based programme under whic h as many as 342 
Services,  including both G2C and G2B services, are being facilitated 
through a single entry  portal. India Post can also consider this model.  
 Para 10.3.2:  Services which could potentially and usefully be added to the 
 menu of mail and parcel services currently being offered by India Post 
1) Post Offices can be used as Common Service Centres for: 
i. Dissemination of  information, including  weather warnings, traffic 
 conditions, agricultural extension practices, disease protection and 
 prevention, good health practices, etc.;  
ii. Promotion of digital literacy and distance education; 
iii. Sale of railway, airline and road transport tickets; application forms for 
 passports, driving licenses; Stamp Paper, Court Fees Stamps; 
 Application, Examination, Name Correction and other Forms;  
iv. Collection of electricity, water, telephone and all other bills for 
 Government services;  
v. Collection of payments for e -tailing goods and services on behalf of 
 private service providers; 
vi. Promotion of tourism by facili tating dissemination of information, 
 booking of hotels and transport of various kinds;  
vii. Delivery of all Government documents, including Aadhar cards, Voter 
 ID cards, Driving Licenses, Birth, Marriage and Death certificates, Land 
 records, etc.;  
viii. Acceptance of challans and school and university fees;  
ix. Sale of life, crop, accident and other types of insurance;  
x. Collection and compilation of data on electricity services, quality of 
 infrastructure;  
xi. Collection and dissemination of grass -roots innovations and 
 outstanding, functional traditional knowledge practices; 
xii. Conversion of POs to Disaster Management Centres in case of need;  
xiii. e-Education and e-Healthcare, as these areas develop in future. 
2) The Department of Posts may consider whether it would be feasible to  
  add some of these services, as well as some of the 342 services being  
  offered through the „MeeSeva‟ programme in to its existing bouquet of  
  services.  

18 
 
Para 12.2.1: India Post should strengthen its capabilities and diversify the 
range of  products which it offers, paying particular attention to growth 
segments such as Card Based Money Transfers, Mobile Banking, Collection of 
EMIs and bill payments.  
 
Para 12.2.2: India Post may collaborate with the National Payments 
Corporation of India (N PCI) to develop new financial products based on the 
RuPay Indian domestic card scheme.  
     
Para 12.2.3: India Post may tie -up with RuPay to boost the acceptability of 
the Card, particularly in rural areas.  
 
Para 16.2.1: The Aadhar data base will be the primary means of 
authenticating the identity of individuals to whom payments / services are 
being provided. Where the individual is not covered by Aadhar, the PO 
Network or other data base may be accessed to authenticate his identity.  
 
Para 16.2.2: Where social security schemes and entitlements are household / 
family based, it will be the responsibil ity of the State Government / District / 
Local Administrations concerned to ensure that the individual beneficiary is in 
fact entitled to the service / payment being provided and obviate the 
possibility of duplication or fraud in the implementation of Gove rnment 
schemes.   
 
The PBI data-base would need to be updated and re -checked periodically to 
eliminate duplication of beneficiaries. 
 
Para 16.2.5: The Aadhar data -base will be the primary means of biometric 
identification; the PBI should also develop its own data -base focusing on the 
family or house -hold and link it to the Aadhar data -base for functional and 
operational purposes.  
  
Para 16.3.1: In order to speed up biometric identification and improve 
operational efficiency, the Aadhar data base should be segmented State-wise 
or even district-wise.  
 
Para 16.3.2: The smaller data base focused on the particular District should 
be accessed in the first instance and the larger data base should be resorted 
to as a secondary pro cedure only if identity authentication on the truncated 
data base fails.  
 
Para 16.4.1: Commercially Important Clients (CICs) should be treated as a 
special category and provided with a Bulk Client code through which they can 
access updated data and ascertain delivery status immediately.   
       

19 
 
CICs should be allowed to frank the postage impression while printing the 
communication letter itself.  
  
Para 18.2.1: India Post / Parcel  should make postal services available to 
citizens electronically through the in tro duc t io n o f d ig it a l stamping 
and franking  machines at postal counters, internet postage and electronic 
mail boxes.” 
 
25. On the major challenges in implementation of recommendations of the Task Force 
on leveraging India's post office network, the Committee have been informed as under:- 
 
“The Task Force on Leveraging the Post Office Network has made a total of 
181 recommendations. The main challenge in implementing the 
recommendations of the Task Force is that most of the recommendations are 
interconnected and decision will have to be taken on them in a holistic and 
not in a piecemeal manner.  Further, before taking a final view on the 
recommendations, consultation with various stakeholders , including Service 
Unions, etc. will be required.  
 
 However, with the approval of Hon‟ble Minister of Communications & 
Information Technology, a Group of Senior Officers has been constituted to 
examine each recommendation of the Task Force to obtain relevant inputs 
from various stakeholders, including Service Unions, etc. and to chalk out a 
strategy for implementing specific recommendations of the Task Force along 
with timelines, in synergy with the other two reports of Internal Task Forces 
set up to „Scale up PLI Business‟ and „Capture e-Commerce Market‟” 
 
26. On how the lT Induction and Modernization Project will facilitate implementation of 
key recommendations of the Task Force, the Department stated that the Task Force has 
envisaged new role  for the D epartment in the realm of e -commerce, banking and 
insurance.  The new set -up will be possible only in a technologicall y augmented 
environment of the Department, which the IT Modernization Project will create. 
 
j. Focus on Banking, Insurance and e-Commerce 
 
27. When asked about h ow the lT Induction Project is likely to facilitate banking, 
insurance and e-Commerce operations of the Department of Posts, the Committee have 
been informed as under:- 
 
(i) Banking: The core banking solution is part of the IT Modernization 
Project that aims to bring in the facility of „Anytime Anywhere banking‟ 
for the Post Office Savings Bank customers . The primary objective of 
the IT Modernization P roject has been to enhance customer, 

20 
 
satisfaction through better service delivery.  India Post plans to 
implement core banking in all depar tmental Post Offices (more than 
25,000) and install 1000 AT Ms in major Post Offices.   The Project will 
bring in facilities of ATM banking, Internet banking and Mobile banking 
to the Post Office Savings Bank customers. 
(ii) Insurance: Implementation of IT induct ion will facilitate the insurance 
customers to pay premium or get policy update through any Post 
Office or online, apply for loan against policy as well as submit final 
claim at any Post Office . The settlements of claim s will also be easier 
and smoother  as all documents shall be available in a digitized and 
easily retrievable format. The departmental processing of investments 
will be more efficient as the corpus at the disposal of the Department 
will be know n and made available to the Investment D esk on a real 
time basis.   
(iii) e-Commerce:  It is a technology driven business  involving seamless 
data transmission, visibility of arti cles across mail flow pipeline and 
smooth & transparent remittance of collected amount. Department has 
already started providing thes e facilities to high value e-Commerce 
customers through „Application Programme Interface‟ . With the 
implementation of I T project in the Department,  e-Commerce 
transmission & delivery services can be provided through an integrated 
IT system. The Department shall thus be able to bring the benefits of 
e-Commerce to the rural and semi -urban areas, both as a market as 
well as supplier of goods.  
 
k. Data Centre Facility (DCF) and Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) 
 
28. On the current status of the Data Centre Facility (DCF) located at Mumbai, the 
average number of transactions handled by the DCF on a daily basis and the current 
status of installation of the Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) at Mysore which was slated 
to be operational by October, 2014, the Department, in a note, stated:- 
 
“DCF located at Navi Mumbai is functional since April 2013. Presently, DCF is 
handling CBS and Core PLI transactions in 9174 Post Offices. Daily average 
number of transactions handled at DCF is 8.52 Lakh. The DRC facil ity at 
CEPT, Mysore has been installed. The user acceptance test has been 
completed and accepted on 19.03.2015. DRC shall be operationalized 
shortly." 
  
29. On the status of setting up of the National Data Center (NDC) and Disaster 
Recovery Center (DRC) and th e frequency of synchronization of DRC with the NDC , the 
Committee have been informed that the National Data Centre has been operational since 
April 2013. The DRC facility has been accepted by the Department from the vendor on 
19.3.2015.  For its complete operationalization, statuary approvals from Pollution Control 

21 
 
Board and Controller of Explosives are being obtained. The complete operations of DRC 
are likely to start very soon. The data flow between NDC and DRC would be continuous 
and mirror data shall be available at DRC. 
 
30. The status of computerization and networking acro ss the different postal circles is 
depicted in the following Table:-  
  
Sr. 
No.  Circle 
No. of Post 
Office 
Computerised 
No. of POs 
Networked 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2438 2438 
2 Assam 626 582 
3 Bihar 1046 1043 
4 Chhattisgarh 343 335 
5 Delhi 425 393 
6 Gujarat 1335 1328 
7 Haryana 493 490 
8 Himachal Pradesh 464 418 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 263 251 
10 Jharkhand 455 454 
11 Karnataka 1715 1683 
12 Kerala 1506 1506 
13 Madhya Pradesh 1062 1061 
14 Maharashtra 2212 2212 
15 North-East 329 268 
16 Odisha 1195 1147 
17 Punjab 758 758 
18 Rajasthan 1345 1334 
19 Tamil Nadu 2759 2578 
20 Uttar Pradesh 2553 2540 
21 Uttarakhand 388 341 
22 West Bengal 1758 1301 
  Total 25468 24462 
 
 
 
l. Need to reorient the Workforce to function in an IT enabled environment 
 
31. When asked about the plans of the Department to create awareness among the 
staff about the working conditions in an lT enabled environment & to meet the training 
requirements of a large workforce under the Change Management Vendor (CM) module, 
the Department submitted as under:- 
 

22 
 
“The Change Management vendor selected for required job is conducting 
surveys for different level of officers/officials. On the basis of the same, 
workshops are being held  and training programs are being conducted for the 
staff.  Department‟s website, newsletter and SMS alerts are being used to create 
awareness among the staff. Vendors are conducting training in the phased 
manner to train the staff in IT enabled environment. This is being augmented by 
training in all our Training Centres, including Work Place Training Centres 
functioning in all Divisions, and Standard Training Packages being delivered 
online, and Divisional level Change Agents.” 
 
m. Project Governance Structure 
 
32. A Project Governance Structure has been put in place which consists of the 
following:- 
(i) Steering Committee: for implementation of the P roject in the manner indicated in 
the proposal recommended by the EFC and  has flexibility in modifying the 
financial and physical parameters of  the scheme within the total budget 
approved by the CCEA, keeping in view the extant instructions as regards time 
and cost over-runs.  Secretary, Posts, is its Chairperson. 
  
(ii) Project Coordination Committee: for reviewing the project, issues/risks and taking 
key decisions with respect to the project and for sanctioning the payments as per 
the contracts approved by the Steering Committee within the overall outlay. 
 
(iii) Project I mplementation Committees:  to review, approve and sign off  on the 
Project deliverables in each phase.  Finalization of  functional requirement,  blue 
print document, and User Acceptance  Test, Facilitating deployment of 
Department‟s manpower to carry out structural changes and  taking business and 
operational decisions/ process changes. 
 
(iv) Circle Monitoring Committees:  for ensuring the progress of the  project in the 
Circles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
PART II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
1. The Committee note that during the early 1990s, with the advent of 
technology that led to electronic substitution of postal mail, introduction of 
core banking solutions and easy accessibility to mobile and internet based 
services, the Department of Posts  (DoP) had started inducting technolo gy by 
way of supplying hardware to Post Offices and implementing standalone 
software solutions for various operations in a Local Area Network (LAN) based 
environment. A Software Development C entre was also set up at Mysore to 
cater to the needs of the Post  Offices. To improve the quality of its services in 
line with the public expectations and to meet the increasing competition, 
technology upgradation in Post Offices was identified as a necessary 
prerequisite and to achieve this objective, the Department decided to improve 
and augment their IT infrastructure and introduce a new integrated software 
platform for its operations through an end -to-end IT Project. The India Post IT 
Project was designed to realize this  vision. The Project was approved by the 
Government with a total outlay of Rs. 4909 crore in November 2012. The earlier 
programmes of induction of technology and computerization of Post Offices and 
introduction of core banking for post office saving s bank operations were 
merged in this new P roject. The Committee recognize that IT Induction and 
Modernization is a very important P roject of the Department with a 
comprehensive IT roadmap to develop network architecture, integrated 
software and effective data ma nagement, including the establishment of 
National Data Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery Centre. The Committee observe 
that t here are eight segments/activities under the IT Induction and 
Modernization Project which are the Data Center Facility (DCF), Network  

24 
 
Integrator (NI), Financial Services Integrator (FSI), Core System Integrator 
(CSI), Change Management (CM) structure, Rural Hardware (RH), Rural System 
Integrator (RSI) and Mail Operation Hardware (MOH). 
 
The Committee note that the IT Induction & Moderni zation Project 
envisages improvement in the working of the Department across all functional 
areas, viz. faster and more reliable services in postal, logistics, banking, 
insurance and retail operations, equipping all Wide Area Network ( WAN) 
locations with p rimary and secondary bandwidth connectivity for seamless 
connectivity, simplification of processes resulting in immediate transfer of 
accounts and certificates, “Anytime Anywhere Banking” through multiple 
channels such as Internet, ATM and mobile, interope rability with other 
banks/Financial Institutions, efficient controls through improved Management 
Information System ( MIS), centralised and accurate employee information 
resulting in improved and timely administrative services, efficient procurement 
and inventory management and reduction in operational times and costs. 
 
The Committee further observe that by setting up an IT infrastructure 
spanning across all post offices, including branch post offices in rural areas, the 
Department will be able to harness the benefits of consolidated real time 
information and capabilities across various functional silos as well as 
geographical reach. The transformation of the physical network to a digital 
network will also provide a national asset for all users , apart from post offices, 
including various Government Departments, business houses and citizens to 
use the IT enabled countrywide network for communication, banking, 
insurance and service delivery needs with  transaction data. This mega IT 
driven transformation would be unparalleled in its size and scope and will 
create a national asset of over 1,55,000 networked post offices. 

25 
 
2. The Committee also note that multiple types of access have been 
provisioned in the I T Modernization Project which w ill be available to the 
customers for getting information, availing services and for redressal of 
grievances. The multiple channels include the Customer Interaction 
Management Portal (CIM), Interactive Voice Response (IVR), C all Centre, ATM, 
e-Banking, Mobile phones, Post O ffice counters , Payment G ateway, etc. 
Further, the implementation of Rural ICT Solution (RH & RSI) and Core Banking 
Solution (CBS) will enable the Department of Posts to roll -out Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) through a network of 1.55 Lakh Post Offices in rural as wel l as 
urban Post Offices. Rural Post O ffices will be enabled with a Hand Held device 
with biometric identification and Micro ATM enablement, wireless network, 
thermal printer to provide immediate receipts to customer and solar powered 
battery to charge and operate the Micro ATM. The Rural Information 
Communication & Technology (RICT) involves computerization and digital 
connectivity of all the Gramin Dak Sewak Post O ffices including those in rural 
areas. The objective is to provide a technology solution (ICT Device) to each 
Branch Postmaster (BPM) which will enable each of approximately 1 ,30,000 
Branch Post Offices to improve the quality of services being offered to rural 
customers. It will increase  the rural reach of the Department and enable 
Branch Post Offices to increase traffic of all financial remittances, savings 
accounts, cash certificates and Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI). This is being 
enabled through the Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Rural Hardware (RH) 
solutions. The ease of transactions will encourage rural citizens to avail the 
services of Post Offices, thereby having a positive impact on the rural economy, 
besides improving financial inclusion. 

26 
 
 The Department of Posts ha ve a vast network of approximately 1,55,000 
Post O ffices o ut of which 1,30,000 are rural Branch Post O ffices. The 
Committee recognize that transformation of the physical network to a digital 
network will also enable the Government to use the postal network to reach out 
to the rural population for efficient delivery of financial services such as 
banking and insurance , besides improving communications, mails and other 
service delivery needs of the citizens. The IT Modernization Project, particularly 
the rural ICT s olutions, will rebuild the rural postal network to create an 
institutional infrastructure for last mile delivery of financial servi ces to the 
citizens. The Project will make the Post O ffice the focal point for delivery of 
financial services and further the  cause of financial inclusion by providing the 
rural population across the country with access to formal banking and 
insurance services. 
3. The Committee acknowledge that the lT enabled Post Offices will lead to 
transparent delivery of social security schemes , including Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT). The disbursement of Social Security Scheme shall be done 
through biometric identification using the mobile hand held devices , that will 
not only lead to transparency but also reduce the number of complaints of 
wrong payment and fraudulent transactions , besides eliminating the 
middlemen in the system. Online monitoring shall also be faster and shall be 
without scope for any manipulation . The Committee observe that the 
Department of Posts, with a net work of approxima tely 1,55,000 Post O ffices 
making transition to a digital network , will enable the Government to use the 
postal network to reach out to the citizens for efficient delivery of social service 
schemes, apart from improving the communications, mails and other service 
delivery needs of the citizens. The IT Modernization P roject, particularly the 

27 
 
rural ICT solutions , will thus rebuild the rural postal network to create an 
institutional infrastructure for last mile delivery of all G overnment services to 
the citizens. The project will make the Post Office the focal point of delivery for 
social security and employment guarantee schemes of the Union and the State 
Governments, including disbursement of wages under MNREGS, Pension and 
scholarship, etc . through Direct Be nefit Transfer employing Biometric 
authentication of financial transactions. 
4. The implementation of the IT Modernization Project is likely to improve 
the visibility in day -to-day operations and enable real -time interventions in 
case of operational problems,  e.g. mail movements ; further,  automatic data 
updation will enable verified data/report availability/generation  and 
operational planning and decision making will be facilitated by availability of 
reliable and up -to-date data, introduction of efficiencies in Inventory 
management and Procurement, ease of financial monitoring/planning and 
improvement in Human Resource Management.  The Committee are of the view 
that the IT Induction and Modernization Project will facilitate quick  decision 
making by the Departm ent of Posts enabl ing real-time interventions to resolve 
operational problems.  The Project will also lead to improved planning and 
decision making through the use of Management Information System (MIS) 
facilitated by availability of reliable and up-to-date data generated in real-time. 
The Committee recommend that the Department should ensure optimum use of 
the data generated in real -time in improving decision making , both in the 
operational and the policy front. 
 
5. The Committee also take note of the fact  that with the roll -out of the IT 
Induction and Modernization Project, the Department shall be in a position to 
introduce several new services in the future, viz. delivery of e -Commerce 

28 
 
articles offering seamless track and trace facility , including returns , and 
immediate remittance of collections on delivery, e -Commerce (place orders / 
view commodity rates), Utility Bill payments  - phone/electricity, etc., 
Commission/Fee Collection, booking and reservation of train & air tickets, data 
collection for other o rganizations, distribution of social security benefits and 
Common Service Centre (CSC) services.  Keeping in view the fact that the 
future roll -out of various products/services by the Department of Posts is 
closely tied-up to the successful roll -out of the IT Induction and Modernization 
Project, the Committee emphasize that efforts should be made for the timely 
and successful execution of the Project to reap the benefits of prospective 
business.   
6. The Committee note that the major challenges faced by the De partment 
in the roll-out of the lT Induction and Modernization P roject include, inter-alia, 
the time consuming nature of public procurement process, selected vendors not 
taking up the allocated work leading to major delays, telecom network 
connectivity issues in areas like North East, Chhatti sgarh, Uttarakhand, Ladakh 
and I sland territories, pan -India scope of operations, large number of Post -
Offices (approx. 1,55,000 comprising of 25,000 Departmental Post Offices and 
1,30,000 Branch Post -Offices), migration from almost 56 stand -alone 
applications presently being used in the Department to an integrated IT 
platform, and managing a workforce of almost 4. 66 lakh employees having no 
prior experience of working in an IT -enabled environment.  In their endeavour 
to meet these challenges, the Department have developed a focused and time -
bound plan which includes roping in Change Management vendor for creation of 
a new work culture, imparting training to employees at all levels, simplification 
of procedure to ensure that manual processes are not replicated in an IT 
environment, large scale simplification of Rules and Procedures to bring them 

29 
 
in synchronisation  with the new IT -enabled working environment and setting 
up Project Monitoring Units upto the Divisional levels (district level) in order to 
implement the Project in a synchronized manner. While appreciating the efforts 
made by  the Department to ensure a smo oth transition from a manual work 
environment to an IT -enabled environment, the Committee recommend to the 
Department to remain focus ed through structural monitoring of the remedial 
measures taken for addressing the operational impediments.  
7. The Committee note that the implementation of the eight components of 
the IT Modernization P roject is planned to be completed between 2015 and 
2017.  As estimated by the Department, the entire operation and maintenance 
of these units is to be completed bet ween 2020 and 2025.  A review of 
implementation of the plan schemes indicates  that achievement in the year 
2012-13 was nil.  The year 2013 -14 witnessed fair progress with the 
commissioning of the Data Centre, networking of 2795 locations, development 
and d eployment of CBS in 124 POs and PLI in 220 post offices, etc.  It is 
disquieting to note that milestones could not be achieved in respect of some 
important schemes, namely, Supply of Mail Office Hardware and Rural 
Hardware and development and deployment of  Rural ICT solution in the year 
2013-14.  The Committee observe that the IT Modernization Scheme of the 
Department of Posts got the maximum outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all 
the schemes for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  A scrutiny of the financial 
performance of the Department during the past four years indicates that there 
has been significant shortfall in utilization of funds against the allocation at the 
BE stage.  The shortfall in utilization is attributed to reasons like  complex and 
time-consuming nature of finalization of RFPs, interdependence amongst the 
eight RFPs, need for re-tendering in RH and MOH due to the vendors opting-out 
after being selected, delay in RFP meetings, queries and clarifications sought 

30 
 
by bidders leading to extension of las t date of submission of bid documents, 
delay in evaluation of RFPs, resolution of complaints re garding certain aspects 
of the P roject, etc.  The Committee do understand that some of the se factors 
may have hindered the timely utilization of funds but would like to point out 
that such challenges are often encountered in implementation of mega projects 
of this nature. It is for the Department to have anticipated such problems and 
factor them in the implementation mechanism . The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that greater efforts should be made by the Department to ensure 
that the problem areas are addressed in an expeditious manner for the smooth 
execution of the plan schemes with better utilization of funds.  The Committee 
also emphasize that the monitoring mechanism in place be appropriately 
strengthened to ensure that various components of the Project are rolled out in 
a time -bound manner.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress of achievement of all the components of the IT Modernization Project. 
   
8. The Committee note that the Department‟s software development centre 
at Mysore (Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology) had developed most of 
the application software th at are still being used by the Post O ffices. In 
addition, CEPT Myso re also housed the first in -house Data C entre of the 
Department. The Committee have been apprised that the software developed 
by CEPT is working in the post offices of many friendly countries. In addition, 
data sanitization work required for roll-out of Core Banking Services (CBS) and 
Core PLI is also being done throughout the country under the overall 
supervision of CEPT Mysore. Insofar as the  IT Induction and Modernization 
Project is concerned, the CEPT, Mysore, is involved in Knowledge Transfer of 
existing Applications, assistance in roll -out and Data migration, Acceptance 
Testing of respective solutions of all RFPs, and Operation and Maintenance.   

31 
 
While appreciating the role of CEPT , Mysore, in developing the application 
software to cater to the specific requirements of post offices, the Committee 
feel that the Software Development Center at Mysore, with its un ique 
experience in developing stand -alone software applications for Post O ffices, 
can play a vital rol e in areas such as knowledge transfer of existing 
applications, data migration, acceptance testing of different modules of the IT 
Project as well as operation and maintenance matters. The Committee 
recommend that the accumulated experience of CEPT , Mysore, in software 
development for DoP may be optimally utilized in ensuring a seamless 
transition from stand -alone applications to a fully networked architecture 
served by a common data center. 
 
9. The Committee have been informed that  Task Force on leveraging the 
Post Office network had given  wide-ranging recommendations concerning IT 
Induction and Modernization in the Department .  Some of the key 
recommendations include adoption of non -proprietary and open standards for 
hardware and software products, leveraging the inherent strengths of the India 
Post network to garner business in upcoming segments such as e -commerce 
and e -retailing, integration of information systems w ith those of major e -
commerce companies, de -linking parcel service from normal postal services, 
introduction of same day delivery, providing end-to-end track and trace facility, 
implementation of measures for cyber security and payment security, GPS 
tracking and containerized movement of parcels . The Task Force had also 
stressed the need to use post offices as Common Service Centers (CSCs) 
offering a variety of public services, diversification into other range of 
products/services such as Card Based Money T ransfers, Mobile Banking, 
Collection of EMIs and bill payments, collaboration with the National Payments 

32 
 
Corporation of India (NPCI) to develop new financial products based on the 
RuPay Indian domestic card scheme, treatment of Commercially Important 
Clients (CICs) as a special categ ory and availability of Postal S ervices to 
citizens electronically through the in t r odu ct ion  of  d ig it a l stamping and 
franking  machines at po stal counters, internet postage and electronic mail 
boxes.  The Committee are given to understand that a Group of Senior Officers 
has been constituted to chalk out a strategy for implementing specific 
recommendations of the Task Force along with timelines, in synergy with the 
other two reports of the Internal Task Forces set up to „Scale up PLI Business‟ 
and „Capture e -Commerce Market‟. The Committee  recommend that the Group 
of Officers should complete the exercise in a time -bound manner and evolve an 
effective strategy to implement the recommendations of the Task Force so that 
the vision of leveraging the Post Office network of the country can be realized.  
The Committee would like to be informed of the outcome in this regard. 
10. The Committee also note that the Task Force on leveraging India's Post 
Office network has envisaged a new role for the Department in the realm of 
banking, insurance and e -commerce.  The new set -up will require a 
technologically augmented environment which will be created by 
implementation of the IT Modernization Project. The Committee understand 
that as part of the IT Project, India Post plan to implement core banking in all 
Departmental Post Offices (more than 25,000) and install 1000 ATMs in major 
Post Offices.   The project will bring in facilities of ATM banki ng, Internet 
Banking and Mobile B anking to th e Post Office Savings Bank customers. 
Implementation of IT induction will also facilitate insurance customers to pay 
premium or get policy update through any Post Office or online, apply for loan 
against policy as well as submit final claim at any Post Office. The settlement of 
claims will also be easier and smoother as all documents shall be available in a 

33 
 
digitized and easily retrievable format. The Departmental processing of 
investments will be more efficient as the corpus at the disposal of the 
Department will be known and made available to the Investment Desk on a real 
time basis. The Committee stress that e-Commerce is a technology driven 
business involving seamless data transmission, visibility of articles across mail 
flow pipeline and smooth and transparent remittance of collected amount. With 
the implementation of the IT project in the Department, eCommerce 
transmission and delivery services can be provided through an integrated IT 
system. The Department shall thus be able to bring the benefits of e -Commerce 
to the rural and semi -urban areas, both as a market as well as supplier of 
goods.   
 The Committee fully recognize the critical role of the IT Induction and 
Modernization Project in the realm of banking, insurance and e -commerce. The 
successful ro ll-out of the IT Project is a necessary pre -requisite for the 
Department to make any significant foray into the banking, insurance and e -
Commerce domain. The Committe e, therefore,  recommend that the utmost  
emphasis should be accorded to the implementation of the P roject so that the 
future expansion of products/services in these areas is not hampered for want 
of requisite IT infrastructure. 
11. The Committee note that the DCF located at Navi Mumbai has been  
functional since April 2013. Presently, DCF is handling  CBS and Core PLI 
transactions in 9174 Post Offices. The daily average number of trans actions 
handled at DCF is 8.52 lakh. The Department plans to scale up the DCF as more 
Post Offices are  being connected through Wide Area Network.  The Committee 
are give n to understand that  all the technical solutions and infrastructure 
being created under the IT Project, including the Data Centre Facility, are 

34 
 
scaleable and modular in nature , i.e. they are designed to take care of 
additional load by scaling up commensur ate to the requirement ; besides, t he 
Data Centre facility is designed to handle transactions emanating from the 
entire postal network . Insofar as the requirement of bandwidth is concerned, 
the RFP and contract s have provisions relating to increasing the ba ndwidth as 
per actual requirements. The DRC facility at CEPT, Mysore , has been installed 
followed by the user acceptance test which has been completed and accepted 
on 19.03.2015. The Committee have been apprised that the DRC is expected to 
be operationalized shortly. 
 
 With the Data Center Facility (DCF) already in operation since April 2013 
and the Data Recovery Center (DRC) expected to be operationalized shortly, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should expedite the networking of 
the remaining Post Offices so that more and more Post Offices can move their 
data to DCF and make optimum use of the networked architecture as envisaged 
in the IT Project.  
12. The Committee note that Change Management is a vital component of the 
IT Modernization Project  and Change Management Vendor is  conducting 
surveys for different level s of officers/officials which forms the basis of 
workshops and training program mes being conducted for the staff members. 
The Department‟s website, newsletter and SMS alerts are also being  used to 
create awareness among the staff members. Vendors are conducting training in 
a phased manner to train the staff in an IT enabled environment which is being 
augmented by training in all Training Centres of the Department, including 
Work Place Train ing Centres functioning in all Divisions, Standard Training 
Packages being delivered online, and Divisional level Change Agents. 

35 
 
 The Committee observe that it is imperative that the Change Management 
vendor should impart requisite training which will go a  long way in improving 
the performance of the Postal employees . Efforts to improve the skills and 
capabilities of employees through training is necessary to equip the workforce 
with the knowledge of various IT tools at their disposal , which will also lead to  
optimum utilization of these IT tools. The Committee feel that since  the 
Department of Posts are a service oriented entity having a large workforce of 
approximately 4.66 lakh employees who have been largely working in a manual 
environment, special emphasis on IT training requirements of such a large 
workforce should be a priority area. While appreciating the ongoing efforts of 
the Department to meet the training requirement of their employees, the 
Committee stress the need to focu s on training requirements of the large 
workforce to reorient them to work in an IT enabled environment. 
13. To sum up, though the IT Modernization Project has entered the fourth 
year of its implementation, the pace of execution has been slow resulting in 
shortfall in achievements as against the envisaged physical targets.  It is 
noteworthy that this mega IT driven transformation is the first of its kind 
undertaken by any postal operator in the world.  The benefits of the Project 
after its successful implem entation is expected to be immense encompassing 
the Government, the Department of Posts and equally importantly  the 
customers.  The Department of Posts are poised to play an important role in 
bridging the urban-rural divide and bringing IT -enabled services to all sections 
of society through its 1,55,000 IT-enabled Post Offices.  It needs reiteration 
that the reduction of paper -based processing w ill enable an environmentally 
sustainable greener Post Office.  The vision can be transformed into reality only 
in a technologically augmented environment of the Department, which the IT 

36 
 
Modernization Project intends to create.  Considering that it is a 
transformational project having far reaching impact, the Committee 
recommend that the Project Governance Structure o f the Department should 
take all necessary measures for the successful execution of this mega venture 
in a time -bound manner which will also support the ambitious 'Digital India' 
Campaign.         
 
 
     New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
     5 August,2015 Chairperson, 
    14 Shravana, 1937(Saka) Standing Committee on  
Information Technology. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
Annexure-I  
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (2014-15) HELD ON 11TH NOVEMBER, 2014 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th November, 2014 from 1 100 hours to 1315 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
7. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
12. Shri D.K. Suresh 
13. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
Rajya Sabha 
  
14. Shi Salim Ansari  
15. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
16. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
17. Shri Derek O’Brien 
18. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
19. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Additional Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 

38 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Posts)  
 
  Name Designation 
 
1. Ms. Kavery Banerjee Secretary (Posts) 
2. Ms. Anjali Deveshar Member (PLI) 
3. Ms. Kalpana Tewari Member (Planning) 
4. Shri G.J. Samuel Member (Operation) 
5. Shri Ashutosh Tripathi Member (Personnel) 
6. Ms. Saroj Punhani JS&FA 
7. Shri Vasumitra CPMG, Delhi Circle 
8. Shri Vineet Pandey CGM, BD Directorate 
9. Shri V.Pati CGM, PLI 
10. Ms. Smita Kumar General Manager (SP&P) BD Directorate 
 
2. At the outset, the Chair person welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. In the first half of the session, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Te chnology (Department of Posts) briefed the Committee on 
the subject ‘IT Induction and Modernization in the Department of Posts’. The Department of 
Posts also made a power -point presentation highlighting different facets of the modernization 
project. It inc luded implementation/rollout plans, present status of implementation and 
timelines of the project, provisioning for the future requirements of the project and key 
benefits of the project to the stakeholders, viz. the customers, the Government and the 
Department of Posts, etc. 
 
3. The Members then sought clarifications on issues to which the representatives of the 
Department of Posts responded. The Chairperson directed the Department of Posts to furnish 
written replies to the points which remained unanswered.  
 
 
4. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of Department of Posts for 
briefing the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
5. ……....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………… 
 
6. ……....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………… 
 
7. ……....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx…………  
 

39 
 
 
8.  ……....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx………………....xxxxx…………  
 
 
 
Verbatim Proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
_________________________________________________________________________  
xxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 