 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on     
‘Issues Related to Paid News’]  
 
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

2 
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on     
‘Issues Related to Paid News’  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ___________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on _____________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
10 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
31 
CHAPTERIV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
33 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
35 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
*I. Minutes of the Twenty -fourth sitting of the Committee held on 11 th August, 
2015  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Forty-seventh report  
 
            45 
 
 
*Not appended with the cyclostyled copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15) 
 
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma Additional Director 
 
         *    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
 
     (ii) 
  

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology       
(2014-2015), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the Twelfth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Fo rty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Issues related to Paid News’ relating to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 6 th May, 2013 and  
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2013.  The Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh Report on                        
25th April, 2014.  
  
3. The Report was considered and adop ted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 11th August, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh Report of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11 August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Issues related to Paid News ’ relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha  on 6.05.2013 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 7.05.2013.  The Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  and are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15 and 18.  
   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 17  
   
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and which require 
reiteration:  
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  6   
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies  are of 
interim nature:  
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 8, 11, 13, 14 and 16.  
   
   
 
  

2 
 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of the Report shall be furnished to 
them at an early date.    
5. In the 47 th Report (15th LS), the Committee had extensively examined various aspects of 
Paid News and its ramifications on different sections of society. The major recommendations of 
the Committee  included, formulating a viable and  enforceable mechanism to curb  the 
menace of paid news, framing of guideline/code to demarcate b etween “Advertisements and 
News”, need for defining Paid News , reviewing the working conditions for media personnel , 
enforcing guidelines/code for bringing transparency in “ Private Treaties” , framing  rules to for 
regulate cross media holdings, implementation of proposals made by the Election Commission 
of India, strengthening of Press Council of India, etc.  Majority of the recommendations made in 
the 47th Report ha ve been accepted by the Government.  The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this Report.  
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations.  
 
Manifestation of “Paid News” 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1 and 2) 
7. In their original Report, the Committee had observed with concern that certain sections of 
the media have started reciveing monetary or other benefits for publishing or broadcasting in 
favour of individuals/organizations/corportate entities, what is  commonly being referred to as 
Paid News and it has spread  at remarkable pace in some sections of the media.  The 
phenomenon has the effect of unduly influencing the financial/stock/real estate ma rket, health, 
industry and influencing public opinion in election process.  The Committee found that Paid 
News is not limited to corruption of individual journalists instead  has become complex and 
‘organised’ involving multiple players like journalists, m anager/owners of media companies, 
corporations, public relations firms/advertising agencies  and some sections of the political class. 
The Committee further noted that although the Election Commission ha d started noticing the 
menace of Paid News as early a s 2004 General Electi ons itself, the malpractice of Paid News  
surfaced prominently during General Elections of 2009 and thereafter.  Even though the menace 
of ‘Paid News’ has been in practice and visible for long, the Committee found that the Ministry 

3 
 
 
 
of I nformation and Broadcasting  had not done anything substantial  to check the menace.   
While feeling seriously concered over the ways the menace has manifested, the Committee 
apprehended that if it was not curtailed at this juncture, it would assume  gigan tic proportions. 
The Committee, therefore,  had recommended the Ministry  to act swiftly on the issue of ‘Paid 
News’ on priority basis  and come out with a viable and enforceable mechanism so that this 
menace is curbed at the earliest.  
 
8. In their Action  Taken Notes, the Ministry have  inter-alia stated that the issue of 
formulating a comprehensive policy and institutional mechanism to addre ss the phenomenom of 
Paid News is under consideration of the Government.   The Ministry of I&B are o f the view that 
any action  on Paid News  through legislative action would require Parliamentary approval for 
which  political consensus is a pre -requisite.  Accordingly, Ministry of I&B have submitted a 
note to the Ministry of Law and Justice on issues namely, (a) Representation of the People Act, 
1951, be amended to make incidence of Paid News  a punishable electoral  malpractice and (b) 
The PCI must be fully empowered  to adjudica te the complaints of Paid News  and give final 
judgement  in the matter.   On the basis of examination by the Ministry of Law and Justice, the 
issues would be considered further and if required the proposal would be submitted for approval 
of the Cabinet accordingly.   The Ministry have further stated that based on the recommenda tion 
of the Standing Committee on Information Technolgy ‘Press and Registration of Book and 
Publications Bill’, inclusion of provisons in the Bill to check the incidents of Paid News has been 
proposed.   
 
9. The Committee note that the Government in princi ple have accepted the 
recommendation of the Committee to forumulate a comprehensive  policy and institutional 
mechanism  to address the phenomenon of Paid News.  In this regard, the Ministry of I&B 
had submitted notes on the issues for amendment in the Representation of People Act, 1951 
and the Press Council Act, 1978 to the Ministry of Law and Justice for examination.  It is, 
however, disquieting to note that despite lapse of considerable time, there has been no 
tangible progress in the policy making front.  The Committee desire that the administrative 
Ministry, i.e. the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , should urgently take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Law and Justice for expeditious examination of the p roposal 
for amendment of the Representation of People Act, 1951 to make  Paid News a punishable 
electoral malpractice  and also empowering the Press Council of India to adjudicate the 
complaints of Paid News and give final judgement in the matter.  The Committee further 

4 
 
 
 
desire that  after obtaining the viewpoint of the Ministry of Law and Justice, the Ministry 
should swiftly act in the direction of placing the matter before the Cabinet  and thereafter 
initiate legislative action for formulating appropriate p olicy to curb Paid News.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the conclusive action taken in the matter within a 
period of six months.   
 
 
A. Working conditions of Media personnel – contractual employment; wage scenario and 
Editorial Section v/s Management/Owners of Media Houses 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 6) 
10. Taking into account the pathetic woking conditions of the significant part of the 
media personnel, in their original Report, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Paid News  is not only the outcome of the 
convergence of the editorial, advertising, public relations (PR), lobbying group 
and the ‘industry’ but is also due to the decline in independence of the 
journalists/reporters. In this regard, the Committee fee l that the emergence of 
contract system of employment is the primary cause for erosion of the 
independence of journalists/reporters as the system has the affect of reducing 
their status to mere marketing agents. According to PCI, the journalists are often 
under pressure to show ‘results’ till the renewal of contract which is often 
uncertain and they are under fear of an ‘abrupt transfer’ without having choice 
of freedom and there are numerous instances of exploitation of journalists under 
the contractual sy stem of employment. The Committee also note that the 
decisive role of Editors of the Media have been dampened by the interference of 
the marketing departments and owners of the media houses. The Committee 
note from the Report of PCI’s Sub-Committee on ‘Election, Coverage, Monitoring 
in Gujarat’, according to which, several Editors and Journalists have accepted 
that Paid News contract deals are signed at the top level and they get time to 
time ‘instructions’ to carry a particular news item or photograph whic h is 
contrary to the provision of Para 37 (A) of Norms of Journalistic Conduct by PCI 
relating to Management -Editor Relationship which in essence provides that the 
editor under no circumstance can be asked by the proprietor to serve his private 
interests.  
 
Another related issue that has plagued the working conditions of 
Journalists/Reporters, is that of wage/salary of the media personnel. The 
Committee find that journalists on contractual system, may be except in big 
cities, are paid very meagre wages whic h could be less than even the minimum 
wages prescribed by the Government, or sometimes paid commission on given 
fixed targets for business/ advertisements. In addition, some of the media 

5 
 
 
 
houses even use stringers who are given the I -cards of the media hous e and are 
expected to earn for themselves and for that particular media house by way of 
collecting advertisements.  
 
Taking a holistic view of the scenario, the Committee feel perturbed at the 
pathetic working conditions of the significant part of the medi a personnel while 
strongly disapproving the tendency of the media houses to hire and fire. The 
Committee strongly feel that contract employment should not be used as a tool 
for attraction/allurement. Sharing the concerns about the mounting pressure on 
the Editorial/Journalists/Reporters compelling them to indulge in Paid News  
phenomenon, the Committee are inclined to conclude that inspite of having 
several guidelines for segregating Editor and Management/Owners, the same 
are not being enforced efficiently. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government/concerned regulatory bodies should take all necessary steps for 
improving the working conditions of the journalists/media personnel and also 
ensure that the autonomy of the editorial staff is upheld f orth with. More 
importantly, the media houses will have to rise to the occasion and act. The 
Committee desire that all the employees of media houses should be covered 
under the Working Journalists Act and be given the protection under the various 
provisions of the Act. The Committee also feel that there is a need for 
constitution of Media Commission to review the working conditions for media 
personnel i.e. covering print and electronic media. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry while takin g into consideration all these factors 
should formulate the regulatory mechanism and make provisions for periodic 
review of the working scenario/wage conditions of media personnel. The 
Committee would like the Government to apprise them about the specific action 
taken in the matter.” 
 
11. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the ir Action Taken Note have 
stated as under:- 
 
“The Working Journalists and Other Newspapers Employees (Condition of 
Service and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1955’ provide s for fixing/revisiting of 
wages and for regulating service conditions of working journalists and non -
journalist newspaper employees. Under section 9 and 13C of  ‘The Working 
Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955’,  the Wage Boards are constituted by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment having representatives of employees, 
employers and independent members.   The guiding principle for wage fixation is 
the capacity of the employer.   
 
The Act defines ‘Working Journalist’ as a person whose principal avocation is that 
of a journalist and who is employed as such either whole-time or part-time, in, or 
in relation to one or more newspaper establishment and includes an editor, a 
leader, writer, new s-editor, sub -editor, feature -writer, copy -tester, reporter, 
correspondent, cartoonist, news -photographer and proof -reader but does not 

6 
 
 
 
include any such person who is employed mainly in a managerial, administrative 
or supervisory capacity.”  
 
12. While noting the pathetic working conditions of a significant section of the media 
personnel, poor wage scenario of some segment s of media personnel, pressures of 
Management/Media owners on Editorial sections, etc., the Committee had recommended 
that the Government/regulatory bodies concerned should take necessary steps for improving 
the working conditions of media personnel. In this context , the Committee had also 
expressed the need for constitution of  a Media Commission to review the working conditions 
of Media personnel.  The Committee, however, note that the  Action Taken Notes furnished 
by  the Ministry have merely referred to the existing provisions of ‘The Working Journalists 
and Other Newspapers Employees (Condition s of Service and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 
1955’ and definition of  ‘Working Journalist’ as enumerated in the said Act.  The Committee 
need hardly emphasize the fact that the existing Act/Provisions were found inadequate to 
address the concern expressed  by the Committee for the working conditions of the Media 
personnel.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to work out a holistic solution to 
improve the working conditions of both Print and Electronic Media personnel . The 
Committee further note that the Action Taken Note of the Ministry  is also silent on the 
constitution of  a Media Commission.  Expressing their displeasure over the inaction in the 
matter, the Committee call upon the Ministry to apprise them of the steps taken to constitute 
a Media Commission within a period of three months. 
 
B. Private Treaties  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
13. On the issue of Private Treaties, the Committee in the original Report had 
recommended as under:- 
 
“ The Committee note that ‘Private Treaties’ between the media companies and 
corporate entities is one of the most danger ous manifestation/precursor of Paid 
News. ‘Private Treaties’ is referred to as an agreement between the media 
company and another non -media company in which the latter tr ansfers certain 
shares of the company to the former in lieu of Advertisements, space and 
favourable coverage. The Committee note that the phenomenon blatantly 
violates the journalistic ethics and gives rise to the menace/malpractice of ‘Paid 
News’/’Advertorials’. Today, this phenomenon which was initially devised for 
marketing, has reached the level of giving favourable coverage/editorial and 
adverse comments against the opponents. The Committee note that the gravity 

7 
 
 
 
of the problem has been realised by all who have made their submissions to this 
Committee and everybody including self regulatory bodies and SEBI have 
advocated that every media house must mandatorily disclose to the public on its 
website about any shareholding, investment equity participation o r financial 
interest/conflict of interest of any nature whatsoever including specifically 
‘Private Treaties’. Considering the adverse impact of ‘Private Treatise’ in 
independence of journalists/editors/media professionals an d giving rise to the 
menace of Paid News, directly and indirectly, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry/regulatory bodies to strictly enforce all the existing 
guidelines/codes for bringing transparency in ‘Private Treaties’, thereby curbing 
paid news to a great extent. Shortcomi ngs identified in the existing 
guidelines/legislations should be taken up for revision.” 
 
14. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the ir Action Taken Note have stated as 
under:- 
 
“The PCI has advised Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI) to initiate steps to 
tackle Paid News in ‘Private Treatise’ in Securities field and it has also sensitized 
the media on this matter.” 
 
15. Considering the adverse impact of ‘Private Treatise’ on the independence of 
journalists/editors/media professionals and its effect in encouraging the menace of Paid 
News directly or indirectly, the Committee had recommended  to the Ministry/regula tory 
bodies to strictly enforce all the existing guidelines/codes for bringing transparency in 
‘Private Treaties’ and to identify and revis e the short comings in the existing 
guidelines/legislations. The Committee note that the Press Council of India ( PCI) has advised 
the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI) to initiate steps for tackling Paid News in 
‘Private Treatise’ in Securities field and it has also sensitized the media on this matter. The 
Committee trust that bringing transparency in ‘Private Treaties’ will curb paid news to a great 
extent.   The Committee desire to be apprised of the concrete steps taken by SEBI  in this 
regard so that the shortcomings identified in the existing guidelines/legislations should be 
taken up for revision at the earliest.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
 
C. International practices  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
16.  In respect of global practices followed for Paid News, the Committee, in their original 
Report had recommened as under:- 
 
“To have a better understanding of the international practice with regard to Paid News, 
effectiveness of self regulation and the oversight mechanism, the Committee asked the 
Ministry about the international position. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry 
that India’s Self regulatory initiative is in line with the international best practices seen in 
developed countries such as USA, UK and Germany where they are known as SROs  (Self 
Regulatory Organisations). The Committee are however, concerned to note that neither the 
Ministry nor any Self regulatory body viz. PCI/NBA, etc, has conducted any study to evaluate the 
mechanism adopted by other countries to tackle the menace of Paid News. Even with regard to 
the existing mechanism to regulate media, they did not provide any information. However, the 
Committee note that the issue of culture, ethics malpractice in media has engaged serious 
attention worldwide. Very recently, an enqui ry Commission under Lord Justice Leveson was set 
up by the UK Government. Hon’ble Justice Leveson conducted an enquiry into the culture, 
practices and ethics of the press and submitted his Report in November, 2012. In this Report 
various issues viz. regula tory models for future, protecting journalists, access to information, 
media employment, press and politics, plurality and media ownership, etc. have been dealt 
with. The Committee note from the implementation status of the Justice Leveson Report that 
after the publication of the Report there were mixed reactions and there were cross -party 
discussions on how to implement the proposals of the Report. Reportedly the Government of 
UK will go ahead with the establishment of a body which will approve press regul ators and the 
Leveson proposals will be put before the privy council which would meet on 8 th May, 2013 for 
approval and then move on to the Queen for the final seal. Considering the post presentation 
developments of Leveson Report and in view of the ills, including Paid News , afflicting the 
Indian media, the Committee expect the Ministry to consider the recommendations and the 
developments associated with Leveson Report while dealing with the issue.”  
 
17.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their Action Taken Note have as under:- 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has taken cognizance of the Regulatory 
model recommended by the Leveson Report and in order to formulate a structured response to 
the recommendations and the developments associated with the Leveson Report, the Ministry 
has convened a meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Members of Parliament attached 
to the Ministry for discussion on the subject ‘Leveson Report and its relevance qua Indian 
milieu’.  The preliminary views of the members of the Consultative Committee on the Leveson 
Report have been obtained and it has been observed that the regulatory models in other 
democratic countries are also required to be studied.’’ 

9 
 
 
 
18.  Taking into account the recommendations made by  the ’Leveson Report’, an enquiry 
Commission set up by the UK Gov ernment and headed by Lord Justice Leveson which 
enquired into the culture, practices and ethics of the Press, the Committee had 
recommended to the Ministry to consider the recommendations of the said Report in view of 
the ills afflicting the Indian media.  The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting have taken cognizance of the Regulatory Model recommended by the ‘Leveson 
Report’. In order to formulate a structured response to the recommendations and the 
developments associated with  the Leveson Report, the Ministry ha d convened a meeting of 
the Consultative Committee of the Members of Parliament attached to the Ministry for 
discussion on the subject ‘Leveson Report and it s relev ance qua Indian milieu’ . Further , 
preliminary views on the Report were   also obtained from the Members and it was observed   
that the regulatory models in other democratic countries are also required to be studied. The  
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps to initiate such studies and 
apprise them about their findings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Grants for the year 2013-14 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1) 
Media plays a significant role in a democracy not only because it voices concern of the 
people but also it reflects the true picture of the country’s social, cultural, economic and 
political set up. It is therefore, considered as the fourth pillar o f democracy which not only acts 
as a repository of public trust but also plays a significant role in influencing the human mind. 
The Committee, therefore, feel that it is of paramount importance that various 
news/informative programmes delivered by the med ia through various modes like newspaper, 
radio, television, internet, mobile phone etc. are factual, neutral, fair and objective. The 
Committee are, however, deeply concerned to note that certain sections of the media have 
started receiving monetary or oth er benefits for publishing or broadcasting in favour of 
individuals/ organisations/ corporate entities, what is commonly being referred to as ‘Paid 
News’ and it has spread at remarkable pace in some sections of the media. The phenomenon 
has the effect of u nduly influencing the financial/stock/real estate market, health, industry and 
influencing public opinion in election process. The Committee find it disturbing that Paid News’ 
is not limited to corruption of individual journalists instead has become comple x and 
‘organized’ involving multiple players like journalists, managers/owners of media companies, 
corporations, public relations firms/advertising agencies and some sections of the political 
class. Feeling extremely concerned over the way the media has be come compromised and the 
urgency required to curb the menace the Committee took up this subject for detailed 
examination.  
 
During the course of examination of the subject the Committee came across startling 
revelations that ‘Paid News’ is not only an elec tion time phenomenon but happens everyday 
and is prolific as launching/marketing of products/organisations/individuals happens around 
the year and advertisement for these are disguised and presented as full pages of 
‘news’/’advertorials’. Even though the C ommittee note that the entire gamut of 
organisations/authorities like the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Press Council of 
India, Election Commission of India, News Broadcasters Association, Editors Guild of India, 
Prasar Bharati as well as vario us eminent personalities have acknowledged the menace of ‘Paid 
News’ and have impressed upon the need to take remedial measures, yet, the Committee find 
it astonishing that a large section of media is completely silent on this malpractice. As detailed 
in s ucceeding paragraphs, the Government has not taken effective and conclusive action to 
deal with the menace. Role of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
 
The Committee note that it is the mandate of the Ministry to create enabling 
environment and set up policy framework for healthy development of various mass media like 
radio, television, films, press and print publications, advertising and traditional modes of 
communication. Therefore, the Ministry has an important role to play in ensuring that 
news/information made available to the public is factual, neutral, fair and objective. Even 
though the menace of ‘Paid News’ has been in practice and visible for long, the Committee find 

11 
 
 
 
it disconcerting that the Ministry has not done anything substantial to  check the menace as has 
been witnessed by the Committee during examination of this subject including interactions 
with the stakeholders across a wide spectrum. Inspite of upsurge of numerous instances of 
‘Paid News’ since last decade, a suitable, concrete  and enforceable mechanism is yet to be put 
in place by the Government. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting with all policy framework/statutory resources at its disposal has failed to 
discharge its responsibility. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to act 
swiftly on the issue of paid news on priority basis and come out with viable and enforceable 
mechanism so that this menace is curbed at the earliest. The Committee would await specific 
action taken by the Government in this regard within 6 months of presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government is concerned with the issue of paid news and is taking steps to check 
the menace of paid news.  Since the issue is media -sensitive and requires extensive 
consultations, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was constituted under the chairmanship of the 
former Finance Minister to examine the recommendations made by Press Council of India (PCI) 
in its Report on Paid News to give views on a comprehensive policy and institutional mechanism 
to address the phenomenon.  The GoM deliberated upon the issue in its two meetings.  Upon 
elevation of the former Finance Minister as Hon’ble President of India, the GoM was not re -
constituted.  However, the  Ministry of I&B is of the view that any action on paid news through 
legislative action would require parliamentary approval for which political consensus is a pre -
requisite.  The Ministry, therefore requested Cabinet Secretariat to re -constitute a dedicat ed 
GoM on Paid News or alternatively assign it as an additional Term of Reference (ToR) for the 
GoM on Media.  However, it has been decided that note on following issues may be forwarded 
to the M/o Law & Justice for examination and to submit a note to M/o I&B: 
 
Representation of the People Act, 1951, be amended to make incidence of Paid News a 
punishable electoral malpractice. 
The PCI must be fully empowered to adjudicate the complaints of ‘Paid News’ and give 
final judgement in the matter. 
 
Thereafter, M/o I&B may move an appropriate note to the Cabinet. 
 
Accordingly, notes on the issues have been forwarded by M/o I&B to the M/o Law & 
Justice.  On the basis of the examination by the M/o Law &  Justice, the issues would be 
considered further and if required, the proposal would be submitted for approval of the 
Cabinet, accordingly.    
 
Besides, based on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology on ‘Press and Registra tion of Books and Publications Bill’, inclusion of provisions in 
the Bill to check the incidents of Paid News has been proposed. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
Genesis and manifestation of ‘Paid News  
 
 (Recommendations Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that in post -independence era, the media developed in a healthy 
manner and continued the same way for a couple of decades and then started deteriorating 
after it became much powerful. Everybody realised that the press is the important so urce of 
reaching to the people because its credibility was very high. This is the background in which the 
candidates who were contesting the elections realised that influencing media by one way or the 
other would be more productive than paying for other so urces like advertisements and other 
means of publicity, thereby paving way for this malpractice. The Committee note that although 
the Election Commission had started noticing the menace as early as 2004 General Elections 
itself, the malpractice of ‘Paid News’ surfaced prominently during General Elections of 2009 and 
thereafter. The Committee also note during the last 2 decades apart from print media, 
television which is commonly known as electronic media has emerged strongly and has become 
increasingly corp oratized and greater emphasis is on the business and other commercial 
aspects. Moreover, the traditional practice of having completely insulated offices of the Editor 
and the Publisher to preserve the autonomy and independence of the media also appears to 
have been compromised.  
 
As informed by the Press Council of India (PCI), the Committee note that over last six 
decades ‘Paid News’ have changed its form ranging from accepting gifts on various occasions, 
going on a sponsored foreign and domestic tour, to other benefits and direct payment of 
money. The Committee are highly perturbed to learn about another form of paid news i.e. that 
award ceremonies being sponsored by some media houses wherein 
industrialists/professionals/personalities who are the sponsors/ regular advertisers for their 
media houses, are awarded. Sometimes, a kind of indirect blackmailing is resorted to by some 
sections of the media by not giving any kind of publicity to a contesting candidate until he pays 
or on some occasions giving more fa vourable publicity to someone on account of personal 
relationships. Other damaging manifestation of ‘Paid News’ that has emerged during the course 
of examination is the nexus between media and other corporate in the form of ‘Private 
Treaties’. While feelin g seriously concerned over the ways the menace has manifested, the 
Committee apprehend that if it is not curtailed at this juncture it would assume gigantic 
proportions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should meticulously 
formulate a mechanism to tackle paid news after taking into consideration all its forms, facets 
and dimensions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of formulating a comprehensive policy and institutional mechanism to address 
the phenomenon of paid news is under consideration of the Government.  The related aspects 
of the issue were also deliberated by the Group of Ministers (GoM) on Paid New s.  Ministry of 

13 
 
 
 
I&B is of the view that any action on paid news through legislative action would require 
parliamentary approval for which political consensus is a pre -requisite.  Accordingly, M/o I&B 
has submitted notes on the related issues for amendment in the Representation of People Act, 
1951 and the Press Council Act, 1978 to the M/o Law & Justice for examination .  On the basis 
of the examination by the M/o Law & Justice, the issues would be considered further and if 
required, the proposal would be submitted for approval of the Cabinet, accordingly.    
 
Besides, based on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
on ‘Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill’, inclusion of provisions in the Bill to 
check the incidents of Paid News has been proposed. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press                      
Dated 25.04.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  9 of Chapter I) 
 
Distinction between ‘News’ and ‘Advertisements’  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that primarily there is no difference between an advertisement 
and ‘Paid News’ except that in the case of latter it does not appear as if it is an advertisement. 
Therefore, it becomes very difficult to understand whether a particular programme/review/ 
talk show/advertorial is a legitimate one or paid by someone to unduly influence public opinion. 
The Committee also note that even if paid content has been labelled as advertise ments it is 
done in a very small font and that too with the abbreviation ‘Advt.’ in some corner of the 
paper/screen. In print media most of the times the type face and the font size are the same in 
print and in electronic media the scroll/ticker is too sma ll to be noticed. In case of radio it is 
disguised by not announcing about the programme being sponsored. In this regard, the 
Committee note that for electronic media there is Rule 7(10) under Advertisement Code of 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Ru les, 1994 formulated under the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 according to which all advertisements should be clearly 
distinguishable from the programme and should not in any manner interfere with the 
programmes. In addition, there is als o Rule 6(1)(d) under Programme Code which states that 
‘No programme should be carried in the cable service which contains anything obscene, 
defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half truth’. The Committee, 
however, find that these guid elines are not being strictly enforced and the Ministry has also 
acknowledged that Advertising and Programme Code is not being strictly followed by various 
publications/channels. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an imperative need for 
evolving a mechanism which would ensure a clear demarcation as to what is an advertisement 
and what is not an advertisement. 
 

14 
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take necessary steps for strict 
enforcement of the existing provisions for demarcating between ‘advertisements’ and ‘news’ 
by the media houses. The Committee would like the Government to ensure that in case of Print 
Media, the word ‘ADVERTISEMENT’ should be in different letter and highlighted in such a way 
that it catches the eye of the read er instantly. Besides, there should be a disclaimer in this 
regard. In case of Electronic Media, the word ‘Advertorial’ must remain superimposed during 
entire transmission of such advertorial. Besides, there should be announcement of the 
sponsorship before and after each break of the programme, particularly for visually challenged 
audience. The Committee also endorse the suggestion from a stakeholder that the text ‘This 
show is an advertisement’ along with the name of the sponsor should remain superimposed for 
the entire duration of the show at the top centre of the screen in a font size that is the same as 
the font size of the name of the News channel. In case of Radio, there should be an 
announcement that ‘this show is sponsored by so and so’ at a regular interval/break. The 
Committee are of strong opinion that an enforceable guideline/code to demarcate between 
‘advertisements’ and ‘news’ would not only save the common public from being 
cheated/misguided but would also act as the stepping stone in the direc tion of curbing the 
malpractice of ‘Paid News’. The Committee recommend that these suggestions which do not 
require any policy decision or amendment in any legislation should be implemented in letter 
and spirit, without any further loss of time.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
So far as the Print Media is concerned, the Press Council of India, under section 13(2)(b) 
of the Press Council Act, 1978 has formed Norms of Journalistic Conduct for adherence by the 
Media.   The Norm 36(vi) prescribes that advertisements must be clearly distinguishable from 
the editorial matter carried in the newspaper.  As far as news is concerned, it must always carry 
a credit line and should be set in a typeface that would distinguish it from advertisements. 
 
Regarding electronic media, the recommendation is accepted and is being conveyed to 
industry bodies like IBF (Indian Broadcasting Foundation), NBA (News Broadcasters 
Association), ASCI (Advertising Standards Council of India), ARTBI (Association of Regional 
Television Broadcasters of Ind ia), AROI (Association of Radio Operators of India) and Prasar 
Bharati for implementation. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
Need for defining ‘Paid News’  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 4) 
Taking note of the increasing trend of presenting advertisements in the garb of news, 
the Committee firmly believe that there is an urgent need for having a comprehensive 
definition for ‘Paid News’ so that ‘News’ and ‘Advertisement’ can be clearly demarcated. 
However, with the complexities of ‘Paid News’ syndrome and its changing forms and 
manifestations, the challenge continues to be in defining and determining what constitutes or 
qualifies as ‘Paid News’. The Committee, therefore, recommen d that the Ministry, instead of 
blindly endorsing the definition provided by Press Council of India, should in consultation with 
various stakeholders formulate a comprehensive definition covering all its forms and 
manifestations which clearly segregate ‘ne ws’ from ‘advertisement’ and giving the same a legal 
formulation so that it can be distinctly identified for appropriate action. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Press Council of India (PCI) is a statutory autonomous body set up under the Press 
Council Act, 1978 with twin objectives to preserve the freedom of press and to maintain and 
improve the standards of the newspapers and news agencies in the country.  Th e PCI has also 
comprehensively deliberated upon the issue of paid news and has released its ‘Report on Paid 
News’.  The Report defines Paid News as "Any news or analysis appearing in any media (Print & 
Electronic) for a price in cash or kind as considerati on".  The PCI has also set up a Sub -
Committee to re-visit the issue of ‘Paid News’ including the definition accorded to it.  However, 
the issue of re-visiting the definition of ‘Paid News’ has not been finalized by PCI. 
 
The M/o I&B has submitted a note to  the M/o Law & Justice to examine the issue 
regarding amendment of the Representation of People Act, 1951 to make the incidence of paid 
news a punishable electoral malpractice.  The incorporation of specific provisions relating to 
paid news in the RP Act, 1951 would involve legal formulation of the definition of election time 
paid news.      
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
Complexities involved in establishing ‘Paid News’ acts  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee note that because of the clandestine financial transactions involved in 
‘Paid News’ it becomes extremely difficult to establish the violation per se, and therefore it 
becomes difficult to prove the menace particularly in case of visual media.  The Committee also 

16 
 
 
 
note that because of the complexities involved, ‘circumstantial evidence’ forms the basis of 
consideration for proving this malpractice. For instance, during elections a channel may simply 
ignore a contesting candidate if he has not ‘pa id’ and this is more difficult to pin down as a 
malpractice by the authorities namely, Press Council of India (PCI) or Election Commission of 
India (ECI). Further, as the visual media coverage is transitory in nature, malpractice indulged 
may escape detect ion. The Committee also find that in case of Electronic media the main 
problem lies in retrieving the information/footage of the stored programme as currently there 
is no mechanism to classify/catalogue the programme which are stored thereby hindering the 
verification of the violation because it is difficult to prove the menace.  
 
According to PCI’s sub -Committee Report (2010) on ‘Paid News’, though the 
phenomena of widespread practice of ‘Paid News’ has been verbally confirmed and vindicated 
by politicians and campaign managers of political parties, there is no recorded documentation 
that could finally establish that there has been an exchange of money between media 
houses/advertisement agents/journalists and politicians/political parties. The Committee als o 
note that as per the existing mechanism, on receipt of a complaint of ‘Paid News’ it would be 
looked into by the respective agency i.e. PCI in respect of complaints relating to Print Media 
and inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) in respect of content on satellite TV channels.  
 
Considering the fact that there is no straight jacket methodology for establishing this 
malpractice, the Committee urge the Ministry to brainstorm on this issue and put forward 
innovative solutions to consider and establish ‘circumst antial evidence’ in proving the menace. 
The Committee also desire the Ministry to consider the suggestion that there should be a team 
of experts specifically for analyzing the coverage pattern and if any unusualness is noticed in 
the coverage pattern, the concerned regulatory body should immediately swing into action. On 
the issue of retrieving the data/programme in electronic media for proving the case, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with Prasar Bharati and other experts 
in the field, should evolve a mechanism for taking appropriate action on the available 
circumstantial evidence to establish the act of ‘Paid News’ in electronic media.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All Television channels are required to give an undertaking that th ey would abide by the 
Programme Code and Advertisement Code as provided in the Cable Television Networks 
Regulation Act 1995. However, ‘Paid News’ has not been defined in the Programme and 
Advertising Codes. Therefore, instances of ‘Paid News’ are not adeq uately covered. If ‘Paid 
News’ is to be brought under the purview of the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 
1995, the Act would be required to be amended.   In this regard, Ministry is in process of 
amending the Press and Registration of Books Act,  1867 wherein effort has also been made to 
incorporate the definition of Paid News. Once such amendments receive the consent of the 
parliament, the Ministry would be in a position to carry out amendment in the Programme 

17 
 
 
 
Code to incorporate similar definiti on of Paid News.  A view would be taken thereafter in the 
Ministry. 
 
With regard to instances of paid news during Election time, it is pertinent to point out 
that the Election Commission of India is empowered under the People’s Representation Act, 
1951, as  amended from time to time (such as section 39 A, 126, 127 A, etc) to take action 
against all such cases of paid news appearing in Print as well as Electronic Media. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
Private Treaties 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that ‘Private Treaties’ between the media companies and 
corporate entities is one of the most dangerous manifestation/precursor of ‘Paid News’. 
‘Private Treaties’ is referred to as an agreement between the media company and another non -
media company in which the latter transfers certain shares of the company to the former in lieu 
of Advertisements, space and favourable coverage. The Committee note that the phenomeno n 
blatantly violates the journalistic ethics and gives rise to the menace/malpractice of ‘Paid 
News’/’Advertorials’. Today, this phenomenon which was initially devised for marketing, has 
reached the level of giving favourable coverage/editorial and adverse  comments against the 
opponents. The Committee note that the gravity of the problem has been realised by all who 
have made their submissions to this Committee and everybody including self regulatory bodies 
and SEBI have advocated that every media house mus t mandatorily disclose to the public on its 
website about any shareholding, investment equity participation or financial interest/conflict of 
interest of any nature whatsoever including specifically ‘Private Treaties’. Considering the 
adverse impact of ‘Pr ivate Treatise’ in independence of journalists/editors/media professionals 
and giving rise to the menace of ‘Paid News’, directly and indirectly, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry/regulatory bodies to strictly enforce all the existing guideline s/codes 
for bringing transparency in ‘Private Treaties’, thereby curbing paid news to a great extent. 
Shortcomings identified in the existing guidelines/legislations should be taken up for revision. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The PCI has advised Securities E xchange Board of India (SEBI) to initiate steps to tackle 
Paid News in ‘Private Treatise’ in Securities field and it has also sensitized the media on this 
matter. 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 

18 
 
 
 
Paid News and its implications on Electoral Process  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
 The Committee note that the increasing trend of presenting paid content as 
news/editorial/talkshow/review is not only a serious fraud on the innocent 
audiences/readers/viewers/public but is also a threat to the democratic process. The 
Committee find it ver y disturbing that the malpractice of ‘Paid News’, which surfaced 
prominently during 2009 General Elections, is on the rise and has affected the entire country. 
The PCI’s Sub-Committee Report on 2009 General Elections contains some shocking revelations 
indicating that media, which is considered as the fourth pillar of democracy, has its nose dipped 
in various clandestine operations including ‘Paid News’. The Committee are startled with the 
revelation of PCI’s fact finding team on Gujarat Election (2012) wher ein they have cited 126 
confirmed cases of Paid News with 61 candidates in the poll fray admitting to have paid for 
such news. The situation becomes more alarming in light of the District Level Media 
Certification and Monitoring Committee’s observation tha t during Gujarat election 414 cases of 
paid news were confirmed. The Committee are alarmed to note that sections of media are 
deeply involved in the business of ‘Paid News’ and have started distributing rate 
cards/packages for not merely praising a particu lar candidate but also for criticizing their 
political opponents. Worse is the situation that if the candidates do not go along with such 
blackmailing/extortionist practice of the media they are denied coverage. The Committee note 
that there could be cases  where there is no payment as such but still it may lead to 
negative/vindictive action for non -payment. The Committee, therefore, feel that this 
phenomenon has not only threatened our democratic set up but also added to the money 
power in politics in the Country.  
 
As regards the remedial measures to curb the menace, the Committee note that there 
has been suggestions from various quarters to amend the Representation of the People Act, 
1951 so as to make ‘Paid News’ a cognisable, punishable and electoral offence. The Committee 
find that the Election Commission of India has also favoured necessary changes in the law for 
strict prevention of this malpractice and has made reference to the Law Ministry in the year 
2011 to include ‘Paid News’ in the category of corrupt prac tices under the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951. The Commission has also recommended to include publishing and 
abetting of publishing of ‘Paid News’ for furthering the prospects of election of any candidate 
as an electoral offence under Chapter III of Part VII of the 1951 Act, with exemplary punishment 
of a minimum of two years imprisonment. The Committee are, however, concerned to note 
that the proposal is still pending with the Ministry of Law and Justice.  
 
Other suggestions from various stakehold ers to curb this malaise include -imposing ban 
on print media too for carrying election campaign 48 hours before polling is scheduled as is 
applicable for television channels and radio stations; increasing the ceiling/limit on electoral 

19 
 
 
 
expense of candidat es; having different ceilings for national parties and for State/ regional 
parties; Setting up a special cell by EC with nomination from media to receive complaints about 
‘paid news’ in the run-up to elections with a time limit of action, reviewing the pos sibility that a 
candidate can be trapped by other candidate by issuing notices and remedial provisions to take 
care of such mala -fide intention, etc. The Committee also note that PCI in its Sub -Committee 
Report on 2009 General Elections had suggested for a  mandatory disclosure, by all 
candidates/political parties, of equity stakes and/or financial interests in newspapers/television 
channels on which news about their candidates/parties as well as interviews with candidates 
and/or representatives of the political parties are published or broadcasted.  
 
Taking holistic view of the entire scenario the Committee note that the proposal made 
by the Election Commission is good one and merit urgent consideration of the Government for 
bringing appropriate amendment in  the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The 
Committee are of the firm view that there is an urgent need to review the election code of 
conduct and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as well as guidelines/rules framed 
thereunder so as to give m ore power to Election Commission to firmly deal with this menace. 
While considering the serious damage of ‘Paid News’ on electoral/democratic process, the 
Committee impress upon the Government to consider all their recommendations so as to put in 
place a c omprehensive mechanism to tackle the menace of ‘Paid News’ by making necessary 
provisions in the set Rules/Guidelines framed thereunder and making necessary changes in 
model Code of Conduct for elections. The Committee also urge the Ministry of Information  and 
Broadcasting to coordinate with the Ministry of Law and Justice for taking an early action on 
the proposals made by the Election Commission of India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Legislative Department, M/o Law & Justice has stated that a copy of the 47 th Report of 
the Standing Committee on Information Technology has been forwarded to the Law 
Commission of India for its consideration as the issue of electoral reforms in its entirety which 
inter alia  includes the issue of paid news in its crisper agenda, is under consideration of the 
Commission for suggesting comprehensive measures for change in the Law after taking into 
consideration the reports of various committees in the past, views of the Election Commission 
and other stakeholders.  Ministry of Law & Justice has stated that on receipt of 
recommendations of the Law Commission, the matter will further be examined in consultation 
with the stakeholders towards a suitable decision in the matter. 
 
Besides, M/o I&B has also sent a background note on the amend ment of the 
Representation of People Act, 1951 to make incidents of paid news a cognizable electoral 
malpractice with request to examine and submit a note to the M/o I&B.  
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H-11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 

20 
 
 
 
Existing Regulatory Mechanism  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee note that to deal with the Paid News malpractice, directly or indirectly, 
there are host of regulatory bodies/organisations/professional bodies viz. Press Council of India 
(PCI), News Broadcasters Association (NBA), Indian Broadcasters Federation (IBF), Advertising 
Standards Council of India, Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC – established by 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting) , Editors Guild of India (EGI) and several other self 
formed unions, associations, civil society, etc. With respect to guidelines/norms/codes/Acts, 
there are Working Journalists Act, NBA Code, IBF Guidelines, Advertising Standards Council of 
India guidelin es, PCI Act, DD Code for commercial advertising, the Press and Registration of 
Books and Publications Act, 1867, the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995, the 
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, Income Tax Act, 1961, the Companies Act, 1956, et c. 
However, the Committee’s findings reveal that none of these have proved effective enough to 
curb the menace of Paid News. The Press Council of India and Editors Guild of India have been 
candid in their admission that with their existing powers and manda te they can only exert 
moral pressure and cannot penalize media/ are not authorised to do so. They have repeatedly 
expressed their helplessness of being a body/organisation without teeth. Similarly, the Ministry 
themselves were frank enough to accept that the existing Advertising and Programme Code is 
not being followed strictly and there is no mechanism to enforce the Code to private 
channels/newspapers even during the election time. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
the Electronic Media Monitoring Ce ntre created by the Ministry to tackle violations of the 
Advertisement and Programme Code is only recommendatory in nature and has no power to 
take action. The Committee also note that District Level and State Level Monitoring Committee 
set up by the Elect ion Commission, existing in 276 Districts and 16 States, handle the ‘Paid 
News’ instances during election periods only and do not have power to take action against the 
media. Not only this, media themselves have come up with a body of their own viz. NBA fo r 
news and current affairs channels, IBF for non -news and general entertainment channels, ASCI 
for advertising.  
 
While agreeing to the basic principle that Media should be free from State control, the 
Committee at the same time strongly feel that self reg ulatory bodies have proved merely an 
eye wash. This feeling of the Committee gets firmed/strengthened in light of NBA’s submission 
that out of 198 complaints they have received since 2008, there are no complaints reported 
against ‘Paid News’. The specious plea of self regulatory bodies and the contention of the 
Ministry that the Self regulatory mechanisms alone can curb the menace is elusive and totally 
untenable. The Committee strongly feel that inspite of so many provisions to deal with the 
violations, the existing self regulatory bodies have abysmally failed to invoke the provisions and 
take appropriate deterrent action. The Committee, therefore, recommend that there is an 
urgent need to review the efficacy of the existing self regulatory bodies/code/Act etc. 
governing the media. The Committee also urge upon the Ministry to urgently chalk out a 

21 
 
 
 
comprehensive action plan on this crucial matter and also recommend the Ministry to ensure 
that till such time a structured mechanism is put in place, all the exist ing relevant provisions/ 
guidelines/ Acts/ Rules/ Codes are strictly enforced and followed by the concerned authorities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to para 2.22 of the report of Standing Committee, it is submitted that 
Electronic Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) has not been established with the purpose of 
taking action against TV channels for violations of Programme and Advertising codes.  EMMC is 
a body meant to monitor the violations of Programme and Advertising codes and bring them to 
the notice of the Ministry of I&B.  EMMC has a Scrutiny Committee, which comprises of several 
members of this Ministry as well as from NCW, NCPCR, CBFC, MHA, Prasar Bharati and an NGO. 
The Committee meets regularly and sends reports on violation to the Min istry of I&B.  The Inter 
Ministerial Committee of Ministry of I&B makes specific recommendations about the action to 
be taken in case violations against TV channels are proved.  Thereafter, Ministry of I&B takes 
action against such television channels after obtaining the approval of the competent authority.  
This mechanism has been working well for the past many years. During the period from 2010 to 
2013, Ministry of I&B has taken action in 77 cases of Violations. Of these 15 TV channels were 
taken off air,  8 TV channels were ordered to run an apology scroll, 54 TV channels have been 
issued warnings/ advisories/ directives.  It is pertinent to point out that a very well established 
mechanism, therefore, is in place to take care of any violation by a satellite channel. 
 
It is neither possible nor desirable for the Government to control or regulate the volume 
and diversity of content provided, which is increasingly getting localized. Any kind of a direct 
Government control is seen as violative of the right to f reedom of speech and expression 
enshrined in the Constitution.  
 
Efforts were made in the past to take regulation of content out of Government control 
by setting up an independent and autonomous authority to deal with the broadcasting sector in 
a comprehensive manner. The Bill for an independent regulatory authority was first introduced 
in 1997 but could not be carried through due to change of Government. Another attempt was 
made in the year 2001 with the introduction of the Convergence Bill of 2001 which a lso lapsed 
subsequently. In the year 2006 and 2007 two different drafts of Broadcasting Services 
Regulation Bill were attempted by the Government to set up an independent Broadcasting 
Regulatory Authority of India. However, this was vehemently opposed by the media industry.  
 
It has been argued by broadcasters that the Programme and Advertisement Codes are 
too brief and ambiguous and do not provide for self -regulation. Therefore, a Committee 
headed by the then Secretary (I&B) with representations from all s ections of society was set up 
by the Government to examine the amendments in the Codes. The Committee submitted its 
report on 5 th March, 2008 proposing the Draft of ‘Self Regulation Guidelines for the 

22 
 
 
 
Broadcasting Sector’ to replace the existing Programme and Advertising Codes by amending the 
Cable Rules under the existing Cable Act. The Committee suggested a three tier structure of 
regulation of content with two tiers of self regulation by the industry  and the third tier at the 
level of a Statutory Regulator. The first tier of self regulation would be at the level of the 
channel itself and the second tier at the level of a mechanism set up by the relevant industry 
association. The proposal envisaged coe xistence of self regulation with statutory regulation. 
However, concerns have been expressed by broadcasters on the need, scope and the 
mechanism of dealing with complaints relating to content issues as proposed in the Draft Self 
Regulation Guidelines.  
 
The broadcasters are more inclined towards self -regulation. Considering that content 
generation falls exclusively in the domain of broadcasters, self -regulation could be an effective 
mechanism for a healthy content regulation. Keeping this in mind, the Mini stry has consistently 
been taking up the matter with the stakeholders in the arena of content regulation and as a 
result of these efforts, the broadcasters have set up self-regulation mechanism.  
 
Self Regulation in case of News Channels 
 
The News Broadcas ters Association, as part of its self -regulation mechanism, has 
formulated a Code of Ethics and Broadcasting Standards covering a wide range of principles to 
self-regulate news broadcasting. NBA has also formulated News Broadcasting Standards 
Regulations. They have set up a Two - Tier structure to deal with content related complaints. At 
Tier I, complaints are dealt with by the individual broadcasters at their level. At Tier II, NBA has 
set up News Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA) in 2008.  
 
The objec t of the News Broadcasting Standards Authority includes entertaining and 
deciding complaints against or in respect of news broadcasters in so far as these relate to the 
content of any broadcast. The Authority consists of a Chairperson who is a retired Judg e of the 
Supreme Court and eight other members. Members of the Authority shall comprise 4(four) 
eminent editors employed with a broadcaster, 4 (four) persons having special knowledge 
and/or practical experience in the field of law, education, medicine, sci ence, literature, public 
administration, consumer affairs, environment, human psychology and/or culture. The NBSA is 
presently headed by Justice RV Raveendran, former Judge of Supreme Court of India.   The 
other 8 members are: 
Four Persons from Editor’s Category 
1. Mr. Rahul Kanwal, Managing Editor, Headlines Today. 
2. Mr. Vivek Law, Editor, Bloomberg TV India. 
3. Mr. Ajit Anjum, Managing Editor, News 24 
4. Mr. Johny Lukose, Director News, Manorama News 
  

23 
 
 
 
Four Eminent Persons 
1. Mr. Nitin Desai, Economist and Former Under Secretary General of United Nations  
2. Mr. Dipankar Gupta, Former Professor of Sociology, JNU University  
3. Mrs. Chokila Iyer, Former Foreign Secretary, Govt. of India 
4. Dr. S.Y. Quraishi, Former Election Commissioner of India 
 
During the last one year, NBSA met 9 times to review/consider 303 complaints which 
were received, including 89 references from this Ministry. 275 complaints were satisfactorily 
resolved at Tier 1 (i.e., by the member Broadcasters themselves). 28 complaints were finalized 
by NBSA. 
 
 Self- Regulation in case of Non- News (General Entertainment) Channels 
 
Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) has set up a mechanism for self -regulation in case 
of non -news channels after consultation with the Ministry. As part of this, I BF has laid down 
Content Code & Certification Rules 2011 covering an entire gamut of content -related principles 
and criterion for television broadcast.  
 
As part of this mechanism, a two -Tier based complaints redressal system has also bee n 
set up. At the Tier -I level, e ach Broadcaster shall set up a Standard and Practices (S&P) 
Department with a Content Auditor to deal with the complaints received for content aired on 
its channels.  
 
At the Tier II, which is the apex level, the Broadcast C ontent Complaints Council has 
been set up and made operational since 1.7.2011. The BCCC is a thirteen (13) Member body 
consisting of a Chairperson being retired Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court and 12 
other Members from various spheres of expertise.  
 
The BCCC until recently was headed by Justice (Rtd) Mukul Mudgal. The Four Eminent 
Persons on BCCC are 
 Prof Anand Kumar from Jawaharlal Nehru University  
 Mr. Vir Sanghvi, eminent journalist  
 Ms. Shabana Azmi, eminent actress and activist  
 Mr. Bhaskar Ghose, eminent theatre personality and a former bureaucrat 
Four members from the following National Statutory Commissions (as per subject of 
complaints) are: 
1. Ms. Shamina Shafiq, Member, National Commission for Women (NCW)  
2. Dr. P.L. Punia, Chairperson, National Commission for Schedule Castes (NCSC)  

24 
 
 
 
3. Ms. Dipa Dixit, Member, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) 
4. Mr. Wajahat Habibullah, Chairperson, National Commission for Minorities (NCM) 
5. Mr. S.K. Kharventhan, Member, National Commission for Backward Classes (NCBC) 
Four broadcast members are: 
 
1. Mr. Ashok Nambissan (Multi Screen Media) 
2. Mr. Sujeet Jain (Viacom 18) 
3. Mr. Nitin Keni (Zee Network) 
4. Mr. Deepak Jacob (STAR India) 
 
The BCCC has held 15 meetings during the period - July 2011 to July 2012. BCCC has so 
far received 6397 complaints. Out of total complaints received 717 complaints related to 
content violation relating to their members of which 197 complaints were not upheld. Action 
was taken in 528 cases.  
 
Self regulation of advertisements on TV channels  
 
With regard to regulation of advertisements on TV channels, the Code adopted by the 
Advertising Standards Council of India(ASCI), which is a self -regulatory body, has been 
incorporated in the Advertising Code stipulated in  Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act 
1995 and Rules framed thereunder.   ASCI has set up a Consumer a Complaints Council (CCC) to 
consider complaints in regard to advertisements.  The CCC currently has 21 members; 9 are 
from within the industry and 1 2 are from the civil society like well known doctors, lawyers, 
journalists, academicians consumer activists etc. 
 
Under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, this Ministry had issued an 
order dated 6 th September, 2005 designating the Distri ct Magistrates Sub -Divisional 
Magistrates and Commissioners of Police as ‘authorized officers’ to take action against violation 
of the Act. It was also directed to constitute a Monitoring Committee at the State and District 
level to review and deliberate o n the litany of complaints received by authorized officer or take 
suo-motu cognizance of violations transmitted and re -transmitted in the local channels. The 
Committee takes a decision on the matters referred to it.  So far State level Monitoring 
Committees have been set up in 18 States and 5 Union Territories.  District level Monitoring 
Committees have been constituted in 274 Districts. 
 
Role of Government in the wake of self-regulation 
 
The self -regulation mechanism put in place by the broadcasters will, however, not 
replace the existing regulatory function of the Government, arising out of the extant statute, 
namely, Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and Rules framed thereunder. While 
the self -regulation is aimed at facilitating better cont ent regulation at broadcasters’ level, it 

25 
 
 
 
does not mean that the Government will abdicate its overall statutory functions. Government 
will step in as warranted by the existing Act, wherever self -regulation does not succeed in 
content regulation. 
 
The PCI t akes cognizance, suo moto or on complaints of contents in print media which 
are in violation of the norms which also include cases of paid news.  The PCI adjudicates upon 
such cases under section 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978.    
 
Meanwhile, the Election Commission has also initiated measures to check election -time 
paid news.  The Commission has issued instructions to Chief Electoral Officers of all the States 
to constitute District level and State level Media Certification and Monitoring Committees 
(MCMC) for scrutiny of paid news.  These Committees have been instructed to do vigorous 
scrutiny of electronic media, print media and other modes of mass communication in order to 
locate political advertisements in the garb of news coverage appearing during t he election 
period.  In addition, the Commission has also constituted a Committee at its own level to 
examine references from State level MCMCs and to support policy formulation for issues 
related to paid news and those related to usage of electronic and p rint media for campaigning 
by parties and candidates.     
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
International practices  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
To have a better understanding of the international practice with regard to ‘Paid News’, 
effectiveness of self regulation and the oversight mechanism, the Committee asked the 
Ministry about the international position. The Committee have been informed by th e Ministry 
that India’s Self regulatory initiative is in line with the international best practices seen in 
developed countries such as USA, UK and Germany where they are known as SROs (Self 
Regulatory Organisations). The Committee are however, concerned t o note that neither the 
Ministry nor any Self regulatory body viz. PCI/NBA, etc, has conducted any study to evaluate the 
mechanism adopted by other countries to tackle the menace of ‘Paid News’. Even with regard 
to the existing mechanism to regulate media,  they did not provide any information. However, 
the Committee note that the issue of culture, ethics malpractice in media has engaged serious 
attention worldwide. Very recently, an enquiry Commission under Lord Justice Leveson was set 
up by the UK Governme nt. Hon’ble Justice Leveson conducted an enquiry into the culture, 
practices and ethics of the press and submitted his Report in November, 2012. In this Report 
various issues viz. regulatory models for future, protecting journalists, access to information,  
media employment, press and politics, plurality and media ownership, etc. have been dealt 
with. The Committee note from the implementation status of the Justice Leveson Report that 
after the publication of the Report there were mixed reactions and there w ere cross -party 

26 
 
 
 
discussions on how to implement the proposals of the Report. Reportedly the Government of 
UK will go ahead with the establishment of a body which will approve press regulators and the 
Leveson proposals will be put before the privy council w hich would meet on 8th May, 2013 for 
approval and then move on to the Queen for the final seal. Considering the post presentation 
developments of Leveson Report and in view of the ills, including ‘Paid News’, afflicting the 
Indian media, the Committee expe ct the Ministry to consider the recommendations and the 
developments associated with Leveson Report while dealing with the issue.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has taken cognizance of the Regulatory 
model recommended by the Leveson Report and in order to formulate a structured response to 
the recommendations and the developments associated with the Leveson Report, the Ministry 
has convened a meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Members of Parliament attached 
to the Ministry for discussion on the subject ‘Leveson Report and its relevance qua Indian 
milieu’.  The preliminary views of the members of the Consultative Committee on the Leveson 
Report have been obtained and it has been observed that the regulatory models in other 
democratic countries are also required to be studied.  
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Regulation of Advertisements by DAVP  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal multimedia 
advertising central agency of the Govern ment under the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to execute publicity campaigns through advertisements etc., on behalf of various 
Ministries/ Departments of Government of India, autonomous Bodies and Public Sector 
Undertakings. However, it has been brought to the notice of the Committee by various 
stakeholders that advertisements are used by the Government to arm -twist media companies 
to have favourable coverage and even stopping advertisements to the media houses who are 
critical about the Governmen t. In view of the serious irregularities advanced by numerous 
editors/media personnel/media houses, the Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry’s 
contention that there is an established advertisement policy of the Government and the 
advertisement spe nding of the Government is always in accordance with this established 
Advertisement policy.  
 

27 
 
 
 
The Committee feel that the advertisement policy of the Government is a matter of 
great public concern. In a democratic set up like India there is a need for having transparency in 
providing advertisements by Government body like DAVP. The Committee, there fore, strongly 
recommend for a more transparent and unbiased policy for allocation of advertisements by the 
Central Government/State Government Departments which is open to scrutiny. Besides, there 
should be disclosure about disbursement of advertisements expenditure from DAVP for 
advertisements on its website. Similarly, it should be made mandatory for all media houses to 
disclose details of all forms of concessions granted to them and about the advertising revenue 
from Government and private parties, on t heir websites. In view of allegations by many 
stakeholders/experts that the issue of circulation of paper/viewership of channels is being 
manipulated to get more TRP’s/benefits from the Government to influence the public in 
believing wrong information, it is imperative that the Ministry examine and take appropriate 
action in the matter in consultation with concerned organisations and Government bodies and 
inform the Committee in detail about the action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Television Rating Points (TRPs) have been a much debated issue in India since the 
present system of TRP is riddled with several maladies such as small sample size which is not 
representative, lack of transparency, lack of reliability and credibility of dat a etc.  Shortcomings 
in the present rating system have been highlighted by key stakeholders that include Individuals, 
Consumer Groups, Government, Broadcasters, Advertisers, and Advertising Agencies. A 
comprehensive examination of TRPs was taken up by the Standing Committee on Information 
Technology. In the 67th Report (2008 -2009), tilted “Television Audience Measurement in 
India”, the Standing Committee critically examined the entire system of TRP generation in India 
and made several recommendations to address the deficiencies in the present system. 
 
The Committee noted that the industry has jointly formed a Broadcasting Audience 
Research Council (BARC) to oversee and control the television rating system in India.  However, 
the Committee recommended that so me sort of Government oversight, regulation should be 
brought to make the TRP System credible and accountable. In 2008, MIB had sought 
recommendations of TRAI on evolving a foolproof rating system and various aspects relating 
thereto. TRAI, in its recommen dations dated 19th August 2008, had, inter -alia, recommended 
the approach of self -regulation through the establishing of an industry -led body, the Broadcast 
Audience Research Council (BARC).  The Ministry had also constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Amit Mitra, the then Secretary General FICCI in 2010 to review the existing 
TRP system In India.  
 
The Committee had also recommended that self-regulation by the industry was the best 
way to go forward. Since BARC is still in process to finaliz e its systems to generate TRPs and a 
credible and transparent mechanism for TRP generation has remained elusive, the MIB had 

28 
 
 
 
again sought recommendations TRAI in August 2012 on comprehensive 
guidelines/accreditation mechanism with TRAI as accrediting agenc y for television rating 
agencies in India to ensure fair competition, better standards and quality of services by 
television rating agencies.  
 
TRAI made its recommendations’ on Guidelines for Television Rating Agencies on 
11.9.2013. While supporting self -regulation of television ratings through an industry -led body 
like BARC, TRAI recommended that television rating agencies shall be regulated through a 
framework in the form of guidelines to be notified by the MIB. It also recommended that all 
rating agenci es, including the existing rating agency, shall require registration from MIB in 
accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed under the said guidelines.  Based on the 
recommendations of TRAI, the Ministry has formulated policy guidelines for Televis ion Rating 
Agencies in India.  These guidelines, inter -alia, cover detailed procedure for registration of 
rating agencies, eligibility norms, terms and conditions of registration, cross -holdings, 
methodology for audience measurement, complaint redressal me chanism, sale and  use of 
ratings, audit, disclosure, reporting requirements and action upon non-compliance of guidelines 
etc. The Ministry had sought the approval of the Cabinet on these Guidelines. The Cabinet has 
approved the Policy Guidelines for TV Ra ting Agencies in India which have been notified on 16 th 
January 2014. 
 
Directorate of Advertising &Visual Publicity (DAVP) empanels newspapers on the basis 
of recommendations of the Panel Advisory Committee (PAC).  DAVP announces the outcome of 
the process of empanelment on its website and informs the applicants about the reasons for 
not being empanelled in writing.  The publishers, whose applications are rejected, are also 
given an opportunity to personally verify their files.  DAVP being a Government agen cy is 
bestowed with the responsibility of giving publicity to the government programme and policies 
at an optimum cost, has the responsibility to verify the claims of circulation made by the 
newspapers.  It has to satisfy itself about the genuinity of circ ulation claims for best utilization 
of public money and for this purpose, DAVP asks for copies of documents like audited balance 
sheet, Income Tax returns etc.  The Advertisement Policy of DAVP takes into account circulation 
figures of the newspapers and p ublications as verified by the Audit Bureau of Circulation (ABC) 
or verified by the Chartered Accountants in case of small newspapers.  ABC is a non -profit, 
voluntary organization consisting of Publishers, Advertisers and Advertising Agencies.  The 
Bureau certifies circulation figures of member publications for a six -monthly audit period.  
DAVP also takes into account the circulation figures of newspapers verified by Registrar for 
Newspapers in India (RNI).   
 
DAVP uploads the details of expenditure incurre d on advertisements to various 
publications on its website on monthly basis.   
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
  

29 
 
 
 
Need for Awareness/Education/Training programmes 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee note that due to the ‘camouflage’ nature and subtle way in which paid 
content is presented as advertorial/news, it becomes difficult not only for common man but 
also for the experts in the field to distinguish bet ween genuine and paid content. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that there is a definite need for creating awareness amongst the 
masses about this malaise of ‘Paid News’ by educating the people on this aspect. Though the 
Ministry has suggested that the adjud ication of paid news case by PCI/Ministry/self regulatory 
bodies may be published in prominent newspapers or telecast in electronic media for public 
awareness, the Committee are concerned to note that no concrete action has yet been taken in 
this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend for a coordinated effort from the Ministry, 
PCI, Self Regulatory Bodies, Election Commission, etc. for organizing awareness campaigns on 
the issue and educate common masses/voters to distinguish between ‘paid reporting’ a nd 
‘balanced/unbiased reporting’. The Committee also recommend for taking the civil 
society/research groups in the loop while conducting awareness campaigns. The Committee 
also feel that enhancement of training in media ethics for media personnel will also  add to this 
measure. On this aspect, the Committee would also recommend the Ministry to plan a National 
Help Line number for addressing the citizen’s concerns in this regard.  
 
The Committee also observe that the Sectoral Innovation Council of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, constituted under the Chairpersonship of Smt. Asha Swarup has 
submitted its Report. The Report contains 64 recommendations in seven key areas c oncerning 
the media and entertainment sector such as Broadcasting, Films, Print Media, Advertising, 
Media Education, Animation, Gaming and VFX. The Committee are of the firm view that some 
of the recommendations viz. availability of reliable single source data on all medium of 
advertising, comprehensive media policy integrating all existing media segments, 
comprehensive National Media Policy, regulating media education to ensure orderly growth of 
the discipline, making DAVP’s functioning online so as to bri ng greater transparency, etc, if 
implemented, in true spirit would go a long way in curbing the menace of paid news. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that while taking policy decisions in regard to control the 
menace of paid news the Ministry should con sider the recommendations of the Council, 
especially those relating to Broadcasting, Print Media, Advertising and Media Education and 
apprise them about the action taken accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the recommendations made by the Sec toral Innovation Council, the Ministry 
of Information & Broadcasting has set up an Innovation Cell with following Terms of Reference 
(ToRs): 
 

30 
 
 
 
i. Innovation Cell will identify the problem areas, policy challenges etc. 
ii. Innovation Cell will invite suggestions on  these areas from all the stakeholders including 
NGOs and Civil society. 
iii. Innovation Cell will examine the suggestions/ideas received from various stakeholders 
for their operationalisation. 
 
Keeping in view the feasibility of the innovative ideas, the Cell will submit the proposal 
sector-wise alongwith the detailed implementation plan which may inter alia include cost, year-
wise financial phasing, financial and physical targets. 
 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Transparency regarding Revenue/Assets of Media Houses and Right to Information Act , 2005 
(RTI)  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee note that due to clandestine nature of financial transactions involved in 
‘Paid News’ there is no transparency with regard to accounts of media houses as well as on the 
part of the parties providing favour/money. The Committee are concerned to note that when 
the media is asked for disclosure of the source of income or details of revenue generated 
through advertisements, some section of them take the plea that it is against freedom of the 
Press. The most worrisome piece of evidence is submission of a former Chief Election 
Commissioner that the Election Commission faces difficulty in knowing the source of income for 
the suspected case of ‘Paid News/advertorial/advertisement’ and they find themselves at the 
dead end. The Committee can not but express their displeasure to note that despite SEBI’s 
guideline for disclosure of shares/stakes held by media companies there are medi a 
houses/group who avoid/evade the guideline. In this regard, the Committee take note of the 
suggestions in many submissions that media should be subjected to Right to Information Act, 
2005 and brought under the ambit of Lok Pal Bill particularly the media ’s source of 
income/revenue. Considering the fact that people’s right to unbiased information weighs more 
than the individual’s/companies right, the Committee are of considered view that there is an 
urgent need to protect public from misguided and camoufla ged paid content. The Committee 
also opine that the media houses should be open and transparent about the sources of their 
revenue, shares, stakes and more importantly about the sponsored 
programme/review/editorial, etc. Further, disagreeing with the media ’s plea that seeking 
accountability and transparency with regard to source of revenue tantamount to infringement 
of Right to Freedom of Press, the Committee strongly feel that media is accountable to the 
public and disclosure of source of revenue is not on ly their duty under the Companies Act, 
1956, the Income Tax Act, 1961, etc. Nevertheless, taking cognizance of Prasar Bharati’s 
submission that there might be a danger of over regulation by audit of each and every account 
of media, the Committee opine that there should be some provision to hold media accountable 
to the public and their accounts should be subject to examination. Media should not hide the 
revenue source/detail for the suspected article/programme/review/talk show. Here, the 
Committee would als o like to reemphasize and reiterate their recommendation made in their 
Forty Second Report on ‘The Press and Registration of Books and Publication Bill, 2011’ wherein 
it was recommended to incorporate a suitable provision in the Bill for disclosure of annu al 
income from advertisements so as to check the menace of paid news. The Ministry may apprise 
the Committee about the action taken in this regard.  

32 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation made by the Standing Committee on IT in its 42nd Report on ‘the 
Press and Registration of Books and Publications Bill, 2011’ to incorporate a suitable provision 
in the Bill for disclosure of annual income from advertisements has been examined in the 
Ministry and after discussions with the stakeholders, it is felt that it w ould be difficult for big 
groups and multi-edition newspapers to send mammoth details of their advertisement income 
or annual statement for each edition and for the Government to maintain records.   Also 
whenever need arises the financial details can be as ked for under provisions proposed in other 
relevant sections of the proposed Bill. 
 
However, inclusion of provisions in the PRBP Bill to check the incidences of Paid News 
has been proposed. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Working conditions of Media personnel – contractual employment; wage scenario and 
Editorial Section v/s Management/Owners of Media Houses 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that ‘Paid News’ is not only the outcome of the convergence of the 
editorial, advertising, public relations (PR), lobbying group and the ‘industry’ but is also due to 
the decline in independence of the journalists/reporters. In this regard, the Committee feel that 
the emergence of contract system of employment is the primary cause f or erosion of the 
independence of journalists/reporters as the system has the affect of reducing their status to 
mere marketing agents. According to PCI, the journalists are often under pressure to show 
‘results’ till the renewal of contract which is often  uncertain and they are under fear of an 
‘abrupt transfer’ without having choice of freedom and there are numerous instances of 
exploitation of journalists under the contractual system of employment. The Committee also 
note that the decisive role of Editor s of the Media have been dampened by the interference of 
the marketing departments and owners of the media houses. The Committee note from the 
Report of PCI’s Sub -Committee on ‘Election, Coverage, Monitoring in Gujarat’, according to 
which, several Editors  and Journalists have accepted that Paid News contract deals are signed 
at the top level and they get time to time ‘instructions’ to carry a particular news item or 
photograph which is contrary to the provision of Para 37 (A) of Norms of Journalistic Condu ct 
by PCI relating to Management -Editor Relationship which in essence provides that the editor 
under no circumstance can be asked by the proprietor to serve his private interests.  
 
Another related issue that has plagued the working conditions of Journalis ts/Reporters, 
is that of wage/salary of the media personnel. The Committee find that journalists on 
contractual system, may be except in big cities, are paid very meagre wages which could be less 
than even the minimum wages prescribed by the Government, or  sometimes paid commission 
on given fixed targets for business/ advertisements. In addition, some of the media houses 
even use stringers who are given the I -cards of the media house and are expected to earn for 
themselves and for that particular media house by way of collecting advertisements.  
 
Taking a holistic view of the scenario, the Committee feel perturbed at the pathetic 
working conditions of the significant part of the media personnel while strongly disapproving 
the tendency of the media houses to hire and fire. The Committee strongly feel that contract 
employment should not be used as a tool for attraction/allurement. Sharing the concerns about 
the mounting pressure on the Editorial/Journalists/Reporters compelling them to indulge in 
‘Paid News’ phenomenon, the Committee are inclined to conclude that inspite of having several 

34 
 
 
 
guidelines for segregating Editor and Management/Owners, the same are not being enforced 
efficiently. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government/concerned regulato ry 
bodies should take all necessary steps for improving the working conditions of the 
journalists/media personnel and also ensure that the autonomy of the editorial staff is upheld 
forth with. More importantly, the media houses will have to rise to the occ asion and act. The 
Committee desire that all the employees of media houses should be covered under the 
Working Journalists Act and be given the protection under the various provisions of the Act. 
The Committee also feel that there is a need for constitutio n of Media Commission to review 
the working conditions for media personnel i.e. covering print and electronic media. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry while taking into consideration all these 
factors should formulate the regulatory mec hanism and make provisions for periodic review of 
the working scenario/wage conditions of media personnel. The Committee would like the 
Government to apprise them about the specific action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Working Journalists and Other Newspapers Employees (Condition of Service and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1955’ provides for fixing/revisiting of wages and for regulating 
service conditions of working journalists and non -journalist newspaper employee s. Under 
section 9 and 13C of  ‘The Working Journalists & Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955’,  the Wage Boards are constituted by the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment having representatives of employe es, employers and 
independent members.   The guiding principle for wage fixation is the capacity of the employer.   
 
The Act defines ‘Working Journalist’ as a person whose principal avocation is that of a 
journalist and who is employed as such either whole -time or part-time, in, or in relation to one 
or more newspaper establishment and includes an editor, a leader, writer, news -editor, sub -
editor, feature -writer, copy -tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news -photographer 
and proof -reader but does n ot include any such person who is employed mainly in a 
managerial, administrative or supervisory capacity. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Cross Media Holdings 
 (Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
Another factor giving rise to ‘Paid News’ which was brought before the Committee is 
that of ‘Cross Media Holding/ownership’ having the effect of promoting monopolies in media 
and coming in the way of free flow of information. The Committee note that so far as Cross 
Media Holdings/Ownerships across print, television and radio sectors of the media is 
concerned, there are no restrictions as of now and this has led to the problem of ‘surrogate 
entities’. The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in  the year 
2008 made a reference to TRAI on this issue seeking their recommendations for bringing out a 
policy for the restriction in ownership of companies seeking licenses/permissions/registrations 
under various policy guidelines. After following a exhaus tive consultation process TRAI gave 
their recommendations in February, 2009 covering vertical and horizontal integration in media 
inter-alia recommending that for the time being necessary safeguard should be put in place to 
ensure that plurality and divers ity are maintained across the 3 media segment viz. Print, 
Television and Radio and this issue could be reviewed after 2 years. In this regard, the TRAI also 
recommended the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to carry out an analysis based on 
detailed market study. In pursuance of this, the Ministry sponsored a study though 
Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad of India. Subsequently, the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting in May 2012 again requested the TRAI to re -examine the whole 
issue and to suggest measures with respect to cross media (holdings) ownership with an 
objective to ensure plurality of news and views to the consumers. The Committee have been 
apprised that TRAI has released a Consultation Paper on 15th February, 2013 takin g into 
consideration the Administrative Staff College of India’s Report and has sought views from 
various stakeholders on the need, nature and level of restriction and safeguards with respect to 
vertical integration in the broadcasting and distribution sec tors and cross holdings across 
various media sectors. In this regard, the Committee, in their Thirty -second Report on Demands 
for Grants (2012 -13) and Fortieth Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) had 
expressed an urgency to frame rules for cross media ownership to regulate both the vertical 
and horizontal integration so as to prevent monopolistic practice.  
 
 Since it is already over 5 years when the matter was first referred to TRAI in 2008 and 
during this period the cross holdings could h ave multiplied, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry and the TRAI to consider this important issue having national 
ramifications on priority basis. Needless to emphasise that TRAI should come out with its 

36 
 
 
 
recommendations and the Ministry shou ld promptly take conclusive action on it and apprise 
the Committee within six months from the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry vide its reference dated 16 th May, 2012 sought TRAI recommendation on 
the issue of vertical integration in the broadcasting and TV distribution sector and cross media 
holdings across the TV, Print & Radio sector. TRAI has been asked to suggest measures that can 
be put to address verti cal integration in order to ensure fair growth of the broadcasting sector. 
Further, recommendations of TRAI were also sought with respect to cross media ownerships 
with an objective to ensure plurality of news and views and availability of equality service s at 
reasonable prices to the consumers. In view of urgency of matter, the Ministry has been issuing 
reminders to TRAI to expedite their recommendations on the issue. The TRAI had issued a 
consultation paper on “Issues Relating to Media Ownership’ on 15 th February, 2013 seeking 
comments of the stakeholders. TRAI has also undertaken open house discussions with the 
stakeholders in the matter to elicit their views and suggestion. Ministry will apprise the 
Committee of the recommendations, as and when received from TRAI. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
The case of M/s Jindal Steel Power Limited and M/s Zee Ltd – highlighting loophole in the 
existing guidelines/code/ mechanism  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee came across the live case of M/s Jindal Steel and Power Limited (JSPL) 
v/s M/s Zee Ne ws wherein M/s JSPL had alleged that M/s Zee News has aired considerable 
number of programmes containing wrong, manipulated, untrue and per -se defamatory 
contents against JSPL in violation of the provisions of Code of Ethics and Broadcasting Standards 
of the News Broadcasters Association and Rules framed under the Cable Television Networks 
(regulation) Act, 1995. During the course of evidence, M/s JSPL submitted before the 
Committee that no action has been taken by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasti ng 
despite repeated complaints presumably on the pretext that the matter is sub -judice. M/s JSPL 
had also stated that since the license is granted by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, it can be revoked only by the Ministry of Information and Br oadcasting and not 
by any other authority.  
 
The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
that the matter has been referred to the Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) to look into the 
violations of Programme and Advertising codes by private satellite TV networks whic h has 

37 
 
 
 
already heard both the parties and has sought further clarifications from them so as to ensure 
that any decision taken by IMC withstands the legal scrutiny. The Committee note that the 
instant case is not only a reflection of severity of malpractices  that take place in media for 
earning revenue but also highlights the helplessness of regulatory bodies in proceeding 
ahead/taking action in the absence of any statutory/legal powers conferred upon them. The 
Committee deplore the indecisiveness on the part  of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting which is highlighted by the fact that the Ministry lacks clarity as to how to proceed 
when the matter being sub -judice and in deciding whether a dispute between two entities is a 
matter of public interest or  national security. Even the self -regulatory body like NBSA has 
pleaded its helplessness in taking cognizance of the matter on the plea that the matter is sub -
judice. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to complete examination 
of the case at the earliest and take appropriate action on the Inter -Ministerial Committee’s 
recommendations which is presently seized of the matter. The Ministry should also ensure that 
henceforth such cases are decided in shortest possible time frame. The Commi ttee are of the 
view that administrative machinery should not come to halt if any of the parties approach the 
Court unless there is specific stay orders granted by the judiciary. The Committee may be 
apprised of the follow-up action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A complaint dated 16.10.2012 was received in the Ministry from M/s Jindal Steel & 
Power Ltd. (JSPL), complaining against Zee News & Zee Business TV channels, owned by M/s 
Zee News Ltd. (ZNL) for telecasting allegedly false, defama tory programmes and manipulating 
facts in a well calculated way so as to injure and harm the reputation of their company and its 
management. They also alleged attempt by ZNL to extort advertisement contracts worth Rs.100 
crore in exchange for stopping tele cast of news reports based on alleged involvement of JSPL 
and other companies under Sh. Navin Jindal in irregularities relating to allotment of Coal Blocks. 
ZNL disputed these claims. 
 
Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) constituted to look into the specific  violations of Programme 
and Advertising Codes took up these complaints on 19th December, 2012 and decided to grant a 
personal hearing to JSPL and Zee News Ltd on 4th January, 2013. 
 
The representatives of JSPL reiterated the allegations already made in va rious 
complaints received from JSPL. They also made a presentation highlighting specific instances 
from the programmes telecast by ZNL in support of their allegations including that of extortion. 
The representative of JSPL stated that after the CAG report regarding Coal Block Allocation was 
tabled in Parliament on 17 th August, 2012, ZNL launched a vilification campaign against their 
company and the management by means of telecast of false and defamatory programmes on 
07.09.12, 09.09.12 and 10.09.12. During the presentation, they stated that on 10 th September, 
Zee News Editor raised a demand of Rs. 20 -25 Crore for a period of 4 -5 years as advertisement 

38 
 
 
 
commitment to stop the coverage of JSPL. They further informed that JSPL had secretly taped 
the subsequent c onversations which took place on 13,15,17,19 and 25 September, 2012 with 
the representatives of Zee News and Zee Business channels in order to create evidence of 
extortion bid on part of ZNL. The representative of JSPL contended that ZNL was continuously 
telecasting defamatory programmes such as “Operation Media Ka Sauda” on 19.10.12 and 
20.10.12 which was said to be an afterthought based on fabricated and forged C&AG report to 
cover their track. He further stated that Zee News aired yet another programme o n 27.11.12 
again containing defamatory contents intended at influencing the legal course of action which 
had already started.  
 
The representatives of ZNL denied the allegation leveled by JSPL and stated that the 
news aired by their Channels was true and b ased on the report tabled by C&AG in the 
Parliament, news items appearing in public domain, various media reports and documents 
received from the Coal Ministry as well as different States. They stated that complaint of JSPL 
was mischievous and aimed at dis tracting media from doing their legitimate job.  They further 
opined that Ministry should not take over the jurisdiction of self -regulatory mechanism in the 
form of NBSA for resolving the issues falling within its jurisdiction and where it had already 
refused to entertain the particular matter being sub -judice. The representative of ZNL further 
stated that a suit filed by JSPL for defamation and damages against the officials of Zee was 
pending before the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay, another suit filed by t he Zee News Ltd. On 
the same subject matter was also pending before Hon’ble Court of Delhi, and the allegations of 
defamation and criminal proceedings were yet to be proved in the court of law. They indicated 
that they cannot be forced to reveal their defe nse outside the courts; and that if on the same 
facts/ allegations, criminal proceedings are pending then all other proceedings would await the 
outcome of the criminal proceedings, no further action could be taken. 
 
IMC considered the deliberations held wi th both JSPL and ZNL and observed that there 
were certain specific issues arising out of the allegations made by JSPL in their complaints which 
needed further clarification from ZNL. Therefore, the clarifications were sought from ZNL vide 
this Ministry’s l etter dated 31.1.2013. However, ZNL approached the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
with a request to quash the letter of this Ministry. This was clubbed with another Writ Petition 
No. 25 filed by ZNL in the Hon’ble Supreme Court praying for quashing of 3 FIRs regist ered by 
Delhi Police. 
 
In the meantime, a letter dated 11.2.2013 was received from JSPL. wherein it was 
alleged that in programmes repeatedly aired on 11.01.13 and 12.01.13 by Zee News and Zee 
Business channels, ZNL blatantly twisted the facts and reported  falsely with a view to mislead 
the general public in case of JSPL’s Tamnar Power project.  JSPL cited another instance where, 
on the date of hearing of the matter i.e., on 12.02.13, the Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased 
to issue notices against the writ p etition filed by them.  However, Zee flashed the news in its 
channel claiming that “Supreme Court issues notice in the case for transferring the matter out 

39 
 
 
 
of the hands of Delhi Police”, whereas the writ petition had been filed for quashing of the FIRs 
on which notice was issued. 
 
The matter had been placed before the IMC on 19.12.12, 4.1.2013, 7.3.13 and 21.3.13.  
The IMC concluded that the programmes telecast by Zee News and Zee Business channels on 
7th, 9th and 10th September 2012 and 19th & 20th October as also of 11th & 12th January 2013 and 
12th February 2013, prima facie appeared against good taste; to contain defamatory, deliberate, 
false and suggestive innuendos and half truths; to criticize, malign and slander an individual and 
thus, in violation of Rule 6 (1)(a), 6(1)(d) and 6(1)(i) of the Programme Code and recommended 
to issue Show Cause Notices to the said Channels. 
 
Accordingly, a Show Cause Notice (SCN) was issued to M/s. Zee News Ltd on 18.4.2013 
for having telecast allegedly false/de famatory programmes against JSPL. Zee News Ltd. 
responded that since the subject matter was sub judice before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India, the SCN may be considered to be withdrawn and/or the proceedings relating thereto may 
be kept in abeyance till the final adjudication thereof.  
 
The Zee News in the meantime filed two cases in the Hon’ble Supreme Court (W.P. 
(Civil) No.84/2013 and WP (Crl.)No.25/2013.  Parawise comments in the WP (Civil) No.84/2013 
were forwarded to Shri Mohan Parasharam, Ld. Soli citor General of India, vide letter dated 
20.3.2013.  When the matter came up for hearing on 05.08.2013, Ld. S.G. assured the Court 
that till further orders passed by this Court, no adverse action will be taken pursuant to the SCN 
dated 18.4.2013. Counter Affidavit in this case was forwarded to the Central Agency Section of 
Supreme Court vide letter dated 27.09.2013. The case came up for hearing on 19.11.2013 and 
10.12.2013 but was not taken up by the Court.   The matter is not listed in the Court at present. 
 
IMC has actively heard this case and given their recommendations at each stage. Even 
though the matter has been taken to the Supreme Court by Zee, this did not deter the 
government to go ahead on the case and show cause notice was also issued to them. However, 
Zee has not responded to the points raised in SCN on merits but have again approached the 
hon’ble court to include the same as impugned document. Hence, at this stage it appears 
appropriate to await decision of Supreme Court. The Standing Committe e would be apprised of 
their decision and consequent action taken by the government within six months of receiving 
the same. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
Role of Press Council of India (PCI) in tackling Paid News  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 13) 
While assessing the PCI’s role in handling ‘Paid News’ cases, since 2009 -10 upto 2012 -
13, the Committee find that of the 40 complaints received more than a quarter of  them were 
closed due to non pursuance and in only 17 cases the papers were warned/censured for having 
indulged in ‘Paid News’ cases. The Committee are given to understand by the Ministry that 
Press Council of India has been fulfilling its objective of pre serving the freedom of press and 
maintaining and improving the standards of the newspapers in the country and safeguarding 
the interest of public at large. However, the Committee are extremely unhappy to note from 
the Press Council of India’s submission th at the Council is vested only with authority of oral 
observations which carry ethical and moral force and in the absence of an express authority it is 
difficult to enforce compliance of its directions. PCI has, therefore, sought amendment in the 
Press Council Act seeking more powers. To the utter surprise of the Committee, almost all the 
submissions made to them on the subject have insisted that the composition of PCI need to be 
re-examined and its mandate be expanded to give it more powers. The Committee a re also 
startled at the Ministry’s silence on this issue thus giving an impression that the Ministry is 
apathetic about the empowerment/revamp of PCI. The Committee are shocked to learn about 
the underlying pressure within PCI because of its composition, a s revealed by one of the former 
PCI member, who was also the head of the two member Sub -Committee constituted by PCI on 
Paid News during 2009 General Elections, wherein he had stated that due to the pressure from 
media owners who were part of PCI, the orig inal report of the Sub -Committee on ‘Paid News’ 
could not be annexed with the final Report of PCI. Worse is the revelation that the Report of 
the Sub -Committee was voted out by a very thin majority with show of hands and even the 
dissenting notes by the Su b-Committee Members were not allowed. In the light of disturbing 
revelation the Committee are sceptical about the Secretary, PCI’s submission that though the 
composition of PCI needs revaluation but it is not on the count that the Members tend to 
protect e ach other, which has not happened in PCI during the last 40 years. The Committee, 
therefore, note that in its existing composition there could be tendency of members coming 
together to protect their interest within the PCI.  
 
The Committee note that about 35 years back when the PCI was set up under the 
provisions of the PCI Act, 1978, the media was basically dominated by the print section and the 
presence of electronic media was the Governmental one. At that time the PCI was mandated 
with the task of govern ing only Print media. The Committee are unhappy to note that though 
over last two decades the electronic media has emerged very strongly yet neither the mandate 
of the PCI has been expanded to include electronic media nor any specific statutory regulatory 
body has been put in place for regulating it and ensuring compliance of provisions of the Cable 
TV Network Regulation Act, 1995 and various rules/guidelines framed thereunder.  
 
 

41 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Press Council of India is a unique mix of representatives from the print media 
industry and representation from Parliament, Academia, Legal and Literary fields. It is headed 
by a former judge of the Supreme Court, who is selected by a transparent process.  The Council 
is autonomous as such that no single group dominates its proceedings or voting rights. 
  
Regarding regulation of the electronic media, the Ministry had formulated a draft 
Broadcasting Service Regulation Bill for ensuring orderly growth of Broadcasting Services in 
2007. The Ministry ha d constituted a Task Force in the Ministry in 2009 to evolve a consensus 
amongst stakeholders on the issue. However, there were a spectrum of views and opinions 
which emerged during the consultation process. Meanwhile, the News Broadcasters 
Association (NB A) and Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF) have set up self regulatory 
mechanisms for regulating News and general entertainment channels through the News 
Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA) and Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) 
respectively. The Broadcasters are required to comply with Programme Code and Advertising 
Code enshrined under Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and rules framed there 
under. The Ministry is exercising statutory powers conferred by the Cable Televisio n Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 with regard to violation of content. 
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
PCI’s Sub -Committee Report on paid news during 2009 General Election titled ‘Paid News: 
How corruption in the Indian media undermines democracy’  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 14) 
Realising the dangers of ‘Paid News’ to democracy as well as the right to freedo m of 
expression enshrined in Article 19 of the Constitution of India, Press Council of India (PCI) 
appointed a Committee to examine the menace of paid news observed during the General 
Elections, 2009 and after deliberating on the issue it released the fina l Report on Paid News on 
30th July, 2010 and submitted to the Ministry. However, to the dismay of the Committee the 
Ministry is still considering the Report. When asked to spell out the status of the Report, the 
Committee have been informed that a GoM was constituted by the Government to examine 
the Report, to give views on a comprehensive policy and institutional mechanism to address the 
phenomenon of paid news. The Committee express their strong displeasure that though the 
issues were deliberated upon by the GoM, yet the recommendations of the GoM could not be 
finalized. Not only this, it was also decided that the GoM on Paid News would not be re -
constituted and the issue as and when considered necessary may be placed before appropriate 
Cabinet Committee/Cabinet. The Committee are also given to understand that since the issue is 
sensitive and requires Inter -Ministerial consultations, the Ministry has requested the Cabinet 

42 
 
 
 
Secretariat to re -constitute the GoM on Paid News. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, the Government is dithering on this important policy initiative on one pretext or 
the other as the same is revealed by the failure of the Government in taking a decision on the 
recommendations of the PCI appointed Committee made in July, 2010 on t he shortcomings 
noticed in 2009 General Elections. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry 
to take expeditious action on the Report of PCI and apprise the Committee of the Government’ 
stand.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government had constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on Paid News to examine 
the PCI’s ‘Report on Paid News’ and to give views on comprehensive policy and institutional 
mechanism to address the phenomenon of paid news.  The GoM deliberated upon the related 
issues in meetings, however the recommendations of the GoM could not be finalized before it 
was decided not to re -constitute the GoM upon election of the former Finance Minister as 
Hon’ble President of India.  It has been decided that that notes on the following issues  may be 
forwarded to the M/o Law & Justice for examination and to submit a note to M/o I&B: 
i. Representation of the People Act, 1951, be amended to make incidence of Paid News a 
punishable electoral malpractice. 
ii. The PCI must be fully empowered to adjudicate the complaints of ‘Paid News’ and give 
final judgement in the matter. 
 
Thereafter, M/o I&B may move an appropriate note to the Cabinet. 
 
Accordingly, notes on the issues have been forwarded by M/o I&B to the M/o Law & 
Justice.  On the basis of the examinat ion by the M/o Law & Justice, the issues would be 
considered further and if required, the proposal would be submitted for approval of the 
Cabinet, accordingly.    
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
Penalty 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
So far as the penalty for ‘Paid News’ menace is concerned, the Committee note that 
under the existing set up, for print media the penalty can be administered only in the form of 
warning/ admonishing/censuring the erring newspaper under the PCI Act and for the electronic 
media there is a provision for cancelling the licence for offences or inconsistencies in the 
programme under section 8 of the Policy Guidelines for Uplinking of Television Channe ls from 
India.  
 

43 
 
 
 
Examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed that existing penal provisions 
have not been proved effective at all. Various stakeholder have advocated for a strict law to 
penalise all the guilty parties involved in the menace. Going by the submi ssions of stakeholders, 
the Committee agree that there is a need for imposing strict penalty provisions for all the 
parties involved in ‘Paid News’. In the opinion of the Committee, the penalty may range from 
warning, censure, fine and even cancellation/re vocation of licence of the media house, 
imprisonment, depending upon the gravity of the violation as well as the repetition of 
violations. The Committee also feel that the decision of imposition of penalty should be prompt 
and swift if it has to serve as a strong deterrent.  
 
Another aspect related to penalty is that of the designated authority to take 
action/impose penalty. The Committee note that with existence of multiple bodies like Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, PCI, Election Commission of I ndia, various self regulatory 
bodies, etc., there is lack of clarity in regard to specific authority who would be final authority in 
deciding a case of irregularity in this regard. The Committee are of the opinion that in the 
envisaged oversight regulatory  mechanism there should also be a cell for complaint redressal 
with the authority/legal backing to implement its verdict for penalty and the decision of that 
cell should be binding on all parties involved including the media. The Committee find that, 
based on PCI’s findings on ‘Paid News’ in a case relating to the 2009 UP Assembly Elections, the 
Election Commission of India disqualified a candidate using its power under Section 10(A) of the 
Representation of People Act, 1951, whereas, in another similar cas e relating to the 2009 
Election of Maharashtra Assembly where a candidate was alleged to have indulge in ‘Paid 
News’ the Election Commission was prevented to exercise the same power on ground of its 
jurisdiction to exercise such power under the Representat ion of People Act, 1951 and the issue 
is pending in the Supreme Court. The Committee, therefore, feel that the ambiguity on such 
issues needs to be done away with and the power of imposing penalties of the nature of 
disqualification of contesting candidate s/ sitting MPs/MLAs on account of paid news should 
remain with the Election Commission of India. Further, looking at the poor disposal status of 
‘Paid News’ complaints by PCI wherein 11 cases out of 40 have been closed because of lack of 
pursuance, the Committee feel that PCI in its existing form is not fulfilling the role expected to 
be performed by it. The Committee, therefore, stress upon the need for revamping the PCI so 
that it functions like a Regulatory authority and strengthening PCI so that it can adjudicate the 
paid news cases and award penalties to the guilty individuals and organisations. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The empowerment of the Press Council of India by way of amendment in the Press 
Council Act, 1978 is under consideration of the Government.  The Group of Ministers (GoM) on 
Paid News has also discussed the issue.   The M/o I&B has forwarded a background not e on the 
issue of further empowerment of the Press Council of India (PCI) to the M/o Law & Justice with 

44 
 
 
 
request to examine the issue and submit a note to M/o I&B in this regard.  The matter would be 
considered further accordingly and if required, the propo sed amendments to the Press Council 
Act, 1978 would be drafted carefully after consultations with the stakeholders on the sensitive 
issues related to the media.   
 
(Ministry of    Information      and       Broadcasting    O.M.  No.      H -11013/17/2013 – Press  
Dated 25.04.2014) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11 August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on  
Information Technology.  
 
 
  

45 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5, 7,9,10,12,15 and 18  
 Total 11 
 Percentage 61.10 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- 17  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.56 
 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  6  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.56 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  8,11,13,14 and 16  
 Total 05 
 Percentage 27.78 
 
 
 