 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’] 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
30 


THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of replies of the Government………………………………. 
 
26 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
27 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
32 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on                  
15th  December, 2016  
 
37 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
         39    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (2016-17) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
 *4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Dr. Sunil Gaikwad 
6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
7. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
8. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
9. Shri P. Karunakaran  
10. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
12. Shrimati Hema Malini  
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Suresh Gopi 
25. Shri Prabhat Jha 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
30. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
  31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Abhishek Sharma  - Executive Assistant  
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 19.10.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 19.10.2016. 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology       
(2016-17), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the          
Thirtieth R eport on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their        
Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (201 6-17)’ 
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2016.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report on 22nd July, 2016.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 15th December, 2016. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Anurag Singh Thakur, 
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty -third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2016 -17)‟ relating to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-third Report was present ed to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
the 3rd May, 2016. It contained 15 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 4, 6, 11, 12,13, 14 and 15    
   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to  
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
   
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 3, 7, 8 and 9    
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2, 5 and 10      
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the

2 
 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and  final action taken 
replies to the Observations /Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
A. Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) 
 (Recommendation S.No.3) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal 
multimedia advertising agency of th e Government catering to the 
communication needs of the Ministries / Departments, autonomous bodies and 
PSUs.  In order to strengthen the publicity of various peoples‟ welfare and 
participation oriented programmes in a holistic manner, and to enable effici ent 
discharge of its services, the DAVP had sought and obtained increased 
funding for two of its Plan Schemes, namely, (i) “People‟s Empowerment 
through Development Communication”, implemented through the DCID 
scheme, and (ii) “Media Infrastructure Develop ment Programme”. The  
Committee note that under the scheme “People‟s Empowerment through 
Development Communication”, during the first year of 12th Plan, i.e., 2012-13, 
utilization of fund was to the tune of Rs.103.18 crore which further increased 
to Rs.189 .00 crore in the year 2013 -14 and Rs.155.20 crore in the year       
2014-15.  For the year 2015 -16, an allocation of Rs.151 crore had been made 
at the RE stage out of which the actual expenditure as on 30 th March, 2016 had 
been Rs.146.34 crore.  During the  current financial year 2016 -17, a reduced 
allocation of Rs.125.60 crore has been made under the scheme at the BE stage.  
The Committee feel that this amount is grossly inadequate to meet the 
requirement under this important scheme.  As a matter of fact, t he allocation is 
about 69% of the total outlay for the information sector.  The Committee are 
given to understand that the line Ministries and Departments carry their 
Ministry-specific campaign for which they have their own budgetary 
allocations.  However,  the DAVP‟s budget allocation obtained through the 
DCID programme of Ministry of I&B is used to run integrated campaigns on 
all the flagship programmes of the Government of India.  The Committee 
observe that the Government of India have been launching seve ral initiatives 
and direct benefit schemes for the welfare of the people, and information 
regarding these schemes have to be disseminated to the people and the target 
groups.  To achieve this objective, the scheme of Peoples‟ Empowerment 
through Development Communication of DAVP has an important role to play.  
In order to facilitate integrated campaign on various flagship programmes of 
the Government, the DAVP needs a much larger budget with matching fund 

3 
 
allocation which requires more allocation for the in formation sector.  The 
Secretary of the Ministry also submitted in evidence before the Committee 
that the budget availability for publicity purpose is not adequate enough to 
facilitate wide publicity.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
budgetary allocation for the DAVP should be enhanced to broadbase and 
increase the outreach of the multimedia campaigns being carried out by them 
through various means such as TV, print, social media or other outreach 
programmes for the welfare of the society.”  
7. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
“The observations of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
have been noted.  The expenditure of DAVP under the DCID programme is 
being monitored on regular basis to determine the requirement of funds during 
the current Financial Year.  Utilisation of funds by other media units under the 
DCID programme is being reviewed and savings, if any, will be transferred to 
DAVP by way of re-appropriation, if required.”   
8. The Committee  had observed that the Government of India have been 
launching several schemes including direct benefit schemes for the welfare of the 
people.  The information regarding these schemes have to be disseminated to the 
citizens and the t arget groups.  In order to facilitate integrated campaign on 
various flagship programmes of the Government, DAVP needs a much larger 
budget with matching fund allocation which requires more allocation for the 
information sector.  The Committee  had, therefo re, recommend ed that the 
budgetary allocation for DAVP should be enhanced to broadbase and increase 
the outreach of the multimedia campaigns being carried out by them through 
various means such as TV, print, social media or other outreach programmes for 
the welfare of the society.   The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in 
their Action Taken Note, have stated that the expenditure of DAVP under the 
DCID programme is being monitored on regular basis to determine the 
requirement of funds during the curr ent Financial Year.  Utilisation of funds by 
other media units under the DCID programme is being reviewed and savings, if 
any, will be transferred to DAVP by way of re -appropriation, if required.   The 
Committee would reiterate that proper dissemination of information about the 
various initiatives and schemes launched by the Government for the welfare of 
the poor is a necessary pre -requisite for successful implementation of those 

4 
 
schemes and to ensure that benefits of the schemes  percolate to intended 
beneficiaries.  For this DAVP needs assured budgetary allocation instead of 
resorting to last minute re -appropriation.  Keeping in view the fact that 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) plays a key role in 
catering to the communication needs of the Ministries/Departments, autonomous 
bodies and PSUs, etc. , the budgetary allocation for DAVP need to be 
substantially enhanced in order to strengthen the publicity of various 
Government initiatives/programmes for the welfare of the society.   The 
Committee also desire that all necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry to 
get the requisite amount of budget.   
 
B. Setting up of a Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and VFX 
(Recommendation S.No.7) 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry are setting up a National Centre of 
Excellence for providing trained manpower in the animation, gaming and 
visual effects sector by operating it under Pub lic Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode, which is part of the Budget announcement during 2014 -15.  The 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been prepared by the Media and 
Entertainment Skills Council and „in -principle‟ approval of NITI Aayog has 
been obtained.  An  outlay of Rs. 57 crore has been given under the 12 th Plan 
for this special project.  During the year 2015 -16 , Rs. 0.26 crore has been 
spent out of Rs. 0.30 crore made available in RE 2015 -16.  In the BE 2016 -17 
Rs. 5.10 crore has been allocated for this special project.  However, the 
Committee have been informed that due to the requirement for consultation 
with different stakeholders and the need for reviewing the DPR, there has been 
a delay in implementation of this Project and consequent underutilizatio n of 
funds.  With regard to Public Private Partnership Model operating under the 
scheme, the Ministry stated that the proposed project envisages creation of 
necessary infrastructure, meeting the pre -operation expenditure as well as 
meeting certain operatio nal expenditure by the Government.  However, the 
responsibility of the private operator is to meet the operational expenditure 
and the expenditure towards upkeep and maintenance of the infrastructure.  
PPP model has helped in funding for creation of infras tructure and it is 
proposed that this Centre will provide world class education in the field of 
animation gaming and visual effects at affordable costs.  The committee note 
that the setting up of the National Centre on Animation, Gaming and VFX is 
important to provide skilled manpower in the animation, gaming and visual 
sector.  Further, this Centre will lay the foundation of providing career 
opportunities to young students having interest in learning animation, gaming 

5 
 
and visual effects.  Maturing of this sector has potential in providing high -end 
entertainment business opportunities in the country.  Considering the 
significance of this techno advance skill imparting centre, the Committee 
recommend to the Ministry to expedite the implementation of this proj ect and 
optimally utilize the enhanced budget allocation made for the year 2016-17.   
10. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
 “The Media and Entertainment Council who were assigned the task of 
preparation of revised DPR submitted the revised DPR.  The revised DPR was 
submitted for acceptance by the competent authority. Following acceptance of 
the DPR by the Competent Authority, a detailed proposal for appraisal by 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has been prepared and sent to Ministry 
of Finance and NITI Ayog.  Ministry of Finance has forwarded their initial 
comments and duly taking inputs from the comments of Ministry of Finance, 
modifications to the EFC proposal are being carried out.  Separately, RFP for 
identifying a private partner is being worked out.” 
11. The Committee had noted that the Ministry are in the process of setting up 
a National Centre of Excellence for providing trained manpower in the 
animation, gaming and visual effects sector by operating it under Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode, and Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been prepared 
by the Media and E ntertainment Skills Council and ‘in -principle’ approval of 
NITI Aayog has been obtained.   Considering the significance of this techno 
advance skill imparting centre, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to 
expedite the implementation of this project and optimally utilize the enhanced 
budget allocation made for the year 2016 -17. The Committee are, however, 
concerned to note that there has not been much progress in the Scheme as the 
Ministry are yet to finali ze the EFC proposal  for the Scheme.  Further , RFP for 
identifying a private partner is also yet to be  worked out.  The Committee need 
not emphasize that animation, gaming and visual effects (VFX)  has emerged as a   
highly skilled and technically advanced domain which is gaining fast popularity 
and in  near future  this sector  may even eclipse the films sector in terms of its 
popularity and potential for revenue generation.  However, there is an acute 
shortage of skilled manpower in the domain of animation, gaming and visual 
effects (VFX) .  In this  context, the setting up of Centre of Excellence for 
Animation, Gaming and VFX assumes much significance. This Centre aims at 

6 
 
laying the foundation for providing career opportunities to young students in 
these areas  and the Committee are hopeful that t he setting up of Centre will 
definitely meet the growing demand of skilled manpower/professionals in this 
domain.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the allocation of funds under 
the Scheme for 2016 -17 be optimally utilized and t he Ministry may expedite the 
setting up of Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and VFX to meet the 
huge demand for professionals in this domain. 
 
C. Strengthening of Electronics Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) 
 (Recommendation S.No.8) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that the monitoring capacity of EMMC is being 
augmented in a phased manner to achieve the objective of developing content 
acquisition facility for 1500 channels by the end of the 12 th Plan. By the end of 
FY 201 4-15, EMMC successfully achieved the Plan target of content 
acquisition facility of 600 TV channels. Under the 12 th Plan, out of the total 
outlay of Rs.90 crore, Rs.56.37 crore has been utilized as of 31 st March, 2016. 
Further, during the year 2015 -16, EMM C has procured content acquisition 
hardware for setting up monitoring facility for 300 additional TV channels and 
installed at the new set up, i.e., Soochna Bhawan. The channels are being 
configured. The Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Ltd. (BECIL)  aims 
to configure all available free to air channels in the content monitoring system 
within a month‟s time. However, configuration of pay channels will require 
broadcasters to provide necessary equipment for downloading and decryption 
of the content/ sig nal and this is expected to be completed with in 4 months‟ 
time. The Committee have also been informed that during the year 2015 -16, 
11 cases were found where TV channels were in violation of content 
guidelines (i.e. Programme Code and Advertisement Code). Insofar as private 
satellite TV channels are concerned, there is no provision of pre -censorship of 
the content telecast on such TV channels. However, all programmes/ 
advertisements telecast on such TV channels are re quired to adhere to the 
Programme and Advertising Codes prescribed under the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder. Action is 
taken whenever any violation of the Codes is noticed or brought to the notice 
of the Mi nistry. On the issue of setting up of the Centralized Content 
Monitoring Facility for private FM and Community Radio Stations, the 
Committee note that BECIL had floated tender for award of job for setting up 
monitoring facility for FM and CR stations. Howe ver, it could not get any 
valid response for establishing IT based radio monitoring system. The tender 
was reissued in 2014 -15, but only one tenderer responded. BECIL is looking 
for alternate mechanism to develop content acquisition facility for FM and 

7 
 
CRS stations. Accordingly, the BECIL proposes to float another tender. The 
Committee observe that as the Government thrust is shifting towards FM, the 
number of FM channels in the country is increasing and it is being felt that the 
monitoring of FM channels a nd CRS should also be brought under the 
purview of EMMC within a definite timeframe. The c ommittee, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry that in addition to achieving the target of covering 
1500 channels, efforts should be made to expedite the content acqu isition 
facility for FM and CRS and apprise the Committee of the progress made in 
this regard.”  
13. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
“The Ministry is reviewing the issue of monitoring of CRSs and an 
appropriate policy decision will be taken.” 
14. The Committee had observed  that as the thrust  of the Government is 
shifting towards FM, the number of FM channels in the country is increasing 
and it is being felt that the monitoring of FM channels and Community Radio 
Stations ( CRS) should also be brought under the purview of E MMC within a 
definite timeframe .   In li ne with the above thrust, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry , in addition to achieving the target of covering 
1500 channels, should make efforts to expedite the content acquisition facility for 
FM and CRS and apprise the Committee of the progr ess made in this regard. 
The Ministry, in their action taken note, have stated that they are reviewing the 
issue of monitoring of CRSs and an appropriate policy decision will be taken.  
The Committee emphasize that since there is no provision of pre -censorship of 
content telecast on private satellite TV channels, strengthening of Electronics 
Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) assumes great er significance to ensure that 
all programmes/advertisements telecast on such TV channels adhere to the 
Programme and Advert ising Codes Prescribed under the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder.  In view of 
this, the Committee reinforce their earlier recommendation and reiterate that the 
Ministry need to focus on achieving the target of covering 1500 TV channels and  
policy decision on content acquisition facility for FM radio and CRS  may be 
worked out at the earliest.   
 

8 
 
 
 
D. Supporting Community Radio Movement in India  
(Recommendation S.No.9) 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Government introduced the policy guidelines 
for permitting community radio stations (CRS) in the year 2002 and initially 
only educational institutions were allowed to operate the CRS. These 
guidelines were revised in the year 2006 to broaden the eligibility criteria and 
allow community based organisations,  including civil societies and voluntary 
organizations, State Agriculture Universitites,  etc., to operate CRS. The 
Ministry are popularizing the CRS thr ough the scheme of Supporting 
Community Radio Movement in India. The Committee are, however, 
concerned to find that against an allocation of     Rs. 6.30 crore made at BE for 
the year 2015 -16 which was reduced to Rs.2.70 crore at the RE stage, the 
Ministry was able to spend only Rs. 1.90 crore. Further, during the year     
2015-16 the amount of Rs. 75 lakh allocated to the North -East Region was 
kept idle as no operational station  or Letter of Intent holder from  the North-
East Region applied for financial as sistance. The Ministry have informed that 
grants to some Community Radio Stations which had submitted claim forms 
could not be released in the year 2015 -16 due to shortfall of funds. It is 
disquieting to note that out of an approved outlay of Rs. 100 crore  in the       
12th Plan for this Scheme, only Rs.7.24 crore, i.e., a little over seven per cent 
could be utilized during the first four years of the Plan Period. The reasons 
cited by the Ministry for the under -utilization of fund included, inter -alia, 
systemic procedural delays in obtaining approvals at different stages, less 
number of applications for financial assistance, utilization for innovation 
grants remained less than anticipated, etc. The Ministry have also informed 
that as per the Scheme for finan cial assistance, 50% of cost of equipment is to 
be borne by the applicant and the grass -root organizations are not in a position 
to mobilise their part of 50%  expenditure, resulting in receipt of less number 
of applicants. Further, challenges such as lack  of awareness, complex 
licensing procedure, technical information and training, lack of community 
involvement and sustainability, etc. are coming in the way of the l aunching of 
new Community Radios. The Committee, keeping in view the slow pace of 
utilization of funds and challenges in the execution of the Scheme, feel that the 
existing financial subsidy structure perhaps needs a re -look to make the 
Scheme more viable and attractive for the target group. In the light of the fact 
that Community Radio Stations  is one of the thrust areas of the 12 th Plan, and 
it is imperative on the part of the Government to take this policy initiative 
forward, there appears a need to increase subsidy support for opening the CRS 
and their sustenance. At the same time, as factore d into in the existing 
financial model, the element of accountability on the part of the operating 
entities should be suitably incorporated in the proposed model. T he 

9 
 
Committee have been informed  that the Academy of Management Studies 
(AMS), Lucknow, is co nducting a study on the effectiveness of Community 
Radios. The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the findings of this 
study and the action taken thereon to strengthen the Community Radio 
Movement in India.” 
16. The Ministry of Information and Broad casting, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
“The scheme envisaged that the financial support will encourage Letter of 
Intent (LOI) holders to operationalise their stations. However, the scheme was 
not widely accepted by LOI holders. The appli cations for grants for purchase 
of equipment were invited in two phases. But, later applications were made 
open throughout the year. Despite that in last 4 years only 101 new & existing 
CRSs/LOI holders have applied for grants for purchase of equipment. On e of 
the reasons for this is that applicant has to bear 50% of the cost of equipment. 
Also, the present approval process requires recommendation from a Screening 
Committee and thereafter approval of Inter -Ministerial Committee, which is 
time consuming. 
The Ministry is in the process of addressing these issues to make the scheme 
more effective.  
The study on effectiveness of Community Radio Stations is in the process. 
AMS Lucknow was asked to visit few operational Community Radio Stations 
and prepare ques tionnaire and methodology for the study. The list of stations 
to be studied, sample size and methodology has been prepared by AMS and 
will start collecting the data. The outcome of the study wil be intimated to the 
Committee on its completion.” 
17. The Committee had observed that the scheme of Supporting Community 
Radio Movement in India  has not been able to take-off due to challenges such as 
lack of awareness, complex licensing procedure, technical information and 
training, lack of community involvement  and sustainability, etc.    Keeping in 
view the slow pace of utilization of funds and challenges in the execution of the 
Scheme, the Committee had felt that the Ministry needed to have a relook at the 
subsidy structure to make it viable and attractive.  Th e Committee had also 
desired that apart from subsidy support, element of accountability on the part of 
operating entities should be incorporated in the Scheme.  The Ministry have, 

10 
 
however, not initiated any action on the suggestions of the Committee to mak e 
the Scheme viable.  Instead of clearly spelling out the action taken to address the 
issues, the Ministry have  again highlighted on issues such as 50% percent cost of 
equipment to be borne by the applicant, time consuming process due to approval 
of Inter -Ministerial Committee, etc. which are well known to the Committee.   
While stressing on the need to strengthen and support the Community Radio 
Movement in India which has not picked up as envisaged , the Committee 
reiterate that the Ministry need to relook a t the subsidy structure for the scheme 
to make it financially viable and also streamline the procedure for setting up a 
Community Radio Station so as to encourage the adoption by the various 
educational institutions, community based organizations, etc.  The Committee 
have also been informed that the  study on effectiveness of Community Radio 
Stations is  already in the process.  AMS , Lucknow has been asked to visit few 
operating Community Radio Stations and prepare questionnaire and 
methodology for the study.   This list of stations to be studied, sample size and 
methodology has also been prepared by AMS and they will start collecting the 
data.   The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the outcome of the study of 
the successful CR models and l earn from their experience in removing the 
impediments in setting up of community radios in India. 
 
E. Prasar Bharati Plan Fund Utilization  
(Recommendation S.No.11) 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note  that for the 12thFive Year Plan, the Government 
approved a total outlay of Rs.3826 crore for Prasar Bharati, viz. Rs.2614.86 
crore for Continuing Schemes and Rs. 1211.14 crore for New Schemes. The 
outlay for Broad schemes namely „Broadcasting and Infrastr ucture Network 
Development‟ is Rs. 3500 crore, for „Content Development and 
Dissemination‟ is Rs. 186 crore and for „Special Project‟ is Rs.140 crore. In 
addition, separate outlay is being provided for „Kisan Channel‟, i.e., Rs. 26 
crore in 2014 -15, Rs.45 crore in   2015-16 and Rs.60 crore for the year       
2016-17. For the Annual Plan 2016 -17, the total outlay is Rs. 450 crore which 
includes Rs.60 crore for the Kisan Channel and Rs.390 crore for Schemes 
„Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development‟ and  „Special Projects‟. 
The Committee have been informed about the reasons for reduction in funds at 

11 
 
the RE stage as compared to the BE given in 2015 -16, which in the case of 
DD pertains to dropping/curtailing in RE  (2015-16) of the provisions for 
major items , viz. Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) transmitters, Direct to 
Home (DTH), Set Top Boxes (STBs), Digital Satellite News Gathering 
Vehicles (DSNGs), etc. as these were not expected to be executed by the 
Prasar Bharati during the remaining period of the  current Financial Year. In 
the case of AIR, the requirement of funds was reduced in the RE stage, 
broadly because various schemes of AIR were reviewed in 2013 -14 and     
2014-15, and those found as having negative cost benefits were ordered to be 
ceased o r tapered off. The Committee note that the Ministry have released 
Rs.453.77 crore to Prasar Bharati during the year 2015 -16 and the amount 
released to Prasar Bharati is construed as expenditure by the Ministry. 
However, Prasar Bharati have informed that ou t of total release of Rs.453.77 
crore, an amount of Rs.246.42 crore has been actually booked as expenditure 
by them which includes Rs.220.17 crore on Plan Capital in AIR and DD and 
Rs.26.25 crore for Content Development and Dissemination for DD Kisan. 
Further, the CEO, Prasar Bharati, submitted the reason for under -utilization of 
Plan funds during 2015 -16 as a policy decision to avoid expenditure on 
obsolete technology such as analog transmission, short wave and medium 
wave radio transmission, etc. The Comm ittee also note that the delay in Plan 
Expenditure has affected studio modernization due to the delay in procurement 
of Camera Chains, XD Cam, Recorders and digitisation of transmitters. The 
Committee would like to point out that less utilization of funds is likely to 
result in spill over of schemes to the next year. As assured by the CEO, Prasar 
Bharati, the Committee trust that in the year 2016 -17, Prasar Bharati would 
resort to better planning in execution of schemes for DD and AIR with 
available state of-the-art technology and gainfully utilize the allocated funds.”  
19. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
“Doordarshan has always been striving to adopt state -of-art technologies to 
upgrade its technic al infrastructure while implementing various projects 
approved in Plan schemes.  Doordarshan has adopted DVB -T2 standard for 
digitalization of its terrestrial network. This is the latest standard for digital 
terrestrial transmission which has highest data capacity amongst available 
DTT standards. For reception on mobile receivers, DD has adopted the latest 
standard, DVB -T2 lite. Similarly, for expansion of DD‟s DTH platform a 
spectrum efficient technology, MPEG-4 standard, has been adopted.  
For 2016-17, an allocation of Rs. 221.00 crore has been made under Creation 
of Capital Assets (Revenue Plan).  It is the constant endeavor of Doordarshan 
to achieve full utilization of the allocated funds. 
Prasar Bharati has also constituted a Committee to examine reason s for 
underutilization of Plan Funds in year 2015 -16 under the chairmanship of Shri 
R.K.Jain Adviser(Tech),Prasar Bharati. It will help Prasar Bharati in 

12 
 
introspection and taking remedial measure for future Plan spending. First 
meeting of this committee ha s already been held in Prasar Bharati to discuss 
the reasons for underutilization of Capital funds.  
Projects are being monitored at highest level. CEO, Prasar Bharati has held a 
meeting with all senior officers of AIR & discussed in detail about bottlenec ks 
in executing the Plan schemes & booking of expenditure. Accordingly, 
guidelines have been issued to meet the target. E -in-C, AIR is reviewing 
progress of each project & purchase proposals on regular basis to avoid 
slippage in meeting the target of year 2016-17.  Progress reports are regularly 
reaching Directorate on monthly basis. Budget meetings are held twice in a 
year to discuss progress and expenditure on various projects and difficulties 
faced by implementing agencies. Direct Budgetary Support for A IR for Plan 
2016-17 outlay is Rs.177 crore. It will be fully utilized mainly on 
digitalization of studio & FM expansion.”      
20. The Committee had noted  that out of the total release of Rs.453.77 crore, 
an amount of Rs.246.42 crore had actually been booked as expenditure by Prasar 
Bharati which included Rs.220.17 crore on Plan Capital in AIR and DD and 
Rs.26.25 crore for Content Development and Disseminat ion for DD Kisan.   On 
the reasons for underutilization of Plan funds during 2015 -16, Prasar Bharati 
had submitted that it was a policy decision to avoid expenditure on obsolete 
technology such as analog transmission, short wave and medium wave radio 
transmission, etc. The Committee also noted that the delay in Plan Expenditure 
had affected studio modernization due to the delay in procurement of Camera 
Chains, XD Cam, Recorders and digitisation of transmitters and felt that less 
utilization of funds was lik ely to result in spill over of schemes to the next year. 
The Committee had hoped that in the year 2016 -17, Prasar Bharati would resort 
to better planning in execution of schemes for DD and AIR with available state 
of-the-art technology and gainfully utiliz e the allocated funds.  The Committee 
are happy to note that Prasar Bharati has constituted a Committee to examine 
reasons for underutilization of Plan Funds in year 2015 -16, which will help them 
in introspection and taking remedial measure for future Plan  spending and the 
first meeting of this Committee has already been held to discuss the reasons for 
underutilization of Capital funds.   Projects are being monitored at highest level. 
CEO, Prasar Bharati has held a meeting with all senior officers of AIR & 
discussed in detail about bottlenecks in executing the Plan schemes & booking of 

13 
 
expenditure. Accordingly, guidelines have been issued to meet the target. 
Engineer-in-Chief, AIR is reviewing progress of each project & purchase 
proposals on regular basis to avoid slippage in meeting the target of year        
2016-17.  Direct Budgetary Support for AIR for Plan 2016 -17 outlay is Rs.177 
crore which will be fully utilized mainly on digitalization of studio & FM 
expansion.  The Committee, while taking note of the above initiatives, caution 
Prasar Bharati that despite their  shift in  focus to adoption of state -of-art 
technologies, both Doordarshan and All India Radio have had to reduce their 
revised estimate during 2015 -16 due to poor planning and execution .  Keeping in 
view the importance of DD & AIR in the Indian broadcasting space and also that 
a major chunk of budget of the Ministry goes to Prasar Bharati , the Committee 
reiterate that Ministry/Prasar Bharati  should resort to better planning in 
execution of schemes for DD and AIR with available state -of-the-art technology 
and gainfully utilize the allocated funds.  
  

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Analysis  
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
The Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) approved for the Ministry of I&B in the 
12th Five Year Plan was Rs. 7583 crore, accounting for 39% increase over the 11th 
Plan allocation. A scrutiny of trend of utilization of Plan funds during the four years of 
the 12th Plan Period (2012 -13 to 2015 -16) indicates that a sum of Rs.2802.72 crore 
was expended against the BE allocation of Rs.3729.53 crore in the corresponding 
period. When compared to the Revised Estimate allocation which was of the order of 
Rs.2918 crore, for these years, it depicts 96% utilization. A close look at the financial 
performance of the Ministry for the year 2015 -16 indicates that they were able to 
spend Rs.734.39 crore on Plan schemes against an outlay of  Rs.914.53 crore at the BE 
Stage. The reasons for shortfall in utilization of funds during 2015 -16 have been 
broadly attributed to reduction of outlay at the Revised Estimate stage by the Ministry 
of Finance, long procurement process of Prasar Bharati for procurement of goods and 
services and delay in approval of the new schemes for the 12th Five Year Plan period 
under the sectors, particularly in Film and Broadcasting. The Ministry, in particular, 
stated that the low expenditure of Prasar Bharati has poorl y reflected on the Ministry‟s 
overall expenditure for the year 2015-16. An outlay of Rs.800 crore has been made for 
financing the Plan schemes of the Ministry for the year 2016 -17, which is Rs.114.53 
crore lesser than the BE allocation made in the year 201 5-16. According to the 
Ministry, the overall reduction in allocation of funds would impact financing of the 
planned schemes. The Committee observe that the annual Plan expenditure of the 
Ministry so far during the 12th Plan period, on an average, has been a little over 
Rs.700 crore. Considering the wide mandate of this Ministry to reach out to the billion 
plus population of the country, the Committee are constrained to point out that the 
quantum allocation made under the Plan segment so far in the 12th Plan  period is 
insufficient to fulfill the envisaged objectives. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that this needs a high level review for requisite enhancement of Plan fund allocation in 
the ensuing Plan period.  
For the year 2016-17, the Ministry should take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance for enhancement of Plan funding at the RE Stage. Most importantly, the 
Ministry should also take steps to strengthen its Plan execution strategy so that the 
fund allocated at the BE stage in the current fisca l is optimally utilized. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry for overall 
increase in the allocation of funds and measures taken to scale up financial 
performance in the year 2016-17.” 
 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for action.  
A sum of Rs.800 crore has been allocated for Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting for the year 2016 -17, the last year of 12 th Five Year Plan.  This Ministry 
is making all out efforts   to ensur e speedy and effective utilization of funds during 
2016-17 which include the following steps: 
a) Streamlining the process of implementation of Plan schemes; 
b) Priority is being given for the completion of Ongoing Schemes. 
c) Undertaking periodic review of Plan imp lementation and expenditure in  
Meetings chaired by Secretary (I&B); 
d) Periodic expenditure review meetings held at the level of Additional Secretary 
& Financial Adviser. 
e) Regular monitoring of the implementation of various Plan Schemes by the 
respective Administrative Heads as well as by Media Unit Heads.  
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.G-30011/7/2016-PC, dated 23.06.2016) 
Scheme of Direct Contact Programme 
(Recommendation S.No.4) 
The Committee note that the Direct Contact Programme (DCP) is a Sub -Scheme 
under the Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP) which envisages a paradigm shift in the 
information delivery mechanism of the Government of India through inter -personal 
communication mode by ushering in systemic changes in the existing mechanisms. 
The Scheme proposes holding of 3000 special programmes on flagship schemes all 
over the country, providing a robust information delivery mechanism serving people at 
their convenience at all the existing estab lishments of DFP and organizing 55 
conducted tours for opinion leaders at the grass-root and village levels. The Committee 
note that under the “Direct Contact Programme”, initially there were three 
components, viz. (i) Special Outreach Programme; (ii) Cond ucted Tours/Skill 
Upgradation; and (iii) Infrastructure Support to DCP. Approval for Rs.3.38 crore 
(2015-16) only was received from the Ministry of I&B. Later, the component 
“Conducted Tours/Skill Upgradation” was dropped in Revised Cost Estimate (RCE). 
Further, the budgetary allocation was reduced to Rs.3.00 crore at the RE stage whereas 
the actual expenditure has been Rs.2.71 crore as on 31.03.2016. The Committee 
observe that while there is a token increase in the budgetary allocation for this 
Scheme, i.e . Rs.3.00 crore in 2015 -16 (RE stage) to Rs.4.00 crore in 2016 -17(BE 
stage), the targets under the Special Outreach Programmes (SOPs) have been reduced 

16 
 
drastically for the year 2016 -17 as compared to the past two annual Plans. While the 
Ministry have state d that the reduced target of SOPs is not going to adversely affect 
the projected outcome of the awareness campaign as the quality of each programme 
has been improved due to increase in unit cost, the Committee feel that the target of 
300 Special Outreach P rogrammes is significantly less as compared to the target of 
1060 SOPs set during the year 2014 -15. Considering the fact that the Scheme is highly 
effective among the people at the grass -root level and brought about behavioural 
changes in them, the Committ ee feel that there is need to organize more and more 
SOPs, with quality and increased unit cost. The Committee also feel that conducted 
tours/skill upgradation and infrastructure support components visualized initially are 
important aspects of the Direct C ontact Programme and should be given a continuing 
thrust. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should give special 
attention to this Scheme and try to increase the targets during the year 2016 -17 with 
emphasis on infrastructure support and  skill upgradation. Efforts should also be made 
to conduct more and more focused and integrated programmes at the grass -root level 
in order to achieve the desired impact. 
Reply of the Government 
It is to mention here that the unit cost of each SOP programme during 2014 -15 
was Rs.26,150/ - (programme expenditure break -up copy enclosed) for a total 
programmes of 1060. However, keeping in view the quality of the programme and 
increase in expenditure etc, the unit cost of each SOP programme for 2015 -16 h as 
been fixed at Rs.65,000/ - (programme expenditure break -up copy enclosed). Since 
there was limited budget, the number of SOPs organized were 561 in 2015 -16 
However, more SOPs were organized on behalf of the client ministries like M/o 
Women and Child Deve lopment and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (696 
programmes), thus creating more awareness about Government programmes at the 
grassroot level. 
  
The DFP has been allocated Rs.4 crores during 2016 -17. Emphasis during 2016 -
17 has been made to improve t he infrastructure and skill development at the grassroot 
level, such as procurement of more field vehicles replacing the condemned vehicles in 
north-east and hilly areas and providing latest hardware like multimedia projectors, 
laptops, smart phones etc., as part of digitalization of communication. Besides, it is 
proposed to organize 300 Special Outreach Programmes during 2016 -17 at a unit cost 
of Rs.65,000/- and significantly improving the quality of programmes at field level. It 
is a fact that the number of SOPs conducted by DFP during 2016-17 will be less due to 
budgetary constraints. But with the proposed integration of activities of DAVP 
Exhibition Wing, Song & Drama Division and Public Information Campaign of PIB, 
the integrated awareness programmes at  the field level would be more effective due to 
pooling of resources and manpower. The field officers would be in a position to 
produce quality programmes. Besides, DFP would be organizing SOP for the Client 
Ministries who are approaching it for conduct of SOPs on specific themes. 
 

17 
 
Detailed breakup of expenditure of each programme costing Rs.65000/ - is given 
below:- 
Sl. No. Particular  Amount  
(in Rs.) 
1.  Honorarium to Resource persons/Experts 2,000 
2.  Logistics such as Arrangement (Pandals/tables/chairs, etc.) for 
public meeting, Refreshments for Opinion Leaders, participants 
of various Programme activities. 
30,000 
3.  Prizes for public winners of Competition/contests, etc. 3,000 
4.  Promotional material in Regional Languages i.e. Pamphlets, 
Brochures/Posters, T-Shirts, Caps, Bags, etc. 
10,000 
5.  Hiring of Field vehicles (1 vehicle for 4 days @Rs.3,000 per day) 12,000 
6.  Stationery and documentation etc. 2,000 
7.  Engagement of local entertainment group and local help 6,000 
 Total  65,000 
 
Detailed breakup of expenditure of each programme costing Rs.26,150/ - is given 
below:- 
Component  Expenditure (in Rs.) 
Honorarium to Resource persons/Experts 1000 
Arrangement (Pandals/tables/chairs, etc.) for public meeting 2500 
100 T-Shirts (@ Rs.125/- each) or 500 caps (@Rs.25/- each) for 
Rally 
12500 
Refreshments for Opinion Leaders, participants of various 
Programme activities 
2150 
Prizes for Competition/contests etc. (10 prizes @Rs.150/- each) 1500 
Banners (for public meetings and Rally) 1000 
Local help 500 
TA/DA to Officers 5000 
Total 26150 
(M/oI&B‟s ID No.M-31012/1/2016-IP&MC dated 08.06.2016) 
 

18 
 
Production of Films & Documentaries in various Indian languages 
(Recommendation S.No.6) 
Production of Films &  Documentaries in various Indian languages is a sub - 
scheme under Development Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content 
which covers three different components, viz. Production of films in various Indian 
languages, Production of Children's Films and Production of Documentary and Short 
Films. The Committee note that during the year 2015 -16, there was underutilization of 
funds under this Scheme due to the late finalization of guidelines in December, 2015 
for the execution of the component 'Production of  Documentary through NGOs'. The 
recommendation of the Committee constituted for selection of NGOs is stated to be 
under examination. In respect of the other component of 'Production of films in 
various Indian languages', the Ministry have informed that the y had constituted a two-
member Committee for examining the financial arrangements between the Ministry of 
I&B and NFDC for implementation of the Scheme. However, after examination by the 
Internal Finance Division of the Ministry, it was found that certain recommendations 
of the Committee were not entirely in accordance with the provisions of General 
Financial Rules and, therefore, the matter was referred to the Ministry of Finance on 
27.01.2015. The Committee have been apprised that the observations of the Ministry 
of Finance have since been received on 10.03.2016 and based on these, the terms & 
conditions of the "Memorandum of Understanding" to be signed between the Ministry 
& NFDC for implementing the scheme are being framed. Due to the above reasons, no 
funds could be released under the two components of the Plan schemes and therefore 
no film has been produced under the two components. The Committee note that on the 
one hand the Ministry could not spend the entire amount allocated during 2015 -16, 
and on th e other, they have stated that the enhanced allocation of Rs.16.00 crore for 
the year 2016-17 will not be sufficient to meet the requirement and in case of pressing 
need they propose to re -appropriate savings, in other schemes. The Committee feels 
that while India has a rich legacy for filmic content, and there is a talent pool in the 
field, particularly in documentary, it is unfortunate that the Ministry are not able to 
channelize the resources for production of films due to procedural hurdles. There is an  
urgent need to identify the modus operandi of this scheme and the enhanced budget 
spent prudently for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
criteria for selection of NGOs and MoU between the Ministry of I&B and NFDC be 
finalized at the earliest.  
Further, the Committee have been apprised that the expenditure for carrying out 
marketing & dissemination activities has increased manifold, sometimes even bigger 
than the production budget and, therefore, the outreach of the contents produced  is not 
increasing because of paucity of funds. Also, the scheme supports production of films 
with cinematic, thematic and aesthetic excellence that is for the niche audience and, 
therefore, achieving commercial success is difficult. The Committee are of t he view 
that there is need for enhancing the budgetary support under the Scheme for marketing 
purpose and the Ministry need to make separate budget provision for marketing and 
dissemination activities of films and documentaries produced to achieve commerci al 
success. The Committee suggest that the task of developing marketing strategy to 

19 
 
experienced co -production partners on revenue sharing basis as proposed by the 
Ministry should be given due consideration. 
Reply of the Government 
The funds allocated to th e plan scheme i.e. Production of Films & 
Documentaries in various Indian languages were not fully utilized during 2015 -16 due 
to non -finalization of the terms & condition of implementing two of its sub 
components -“Production of Documentary through NGOs” a nd “Production of films 
in various Indian languages”.   
The guidelines for executing the components “Production of Documentaries 
through NGOs” were finalized in December, 2015 and the process of selection of 
NGOs has now been completed.  
The observations o f the Ministry of Finance have also been received for 
implementing other sub component “Production of films in various Indian languages” 
and based on that, the terms & conditions of the "Memorandum of Understanding" to 
be signed between the Ministry & NFDC  for implementing the scheme are being 
framed.  
As the Ministry may be in a position to implement these two sub components of 
the plan scheme during current year, more funds may be required for the year 2016 -17 
as compared to 2015 -16 & therefore, the alloc ation for the year 2016 -17 has been 
enhanced.  
The need for enhancing the budgetary support for marketing as noted by the 
Committee is fully accepted by the Ministry and accordingly, provisions have been 
made in the proposed MoU to be signed with NFDC to a llocate funds for marketing at 
the time of first release of the film. As per approved guidelines for implementing the 
scheme “Production of Documentary through NGOs”, the selected NGOs are to be 
allowed to spend 50% of the revenue generated on marketing activities. 
(M/oI&B‟s ID No.202/35/2012-F(PSU)Part-I dated 22.06.2016) 
Prasar Bharati Plan Fund Utilization  
(Recommendation S.No.11) 
The Committee note that for the 12thFive Year Plan, the Government approved a 
total outlay of Rs.3826 crore for Prasar Bharati, viz. Rs.2614.86 crore for Continuing 
Schemes and Rs. 1211.14 crore for New Schemes. The outlay for Broad schemes 
namely „Broadcasting and Infrastructure Network Development‟ is Rs. 3500 crore, for 
„Content Development and Dissemination‟ is Rs. 186 crore and for „Special Project‟ is 
Rs.140 crore. In addition, separate outlay is being provided for „Kisan Channel‟, i.e., 
Rs. 26 crore in 2014-15, Rs.45 crore in 2015-16 and Rs.60 crore for the year 2016 -17. 
For the Annual Plan 2016 -17, the total outlay is Rs. 450 crore which includes Rs.60 

20 
 
crore for the Kisan Channel and Rs.390 crore for Schemes „Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Network Development‟ and „Speci al Projects‟. The Committee have 
been informed about the reasons for reduction in funds at the RE stage as compared to 
the BE given in 2015 -16, which in the case of DD pertains to dropping/curtailing in 
RE (2015 -16) of the provisions for major items, viz. Digital Terrestrial Television 
(DTT) transmitters, Direct to Home (DTH), Set Top Boxes (STBs), Digital Satellite 
News Gathering Vehicles (DSNGs), etc. as these were not expected to be executed by 
the Prasar Bharati during the remaining period of the curren t Financial Year. In the 
case of AIR, the requirement of funds was reduced in the RE stage, broadly because 
various schemes of AIR were reviewed in 2013 -14 and 2014 -15, and those found as 
having negative cost benefits were ordered to be ceased or tapered off. The Committee 
note that the Ministry have released Rs.453.77 crore to Prasar Bharati during the year 
2015-16 and the amount released to Prasar Bharati is construed as expenditure by the 
Ministry. However, Prasar Bharati have informed that out of total release of Rs.453.77 
crore, an amount of Rs.246.42 crore has been actually booked as expenditure by them 
which includes Rs.220.17 crore on Plan Capital in AIR and DD and Rs.26.25 crore for 
Content Development and Dissemination for DD Kisan. Further, the CE O, Prasar 
Bharati, submitted the reason for under -utilization of Plan funds during 2015 -16 as a 
policy decision to avoid expenditure on obsolete technology such as analog 
transmission, short wave and medium wave radio transmission, etc. The Committee 
also note that the delay in Plan Expenditure has affected studio modernization due to 
the delay in procurement of Camera Chains, XD Cam, Recorders and digitisation of 
transmitters. The Committee would like to point out that less utilization of funds is 
likely t o result in spill over of schemes to the next year. As assured by the CEO, 
Prasar Bharati, the Committee trust that in the year 2016 -17, Prasar Bharati would 
resort to better planning in execution of schemes for DD and AIR with available state 
of-the-art technology and gainfully utilize the allocated funds.  
Reply of the Government 
Doordarshan has always been striving to adopt state -of-art technologies to 
upgrade its technical infrastructure while implementing various projects approved in 
Plan schemes.  Doo rdarshan has adopted DVB -T2 standard for digitalization of its 
terrestrial network. This is the latest standard for digital terrestrial transmission which 
has highest data capacity amongst available DTT standards. For reception on mobile 
receivers, DD has adopted the latest standard, DVB -T2 lite. Similarly, for expansion 
of DD‟s DTH platform a spectrum efficient technology, MPEG -4 standard, has been 
adopted.  
For 2016-17, an allocation of Rs. 221.00 crore has been made under Creation of 
Capital Assets (Revenue Plan).  It is the constant endeavor of Doordarshan to achieve 
full utilization of the allocated funds. 
Prasar Bharati has also constituted a Committee to examine reasons for 
underutilization of Plan Funds in year 2015 -16 under the chairmanship of Shri 
R.K.Jain Adviser(Tech),Prasar Bharati. It will help Prasar Bharati in introspection and 
taking remedial measure for future Plan spending. First meeting of this committee has 

21 
 
already been held in Prasar Bharati to discuss the reasons for underutilization of  
Capital funds.  
Projects are being monitored at highest level. CEO, Prasar Bharati has held a 
meeting with all senior officers of AIR & discussed in detail about bottlenecks in 
executing the Plan schemes & booking of expenditure. Accordingly, guidelines h ave 
been issued to meet the target. E -in-C, AIR is reviewing progress of each project & 
purchase proposals on regular basis to avoid slippage in meeting the target of year 
2016-17.  Progress reports are regularly reaching Directorate on monthly basis. 
Budget meetings are held twice in a year to discuss progress and expenditure on 
various projects and difficulties faced by implementing agencies. Direct Budgetary 
Support for AIR for Plan 2016 -17 outlay is Rs.177 crore. It will be fully utilized 
mainly on digitalization of studio & FM expansion.      
(MoI&B‟s ID.No.G-20019/2/2016-B(Fin)dated 15.07.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources of Prasar Bharati  
(Recommendation S.No.12) 
The Committee note that during the year 2015 -16, the Ministry had spent 
Rs.2827.75 crore under Non -Plan fund to meet salary and salary related expenses. 
Separately, Prasar Bharati allocates Rs.200 crore annually from its IEBR for Content 
Development Scheme as  per the 12th Plan Scheme. The Committee have been 
informed that Prasar Bharati spent Rs.295.60 crore in 2012 -13, Rs.352.57 crore in 
2013-14, Rs.465.34 crore in 2014 -15 and Rs.531.78 crore in 2015 -16 from IEBR on 
Content Development and Dissemination. Furt her, in BE 2016 -17, Rs.548.54 crore 
has been allocated out of IEBR, for expenditure on Content Development and 
Dissemination. The Committee have been informed about the possible areas in AIR 
and DD where IEBR generation could be increased. In this regard, under AIR, the 
areas, inter-alia, include FMization, sale of archival releases, renting of auditoria, 
enhancement of commercial revenue, etc. Similarly, under Doordarshan, the areas, 
inter-alia, include expansion of DTH platform, infrastructure resource sh aring, time 
slot sale on DDs satellite channels, Digital Terrestrial Network, etc. Further, for this,   
the Prasar Bharati has taken certain steps which in the case of AIR, include engaging 
the services of professional marketing teams and providing incentives to achievers 
that exceed revenue targets, and in the case of DD, the process of monetization of 
resources. At the same time, efforts were made by Prasar Bharati to generate 
additional revenue by AIR and DD during 2015 -16. However, the declining trend of 
terrestrial viewership, non -implementation of professional marketing division, 
aggressive competition,  curtailment of advertisement budget of the erstwhile heavy 
spending Government Ministries like Health and Agriculture, etc., have been cited as 
reasons for the declining revenue generation trend for DD since 2014 -15. Further, the 
Committee have been apprised about the steps the Prasar Bharati have taken to reverse 

22 
 
this trend which, inter-alia, include reorganization of commercial revenue divisions, 
change in content sourcing model, exploration of new revenue models from auction of 
slots on DTH platforms an d Digital Terrestrial Transmitters having multiple channel 
capacity, etc.; these measures are likely to provide additional revenue generation to 
Prasar Bharati. The Committee appreciates these steps taken by Prasar Bharati and 
recommends that they should c ontinue to explore avenues to augment revenue 
generation so that the public broadcaster achieves self -sustenance gradually and 
becomes less dependent on Government support.  
Reply of the Government 
The expenditure incurred on Content Development under IEBR is given below:-                                                                                          
 
                       (Rs. in Crores) 
Name of the 
Sector financed 
by IEBR 
Actual   
2012-13 
Actual  
2013-14 
Actual 
2014-15 
Provisional 
2015-16 
AIR 85.62 123.58 188.37 189.11 
DD 209.98 228.99 276.97 342.67 
Total 295.60 352.57 465.34 531.78 
The above expenditure was incurred on programme production to cater  the           
needs of general public, weaker sections of the society, SC/ST. special programmes 
on welfare of minorities, development of NE, Border Areas, LWE, Women 
Empowerment, Youth, special initiatives of Hon‟ble Prime Minister etc. 
AIR will continue to broadcast programmes on similar lines during the year 
2016-17.  All out efforts are being made to increase the revenue generation of AIR 
and Doordarshan. 
(MoI&B‟s ID No.G-20019/2/2016-B(Fin) dated 15.07.2016 
Outstanding Dues of Doordarshan Kendras 
(Recommendation S.No.13) 
The Committee note that the issue of outstanding dues of the Doordarshan 
Kendras is lingering for quite some time. The Ministry have informed that as on date 
there is an outstanding due of ap proximately Rs.6.40 crore for the year 2013 -14 and 
Rs.17.76 crore for the year 2014-15 in respect of various DD Kendras. However, there 
is no outstanding amount in respect of AIR stations. Further, the final figures of 
outstanding amount due for the year 2 015-16 are still being worked out and, as such, 
there might be some outstanding dues for that year also. Prasar Bharati is making 
efforts to recover the outstanding dues from Kendras by continuously pursuing the 
defaulters to make payment and request remin ders are sent, and in case of delay, 
Doordarshan charge interest @ 14.5% from the defaulting agencies. Bank Guarantees 
of the defaulting agencies are encashed as per terms and conditions of the agreement. 
Arbitration clause is also invoked as per terms and  conditions of the agreement. Prasar 
Bharati is taking recourse to provisions of the Arbitration Act by filling its claims 

23 
 
against such defaulting agencies for the recovery of outstanding dues. Further, on the 
issue of legal recourse pursued by Prasar Bhar ati, it was submitted that the 
Doordarshan accepts commercials through registered/accredited agencies. Arbitrations 
are invoked against the defaulting agencies under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 
1996 (Including all amendments till 2015). Prasar Bha rati is taking recourse to 
provisions of the said Act by filling its claims against such defaulting agencies for the 
recovery of outstanding dues. In 15 arbitration cases Arbitrators have passed awards 
in favour of Prasar Bharati and approximately Rs.53.71  crore has recovered. In light 
of the huge pendency of outstanding dues of Doordarshan Kendras, the Committee 
recommends that the process of recovery of dues should be expedited. 
Reply of the Government 
A sum of Rs. 1.48 Crores and Rs. 12.39 Crore has been  recovered against the 
outstanding dues for the year 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 respectively. Efforts are being 
made to recover the balance outstanding on priority basis. The major dues are 
outstanding against the state government departments. Kendras have been d irected to 
make all out efforts to recover the dues.   
(MoI&B‟s ID No.G-20019/2/2016-B(Fin) dated 15.07.2016) 
DD Kisan Channel  
(Recommendation Sl.No.14) 
The DD Kisan Channel was launched by the Hon‟ble Prime Minister on             
26 May, 2015 for supporting the cause of the country‟s farming population. The 
Scheme had initially been approved with a provision of Rs.100 crore during 2014 -15. 
However, for the year 2015 -16, an allocation of Rs.45 crore had been made at the BE 
stage which was reduced to Rs.26.25 crore at the RE stage, the whole of which was 
utilized till 31st March, 2016. Regarding the physical targets achieved under this 
Scheme during 2015 -16, the Ministry have informed that interim technical facilities 
were set up at t he Central Production Centre to meet the minimum functional 
requirements. An allocation of Rs.10 crore had been made in BE 2015 -16 for creation 
of capital assets (Revenue Plan). However, the entire amount was withdrawn at the 
RE stage which has impacted activities such as purchase order of important equipment 
such as HD Zoom Lens, Collaborative Non -Linear Editing (NLE), Batteries & 
Chargers, etc. The Committee have been informed that out of Rs. 60 crore allocated 
under BE 2016 -17 for Kisan Channel, Rs. 52 c rore has been earmarked for content 
development and dissemination and Rs. 8 crore for creation of capital assets. In light 
of the above submission of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should  objectively assess Plan activities under t his head so that Rs.8.00 crore made at 
the BE stage for creation of capital assets could be optimally utilized.  
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Purchase orders have already been placed for some equipment such as HD Zoon 
Lens, Collaborative NLE and Batteries &  Chargers.  Multi-Camera Studio Production 
facility, XDCAM High Definition Camcorders & Recorders/ Decks, Camera support 
systems and envisaged to be provided at CPC, Delhi.  Tenders for these facilities have 
already been received and are under various stages of evaluation.  
 
Apart from Rs.8.00 crore allocated for Creation of Capital Assets for Kisan 
Channel for 2016-17, Prasar Bharati has also projected additional demand of Rs.10.00 
crore for Kisan Channel which will be taken up at RE 2016-17 stage.  
(MoI&B‟s ID No. G-20019/2/2016-B(Fin) dated 15.07.2016) 
(Recommendation S.No.15) 
Issues related to casual workers 
The Committee note that the issue of regularization of casual workers is a major 
problem, both in Doordarshan Kendras  and AIR stations. On this issue, the Ministry 
have informed that there has been no uniform policy for empanelment/engagement of 
casuals. It was left to the discretion of Station/Kendra Heads who had been 
empanelling casuals based on requirements from time  to time. The number of casuals 
increased with the expansion of DD and AIR by adding more Stations/Kendras, shifts, 
etc. However, due to legal compulsions, such casuals are being engaged for a 
maximum of 6 days in a month to avoid any claim for regularizat ion in the job. Since 
the maximum booking in a month for a casual is of 6 days and the programmes are to 
be telecast/ broadcast daily, at least 5 casuals are being put on the panel for a 
particular job. There are approximately 20000 casuals who are on the panels of AIR/ 
Doordarshan. In the past, as a one-time exercise, Doordarshan had formulated a policy 
in 1992 (modified in 1994) for regularization of casual artists who had put in 120 days 
of work in a year. However, after obtaining the views of the Additi onal Solicitor 
General, the process was again started with the approval of Prasar Bharati Board. 
Under this process, 233 eligible casual artists have been regularized. 202 eligible 
casual workers who were conferred Temporary Status Worker (TSW) status unde r the 
DoP&T Scheme of 1993 have also been regularized against vacancies. Further, the 
Committee are given to understand that regularization would not be legally possible in 
view of the judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka  
vs. Uma Devi as these casuals are not employed but are only empanelled. Even 
otherwise, the number of casuals is so large that it is neither feasible nor practical to 
regularize them. Keeping in view the problems faced by casuals, Prasar Bharati have 
taken some decisions to address their grievances. For example, in case a casual has put 
in 120 days or more in a year, he/she would be given relaxation of age in the matter of 
direct recruitment to the posts against which they are being booked provided they 
fulfill the educational and other qualifications of the post as per the Recruitment 

25 
 
Regulations. This provision has already been incorporated in the Recruitment 
Regulations for the posts for which recruitment has recently been undertaken through 
SSC. Apart from this, with a view to stopping indiscriminate empanelment of casuals, 
orders have been issued to the effect that all existing panels would be reviewed and no 
new empanelment of casuals would be done without approval of the DG concerned. 
The Committee ap preciate that the Prasar Bharati has taken cognizance of the 
problems faced by casual workers and some steps have been put in place for their 
benefit. The Committee feel that if implemented in the right earnest, these measures 
would address some of the gri evances of casual workers to a great extent, given the 
legal scenario. The Committee desire that while these decisions are being 
implemented, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should try to work out a uniform policy 
regarding empanelment/engagement of casuals, w ithout compromising on the quality 
of performance of the DDKs and Radio Stations.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Directions have been 
issued to Prasar Bharati for strict compliance of the recommendations made  by the 
Committee for formulation a uniform policy regarding empanelment/ engagement of 
casuals in Prasar Bharati in future. Prasar Bharati has also been suitably advised to 
continue to take all necessary steps that could be legally taken to see that the i nterests 
of casual workers are taken care of. 

26 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) 
(Recommendation S.No.3) 
The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal 
multimedia advertising agency of the Government catering to the communication 
needs of the Ministries / Departments, autonomous bodies and PSUs.  In order to 
strengthen the publicity of v arious peoples‟ welfare and participation oriented 
programmes in a holistic manner, and to enable efficient discharge of its services, the 
DAVP had sought and obtained increased funding for two of its Plan Schemes, 
namely, (i) “People‟s Empowerment through  Development Communication”, 
implemented through the DCID scheme, and (ii) “Media Infrastructure Development 
Programme”. The  Committee note that under the scheme “People‟s Empowerment 
through Development Communication”, during the first year of 12 th Plan, i.e.,       
2012-13, utilization of fund was to the tune of Rs.103.18 crore which further increased 
to Rs.189.00 crore in the year 2013 -14 and Rs.155.20 crore in the year 2014 -15.  For 
the year 2015-16, an allocation of Rs.151 crore had been made at the R E stage out of 
which the actual expenditure as on 30 th March, 2016 had been Rs.146.34 crore.  
During the current financial year 2016 -17, a reduced allocation of Rs.125.60 crore has 
been made under the scheme at the BE stage.  The Committee feel that this a mount is 
grossly inadequate to meet the requirement under this important scheme.  As a matter 
of fact, the allocation is about 69% of the total outlay for the information sector.  The 
Committee are given to understand that the line Ministries and Departmen ts carry 
their Ministry-specific campaign for which they have their own budgetary allocations.  
However, the DAVP‟s budget allocation obtained through the DCID programme of 
Ministry of I&B is used to run integrated campaigns on all the flagship programmes of 
the Government of India.  The Committee observe that the Government of India have 
been launching several initiatives and direct benefit schemes for the welfare of the 
people, and information regarding these schemes have to be disseminated to the 
people and the target groups.  To achieve this objective, the scheme of Peoples‟ 
Empowerment through Development Communication of DAVP has an important role 
to play.  In order to facilitate integrated campaign on various flagship programmes of 
the Government, the DAVP needs a much larger budget with matching fund allocation 
which requires more allocation for the information sector.  The Secretary of the 
Ministry also submitted in evidence before the Committee that the budget availability 
for publicity purpose is n ot adequate enough to facilitate wide publicity.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the budgetary allocation for the DAVP should 
be enhanced to broadbase and increase the outreach of the multimedia campaigns 
being carried out by them through various  means such as TV, print, social media or 
other outreach programmes for the welfare of the society.  
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Standing Committee on Information Technology have 
been noted.  The expenditure of DAVP under the DCID prog ramme is being 
monitored on regular basis to determine the requirement of funds during the current 
Financial Year.  Utilisation of funds by other media units under the DCID programme 
is being reviewed and savings, if any, will be transferred to DAVP by way  of re -
appropriation, if required.   
(MoI&B O.M. No.M-24012/2/2016-MUC dated 08.07.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
Setting up of a Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming and VFX 
(Recommendation S.No.7) 
The Committee note that the Ministry are setting up a National Centre of 
Excellence for providing trained manpower in the animation, gaming and visual 
effects sector by operating it under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode, which is 
part of the Budget announcement during 2014-15.  The Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
has been prepared by the Media and Entertainment Skills Council and „in -principle‟ 
approval of NITI Aayog has been obtained.  An outlay of Rs. 57 crore has been given 
under the 12 th Plan for this special project.  During the year 2015 -16 , Rs. 0.26 crore 
has been spent out of Rs. 0.30 crore made available in RE 2015 -16.  In the BE 2016 -
17 , Rs. 5.10 crore has been allocated for this special project.  However, the 
Committee have been informed that d ue to the requirement for consultation with 
different stakeholders and the need for reviewing the DPR, there has been a delay in 
implementation of this Project and consequent underutilization of funds.  With regard 
to Public Private Partnership Model opera ting under the scheme, the Ministry stated 
that the proposed project envisages creation of necessary infrastructure, meeting the 
pre-operation expenditure as well as meeting certain operational expenditure by the 
Government.  However, the responsibility of  the private operator is to meet the 
operational expenditure and the expenditure towards upkeep and maintenance of the 
infrastructure.  PPP model has helped in funding for creation of infrastructure and it is 
proposed that this Centre will provide world cl ass education in the field of animation 
gaming and visual effects at affordable costs.  The committee note that the setting up 
of the National Centre on Animation, Gaming and VFX is important to provide skilled 
manpower in the animation, gaming and visual sector.  Further, this Centre will lay 
the foundation of providing career opportunities to young students having interest in 
learning animation, gaming and visual effects.  Maturing of this sector has potential in 
providing high-end entertainment business opportunities in the country.  Considering 
the significance of this techno advance skill imparting centre, the Committee 
recommend to the Ministry to expedite the implementation of this project and 
optimally utilize the enhanced budget allocation made for the year 2016-17.   
   

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Media and Entertainment Council who were assigned the task of preparation 
of revised DPR submitted the revised DPR.  The revised DPR was submitted for 
acceptance by the competent authority. Following acceptance of the DPR by the 
Competent Authority, a det ailed proposal for appraisal by Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) has been prepared and sent to Ministry of Finance and NITI Ayog.  
Ministry of Finance has forwarded their initial comments and duly taking inputs from 
the comments of Ministry of Finance, modifications to the EFC proposal are being 
carried out.  Separately, RFP for identifying a private partner is being worked out. 
(MoI&B O.M. No.M-21013/8/2015-F(F) dated 24.06.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
Strengthening of Electronics Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) 
(Recommendation Sl.No.8) 
The Committee observe  that the monitoring capacity of EMMC is being 
augmented in a phased manner to achieve the objective of developing content 
acquisition facility for 1500 channels by the end of the 12 th Plan. By the end of FY 
2014-15, EMMC successfully achieved the Plan tar get of content acquisition facility 
of 600 TV channels. Under the 12 th Plan, out of the total outlay of Rs.90 crore, 
Rs.56.37 crore has been utilized as of 31 st March, 2016. Further, during the year 2015-
16, EMMC has procured content acquisition hardware f or setting up monitoring 
facility for 300 additional TV channels and installed at the new set up, i.e., Soochna 
Bhawan. The channels are being configured. The Broadcast Engineering Consultants 
India Ltd. (BECIL) aims to configure all available free to air channels in the content 
monitoring system within a month‟s time. However, configuration of pay channels 
will require broadcasters to provide necessary equipment for downloading and 
decryption of the content/ signal and this is expected to be completed with in  4 
months‟ time. The Committee have also been informed that during the year 2015 -16, 
11 cases were found where TV channels were in violation of content guidelines         
(i.e. Programme Code and Advertisement Code). Insofar as private satellite TV 
channels are concerned, there is no provision of pre -censorship of the content telecast 
on such TV channels. However, all programmes/ advertisements telecast on such TV 
channels are required to adhere to the Programme and Advertising Codes prescribed 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the rules framed 
thereunder. Action is taken whenever any violation of the Codes is noticed or brought 
to the notice of the Ministry. On the issue of setting up of the Centralized Content 
Monitoring Faci lity for private FM and Community Radio Stations, the Committee 
note that BECIL had floated tender for award of job for setting up monitoring facility 
for FM and CR stations. However, it could not get any valid response for establishing 
IT based radio moni toring system. The tender was reissued in 2014 -15, but only one 

30 
 
tenderer responded. BECIL is looking for alternate mechanism to develop content 
acquisition facility for FM and CRS stations. Accordingly, the BECIL proposes to 
float another tender. The Commi ttee observe that as the Government thrust is shifting 
towards FM, the number of FM channels in the country is increasing and it is being 
felt that the monitoring of FM channels and CRS should also be brought under the 
purview of EMMC within a definite timeframe. The committee, therefore, recommend 
to the Ministry that in addition to achieving the target of covering 1500 channels, 
efforts should be made to expedite the content acquisition facility for FM and CRS 
and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this regard.”  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is reviewing the issue of monitoring of CRSs and an appropriate 
policy decision will be taken. 
(MoI&B‟s ID Note No.N-18013/5/2016-BC-II dated 20.07.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
Supporting Community Radio Movement in India  
(Recommendation S.No.9) 
The Committee note  that the Government introduced the policy guidelines for 
permitting community radio stations (CRS) in the year 2002 and initially only 
educational institutions were allowed to operate the CRS. These guidelines were 
revised in the year 2006 to broaden the eligibility criteria and allow community based 
organisations, including civil societies and voluntary organizations, State Agriculture 
Universitites, etc., to operate CRS. The Ministry are popularizing the CRS through the 
scheme of Supporting Community Rad io Movement in India. The Committee are, 
however, concerned to find that against an allocation of Rs. 6.30 crore made at BE for 
the year 2015 -16 which was reduced to Rs.2.70 crore at the RE stage, the Ministry 
was able to spend only Rs. 1.90 crore. Further , during the year 2015-16 the amount of 
Rs. 75 lakh allocated to the North -East Region was kept idle as no operational station  
or Letter of Intent holder from  the North-East Region applied for financial assistance. 
The Ministry have informed that grants to some Community Radio Stations which had 
submitted claim forms could not be released in the year 2015 -16 due to shortfall of 
funds. It is disquieting to note that out of an approved outlay of Rs. 100 crore in the 
12th Plan for this Scheme, only Rs.7.24 cro re, i.e., a little over seven per cent could be 
utilized during the first four years of the Plan Period. The reasons cited by the 
Ministry for the under -utilization of fund included, inter -alia, systemic procedural 
delays in obtaining approvals at differen t stages, less number of applications for 
financial assistance, utilization for innovation grants remained less than anticipated, 
etc. The Ministry have also informed that as per the Scheme for financial assistance, 
50% of cost of equipment is to be borne by the applicant and the grass -root 
organizations are not in a position to mobilise their part of 50%  expenditure, resulting 
in receipt of less number of applicants. Further, challenges such as lack of awareness, 

31 
 
complex licensing procedure, technical inf ormation and training, lack of community 
involvement and sustainability, etc. are coming in the way of the l aunching of new 
Community Radios. The Committee, keeping in view the slow pace of utilization of 
funds and challenges in the execution of the Scheme , feel that the existing financial 
subsidy structure perhaps needs a re -look to make the Scheme more viable and 
attractive for the target group. In the light of the fact that Community Radio Stations is 
one of the thrust areas of the 12 th Plan, and it is i mperative on the part of the 
Government to take this policy initiative forward, there appears a need to increase 
subsidy support for opening the CRS and their sustenance. At the same time, as 
factored into in the existing financial model, the element of ac countability on the part 
of the operating entities should be suitably incorporated in the proposed model. T he 
Committee have been informed  that the Academy of Management Studies (AMS), 
Lucknow, is conducting a study on the effectiveness of Community Radios . The 
Committee desire that they may be apprised of the findings of this study and the 
action taken thereon to strengthen the Community Radio Movement in India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme envisaged that the financial support will encourage Letter of Intent 
(LOI) holders to operationalise their stations. However, the scheme was not widely 
accepted by LOI holders. The applications for grants for purchase of equipment were 
invited in t wo phases. But, later applications were made open throughout the year. 
Despite that in last 4 years only 101 new & existing CRSs/LOI holders have applied 
for grants for purchase of equipment. One of the reasons for this is that applicant has 
to bear 50% of  the cost of equipment. Also, the present approval process requires 
recommendation from a Screening Committee and thereafter approval of Inter -
Ministerial Committee, which is time consuming. 
The Ministry is in the process of addressing these issues to make  the scheme 
more effective.  
The study on effectiveness of Community Radio Stations is in the process. AMS 
Lucknow was asked to visit few operational Community Radio Stations and prepare 
questionnaire and methodology for the study. The list of stations to be studied, sample 
size and methodology has been prepared by AMS and will start collecting the data. 
The outcome of the study wil be intimated to the Committee on its completion. 
(MoI&B, CRS Cell, O.M.No.503/103/2016-CRS, dated 06.06.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
(Recommendation S.No.2) 
The Committee note  that for IIMC, the Ministry are implementing two Plan 
schemes, viz. (i) Scheme of Upgradation of IIMC to international standards; and (ii) 
Scheme of Opening of New Regional Centres of IIMC. The Scheme of Upgradation 
of IIMC to international standards had an initial outlay of Rs.62.00 crore. However, 
the actual budgetary allocation for this scheme during the 11th Plan was Rs.51.50 
crore. Out of this, an amount of Rs.8.50 crore was utilized during the 11th Plan and 
the rest of the amount was carried forward to the 12th Plan. During the 12th Plan, out 
of the remaining Rs.43 crore, an amount of only Rs.13.09 crore was utilized from 
2012-13 to 2015-16. Regarding the reasons for underutilization of funds during 2015 -
16, the Ministry have attributed it to the dela y in obtaining approvals from the civic 
agencies concerned for construction of additional buildings at the New Delhi Campus. 
The Committee are given to understand that the construction of additional buildings 
such as one academic block, one hostel block an d a guest house is yet to start for want 
of clearance from various civic agencies such as the DDA, Ridge Board of NCT 
Delhi, etc. The Committee note that construction of one additional floor in the existing 
main building had been completed way back in 2012 . Since then, the Ministry have 
not been able to achieve much under this scheme in terms of physical target. The 
Committee have been informed that the IIMC has already entered into one MoU with 
the CPWD for the construction and the timeline for constructio n of these buildings is 
three years from the date of approvals from the civic agencies concerned. The 
Committee recommend that the IIMC should follow up the matter with the civic 
agencies for expeditious clearance and commence the construction work at the 
earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the status within a period of three months.  
With regard to the Scheme of Opening of New Regional Centres of IIMC, the 
Committee note that the Scheme was approved in the 12th Plan with a total Plan 
outlay of Rs. 9 4.20 crore and a net budgetary support of Rs.90.00 crore for the 
purpose of constructing permanent campuses at 4 new regional centres of the Institute, 
viz. Maharashtra (Amravati), Mizoram (Aizawl), Jammu & Kashmir (Jammu) and 
Kerala (Kottayam). So far as the construction of permanent campuses for these 
Regional Centres are concerned, the Committee note that while there is some progress 
with regard to construction of Permanent Campus at Aizawl, the work of construction 
of Regional Centre at Kottayam, Jammu and Amravati is yet to commence. The 
Committee have been informed that the construction work for the Regional Centre at 
Kottayam shall commence in July, 2016 whereas the land earmarked for the 
permanent campus at Jammu and Amravati are yet to be handed ove r to IIMC. The 
Committee, while expressing their serious concern that there has been considerable 
delay in these projects leading to time and cost overrun, recommend to the Ministry to 
urgently take up the matter with the authorities concerned for early tr ansfer of land so 

33 
 
that the construction work can commence at the earliest. The Committee also 
recommend to the Ministry/IIMC to strictly adhere to the construction timeline for the 
Aizawl and Kottayam Regional Centres and inform the Committee about the pro gress 
made in these two projects. 
Reply of the Government 
With regards to implementation of Scheme “Up -gradation of IIMC to 
International Standards”, it is submitted that both the Ministry of I&B and IIMC are in 
constant touch with civic authorities for cl earance of the Building Plan proposed by 
IIMC for construction of additional building at IIMC, New Delhi. The Ministry has 
written to DDA for expediting the pending approval. Presently, NOC for construction 
of new buildings at New Delhi is pending with Rid ge Board for clearance. Keeping in 
view the importance of the matter, the meeting of the Ridge Management Board on 
06/06/2016 was attended by ADG, IIMC himself. All the Papers/Documents 
required/demanded by them have been submitted including geo referenced  Map. No 
decision on giving clearance to building Plan was taken in the meeting. Instead, it was 
informed that NOC will be considered in the next Meeting to be held after 3 weeks. 
Clearance has already been obtained from Airport Authority of India and from  SEAC 
(Delhi Pollution Control Board). Necessary follow up action will be ensured by the 
Ministry/IIMC with other authorities like DUAC, Delhi Fire Service and DDA etc. 
after getting clearance from Ridge Management Board.  
With regard to the Scheme of Open ing of New Regional Centres of IIMC, the 
status of permanent campuses of different regional centres of IIMC to be opened in 
different parts of the country is as follows:- 
 Aizawl – The work of construction of Permanent Campus at Aizawl  has been 
entrusted to CPWD as Deposit Work. The work is in progress and IIMC is 
closely monitoring the progress by getting the physical progress report every 
month. The work is likely to be completed somewhere during 2017-18. 
 
 Kottayam – The work of const ruction of Permanent Campus at Kottayam has 
been entrusted to CPWD. Rs. 5.00 crores has already been deposited with 
CPWD. The work has commenced and is likely to be completed by 2018. 
 
 Jammu – The Land for building a permanent campus of IIMC at Jammu has 
been taken-over from Govt. of J&K in the month of May 2016. Currently, IIMC 
is in the process of appointing Consultant for preparation of Project Report, 
preparation of Structural Drawings etc. It has also been planned to entrust the 
construction work to CPWD as Deposit Work. 
 
 Amravati – IIMC/Ministry is monitoring the transfer of land by Govt. of 
Maharashtra for construction of permanent campus of IIMC at Amravati. IIMC is 
in the process of submitting the affidavit as required. The Govt. of Maharashtra is 
likely to give the advance possession of land shortly. The pre -construction 
activities will be initiated immediately after taking over the land. 
(MoI&B‟s ID No.M-31012/1/2016-IP&MC dated 08.06.2016) 

34 
 
National Film Heritage Mission 
(Recommendation S.No.5) 
The Committee note that the Ministry are implementing the National Film 
Heritage Mission (NFHM) to restore, digitize and archive films and filmic material 
through the National Film Archive of India.  Administrative approval for 
implementation of the scheme was issued on 24.11.2014, to undertake preservation 
and restoration of India‟s film heritage in a mission mode under the  NFHM spread 
over 2014-15 to 2020-21.  The scheme is envisaged at a total cost of Rs. 597.41 crore, 
i.e. Rs. 291 crore during the 12 th Five Year Plan and Rs. 306.41 crore during the 13 th 
Plan.  This Scheme is one of the thrust areas of the Ministry during the 12 th Plan and 
the actual expenditure under the Scheme during the year 2015-16 was 3.76 crore out of 
Rs.4.50 crore available in RE 2015 -16.  In the Budget Estimates 2016 -17, only Rs. 30 
crore has be en provisioned as against the proposed annual Plan of Rs. 100 c rore.  In 
this context, the Ministry have stated that depending upon the progress of work under 
the scheme, additional funds  would be requested.  Further, the Committee note that 
National Film Archive of India (NFAI) has identified a consultancy firm and from the 
year 2016-17 NFAI would complete preparation of a roadmap for implementation of 
various components of NFHM.  The Committee also note that a High Powered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, I&B, is being set up as part of the 
Plan propos al for NFHM, which will monitor the progress of the implementation of 
the Scheme.  The Committee hope that the Plan fund allocated for this Scheme during 
the current fiscal would be utilized optimally to accomplish the physical targets set 
under this Scheme.  Further, the Committee desire that the detailed roadmap as worked 
out by NFAI be apprised to them.   
Reply of the Government 
NFAI has engaged a Consultant Firm for Project Management. To prepare a 
road map, NFAI with the help of consultant firm has sta rted Stake Holder 
Consultations which are scheduled at all major film making centres. The first 
consultation was held in Mumbai on 4.6.2016 and the second round is scheduled to be 
held on 7 -8 July 2016 at Chennai. The consultations involve film makers, fil m 
production companies, film historians and writers and film processing laboratories.  
On completion of the consultations, the Road Map would be completed. Separately, 
NFAI has issued RFP for condition assessment of the film reels kept in NFAI to 
prioritize restoration/ digitization. 
(MoI&B O.M.No.M-21013/8/2015-F(F) dated 22.07.2016) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 

35 
 
Mission Digitisation 
(Recommendation S.No.10) 
The committee note  that digitization of the Cable TV sector in the country is 
one of the thrust areas of the Ministry of I&B during the 12 th Five Year Plan. To 
address the drawbacks in the existing analog TV distribution system, the Ministry are 
implementing digitization wi th addressability in Cable TV sector in a phased, time 
bound manner, leading to complete switch off of all analog services by 31 st December, 
2016. A look at the budgetary allocation and utilization of funds during 2015 -16 under 
the scheme of Mission Digiti zation shows that the Ministry have spent Rs. 1.25 crore 
out of Rs. 1.30 crore made available at  RE stage. Further, Rs. 5 crore has  been 
allocated at the BE stage for the year 2016 -17. On the issue  of indigenous Set Top 
Boxes (STBs) manufacturing, the Mini stry ha ve informed that they have been 
supporting local manufacturing of STBs right from the beginning of digitization. As 
per information given by the Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers 
Association (CEAMA), presently STBs are indigenously m anufactured by about 19 
companies in India and they have sufficient installed capacity to meet the demand of 
cable TV digitization. CEAMA has further informed that they can even scale up the 
capacity if there is a demand but for that there is need of Gover nment support in 
creating a level playing field for domestic STB manufacturers to compete with the 
Chinese imported STBs. The Committee are given to understand that as of now there 
is easy facility for obtaining long -term credit to procure the Chinese STBs  and this 
option is not available in the Indian banking system. The Committee have also been 
informed that to address the above issue, the Ministry have taken some steps like 
declaring STBs as part of the telecommunications network equipment and reduction of 
Value Added Tax on domestically manufactured STBs. The issue of providing long -
term financing to Indian manufacturers is also under consideration. Further, the 
Committee have been informed that an indigenous Conditional Access System (CAS) 
has been deve loped which will give further impetus to the domestic STB 
manufacturers to produce and supply the indigenously manufactured STBs. The 
Committee hope that the Ministry will be able to meet the targets of cable TV 
digitization and recommend that the issues o f long term financial support to domestic 
manufacturers to negate easy procurement of Chinese made STBs need to be looked 
into and addressed suitably by the Ministry. The Ministry may also think in terms of 
increasing the allocation for Mission Digitizatio n which at present is merely taking 
care of procedural requirement to support the needs of domestic manufacturers. This 
will not only give a further boost to the „Make in India‟ initiative of the Government 
but also help in employment generation in a big way. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to issues of long term financial support to domestic manufacturers,  
it is submitted that initially, M/o I& B had started to consider the issue of providing 
long-term financing to Indian manufactures for promoting Indigenous manufacturing 
of STBs with the participation of the MSME, the DFS, the DeitY (which is the nodal 
department for production of electronic go ods in the country) and the SIDBI. 
However, during a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held on 19.1.2016, it has 

36 
 
been recommended that DeitY may, in consultation with M/o I&B, take up suitable 
programme to facilitate production of digital Set Top Box es in the country. DeitY has 
taken several steps to promote indigenous manufacturing of Set Top Box for 
Cable/DTH TV, keeping in view the huge indigenous requirement on account of 
roadmap for digitisation of the broadcast sector. Accordingly, a meeting of all the 
stakeholders including Ministry of I&B has been called by Deity on 24 th June, 2016 to 
further facilitate the production of Set Top Boxes in the country.  
With regard to increasing the allocation for Mission Digitization which at 
present is merely t aking care of procedural requirement to support the needs of 
domestic manufacturers, it is submitted that the main feature of the Scheme “Mission 
Digitisation” is to put in place a mechanism which would help in effective monitoring 
and successfully impleme ntation of Cable TV Digitisation in Country.  Ministry of 
I&B has accordingly, projected the requirement of funds i.e. Rs. 13.02 crore under this 
Scheme. For procedural requirement to support the needs of domestic manufacturers, 
DeitY is considering these issues with the participation of Stakeholders.  
(MoI&B‟s O.M.No.7/7/2016-DAS dated 22.07.2016) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Anurag Singh Thakur, 
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
  

37 
 
Annexure-I 
  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2016-17) HELD ON 15TH DECEMBER, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th December, 2016, from 1 515 hours                     
to 1600 hours in Committee Room ‘ B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Virender Kashyap 
6. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
9. Shri Abhishek Singh 
10. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha   
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Shri Suresh Gopi 
14. Smt. Kahkashan Perween 
15. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R. S. Kambo    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Under Secretary 
 
 

38 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following four  Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. Action Taken Report on the Twenty-third Report on ‘Demands for Grants       
(2016-17)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
II. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx ……..; 
III. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……….xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxx..;and 
IV. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……. .xxxxx……… 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Reports  and 
after due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
***** 
________________________________________________________________________
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
  

39 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 4, 6, 11, 12,13, 14 and 15    
 Total 08 
 Percentage 53.33 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  3, 7, 8 and 9    
 Total 04 
 Percentage 26.67 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  2, 5 and 10      
 Total 03 
 Percentage 20 
 
 