 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
14 


 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
28 
CHAPTERIV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and r equire 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
29 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
33 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
*I. Minutes of the Twenty -fourth sitting of the Committee held on                      
11th August, 2015  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
            38 
 
 
 
 
*Not appended with the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Shri Abhishek Sharma Executive Assistant 
 
         *  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
 
     (ii) 
 

 
 
5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technol ogy (2014-2015), having 
been authorised by the Committee, do present the Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants ( 2014-15)’ of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
22nd December, 2014.  The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report on 26th March, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
11th August, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of r eference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Info rmation Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2014-15)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Inf ormation Technology 
(Department of Posts). 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 22nd December, 2014. It contained 22 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all t he Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20 and 22  
   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
   
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 6, 13 and 19  
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the repl y of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  7, 11, 18 and 21   
   
   
 

 
 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies 
to the Observations /Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should 
be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
A. Revenue Receipts 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the major sources of Revenue Receipts for the 
Department include sale of postal articles,  Speed Post, Postal Order, 
Business Post and remuneration from Savings Bank and saving certificates, 
etc. For the year 2013 -14, of the total revenue generation of ` 10730.42 
crore (upto March, 2014), the postal operations accounted for ` 4815.15 
crore and remuneration generated was ` 5915.27 crore. The Committee 
also note that the Revenue Receipts have shown a consistent growth over 
the previous years and for the year 2014 -15, the BE is ` 10281.90 crore 
against the BE of ` 9101.81 crore for 2013 -14. Items l ike PRC on ordinary 
services, Business Post, commission on money orders and postal orders 
and Speed Post have shown considerable increase in 2013 -14 as compared 
to 2012-13. The Committee desire that the Department should sustain the 
momentum and take furth er steps to increase their revenue to offset 
increasing working expenditure. In this regard, the Committee note that 
the Department, through its Business Development and Marketing 
Directorate (BD&MD), are engaged in exploring new business areas by way 
of c ustomizing its existing services/introduction of new services. The 
BD&MD have reportedly taken several initiatives like exploring and 
capturing the emerging e -Commerce market, introduction of express 
parcel post and business parcel post and introduction of  Cash on Delivery 
(CoD) facility as a value addition to the Speed Post. The BD&M Directorate 
is also focusing on the service ‘Business Reply Speed Post Articles’, booking 
of Notices/Summons issued by the Delhi High Court through Speed Post 
Service with Pro of of Delivery facility, e -IPO (electronic Indian Postal 
Order) for Indian Citizens living abroad and in India for paying RTI fee 
online and tie-ups with third parties for the use of DoP network for selling 
their products/services through Post Offices, e.g . PRS for booking of 
railway tickets, sale of various application forms, collection of examination 
fee, etc. have also been introduced by the Department. While appreciating 

 
 
3 
 
the initiatives taken by the Department in exploring new business areas to 
augment their revenue by focusing on emerging areas having significant 
potential for revenue generation, the Committee emphasize that focus on 
emerging areas assumes even greater significance owing to intense 
competition from organized and unorganized players in t he market. The 
Committee would also like to urge the Department to ensure 
implementation of schemes envisaged during the Twelfth Plan like IT 
Induction and Modernization Project, Financial services, Human Resource 
Management, etc. so as to improve overall efficiency in their operations 
and better utilization of resources for achieving of the larger objective of 
bridging the revenue deficit. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the initiatives taken in this regard." 
 
7. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 
"The Department of Posts has been actively working towards maximizing 
revenue generation. Towards this end it is focusing on growth sectors like 
e-commerce and insurance, to fulfill the needs of the urban and rura l 
markets. As a part of the strategy to provide payment solutions to     e -
commerce customers, Department of Posts has rationalized its service 
offerings and introduced Cash on Delivery (CoD)  facility. Tie -ups have 
been made with various e -Commerce compan ies viz. Amazon.in, M/s 
Naaptol, Homeshop 18, Telebrands etc. Upgradation of the parcel 
distribution infrastructure is one of the prime focus areas of the 
Department. The Department is also expanding its Retail Post and Business 
Post opportunities. This will enable business to market and distribute their 
products through India Post. It has also been planned to expand the 
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) of Indian Railways through more post 
offices. Department has also taken aggressive marketing steps to 
popularize its services among all categories of the customers as well as 
Departmental employees through internal marketing. Business 
Development and Marketing Directorate is also working towards providing 
more value additions and add -ons on existing product s/services. For 
example a Single Account Management for bulk customers is under a pilot 
run. ‘Project Arrow’ which is an important plan scheme of the Department 
strives to make a visible impact on the working of Post Office by upgrading 
the ‘Look and Feel’ of Post Offices as well as improving the working of Post 
Offices by focusing on ‘Core Operations’. By bringing in a qualitative 
change in the products and services offered to the common man, Pro ject 
Arrow has resulted in an increase in number of foot falls in the Post Offices 
thereby enhancing the overall revenue generation. During the financial 
year 2013 -14, 100 Post Offices were covered under  on line ‘Core 
Operations’ monitoring. During current financial year it is proposed to 
cover 292 post offices und er ‘Look and Feel’ and 2000 under ‘Core 
Operations’. Operation of POSB schemes does not strictly fall under the 

 
 
4 
 
revenue generating category for DoP as Ministry of Finance  only 
reimburses the  cost of operations to the Department. However, all efforts 
are being made to increase revenue under POSB by allotting targets to 
each Circle and constant monitoring of monthly achievement. Further, FS 
Division of the Department is exploring the possibilities of retailing third 
party products which may generate net rev enue, e.g. Sale of Mutual 
Funds, Sale of Foreign Exchange etc.  In order to increase PLI business, the 
Department has recently enhanced the maximum sum assured limits from 
Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh. The maximum sum assured in RPLI is proposed 
to be enhance d from Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh.  Besides, the categories o f 
employees eligible for PLI have  also been expanded to include teachers, 
employees of banks and local bodies etc." 
 
8. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department in exploring new 
business areas to augment their revenue by focusing on emerging areas having 
significant potential for revenue generation, the Committee  had emphasized that the 
focus on emerging areas assumes even greater significance owing to intense 
competition from org anized and unorganized players in the market . The Committee 
had urged the Department to ensure implementation of various schemes envisaged 
during the Twelfth Plan like IT Induction and Modernization Project, Financial services, 
Human Resource Management, e tc. so as to improve overall efficiency in their 
operations and better utilization of resources for achieving of the larger objective of 
bridging the revenue deficit. The Department of Posts, in their A ction Taken Note, 
have stated that the y have been acti vely working towards maximizing revenue 
generation through various initiatives such as focus on growth sectors like e -
Commerce and insurance , rationalizing its service offerings to cater to specific 
customer needs, entering into t ie-ups with various e -Commerce companies , 
upgradation of the parcel distribution infrastructure , expansion of Retail Post and 
Business Post services, implementation of  ‘Project Arrow’ to improve the ‘Look and 
Feel’ of Post Offices and focus on ‘Core Operations’ , enhancing the maxi mum sum 
assured limits from Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh in PLI , and Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh in 
RPLI, besides expansion in the categories of employees eligible for PLI etc.  While 
lauding the various initiatives taken by the Department  of Posts to improve their 
revenue receipts , the Committee feel that the need for  improving the revenue 
receipts of the Department cannot be over emphasized , particularly in the light of the 
fact that there is limited scope in reducing the revenue expenditure of the 
Department due to increasing costs on the one hand and the obligation to provide 
Postal services throughout the country on the other.  In view of the fact that focus on 
revenue generation is the key to bridge the large revenue deficit, the Committee urge 
that identifi cation of emerging areas for revenue generation, 
restructuring/rationalization of existing services and timely execution of plan schemes 
may be undertaken by the Department to improve their revenue receipts and thereby 
curtail the revenue deficit.  
 
 

 
 
5 
 
B. Review of Plan Schemes: IT Induction & Modernization  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Eleventh Plan envisaged extensive 
technology up gradation and modernizatio n in the Department of Posts. IT 
Induction schemes were taken up in two phases in the 11 th Plan and it is 
being continued in the 12 th Plan with a comprehensive IT roadmap to be 
developed for network architecture, integrated software, proper data 
management including strengthening/establishment of National Data 
Centre, Disaster Recovery Centre. Eight Requests for Proposals (RFPs), viz., 
Change Management (CM), Rural Hardware (RH), Rural System Integrator 
(RSI) and Mail Operation Hardware (MOH) were floated a s proposed in the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and are pending finalization at various 
stages. The Committee also note that IT Induction and Modernization is an 
important scheme of the DoP that got the maximum outlay amongst all 
the schemes for the Twelft h Five Year Plan. However, the percentage 
achievement which ranged between 5.06% and 47.88% during 2012 -13 
and 2013-14, when compared with BE, depicts a dismal picture. According 
to the Department, the factors responsible for the delayed 
implementation of IT Modernization Project broadly relate to reviewing 
the entire project on account of complaints received during the process of 
procurement, delay in finalization of the RFPs, etc. As a result of this delay, 
the time line approved by the Cabinet in Novembe r, 2012 for 
implementation/roll out/completion of the project got adversely affected. 
The Committee is concerned to find that out of over 1, 54,856 post offices, 
only 25145 Departmental post offices have been computerized and 25195 
locations have been elec tronically networked. About computerization and 
networking of the remaining extra Departmental/rural post offices, it has 
been stated that the work will be undertaken after finalization of the RFP 
Contract with vendors of Rural Hardware and Rural System In tegrator. The 
Department is yet to obtain approval for revised timelines for the project. 
The Committee, however, takes note of the fact that project activities 
have gained momentum in the year 2013 -14 and all efforts should be 
made to finalize RFPs in the  current fiscal. The Committee would like to be 
appraised of the revised timelines set for the project along with plans of 

 
 
6 
 
the Department to accomplish the modernization project within the 
envisaged time frame.” 
 
10. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
“IT Modernization Project, which has been approved in November 2012, 
with a total outlay of Rs 4909 Crore, is in implementation phase. Rural 
Hardware contract has been finalized and the work has been awarded to 
M/s Teleco mmunications Consultants India Ltd on 24 -11-2014. 
Implementation of this segment has also begun. Under this segment 
supply and installation of various hardware will start from the month of 
April 2015. The implementation of Rural System Integrator, for whic h 
contract   was signed on 28 -02-2013, which was kept on hold to align with 
the Rural hardware RFP, has also started work in alignment with the Rural 
Hardware RFP. After complete implementation of Rural ICT project, all the 
1,29,389 extra Departmental Branch Post Offices will be computerized and 
networked by the end of October 2016. 
 
Taking in to account the present implementation status of all the eight 
segments of the Project, the following timelines are being set for 
completion of implementation and O&M Phase. 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the segment Completion of 
Implementation  
Completion of 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
1 Rural ICT- Application Oct   2016 Oct    2025 
2 Core System 
Integrator June 2016 June  2021 
3 Financial Solution June2016 May   2021 
4 Data Centre & DR DC  is operational  
DRC Mar 2015 July   2020 
5 Network Connectivity June  2015 Dec   2020 
6 Rural H/W & 
Connectivity Oct    2016 Oct    2021 
7 Mail Operation 
Hardware Sep    2015 Sep   2020 
8 Change Management Oct    2015 Oct   2015 
 

 
 
7 
 
The Project Coordination Committee and Various Project Implementation 
Committees set up at Directorate level and Circle Monitoring committee at 
Circle level and Regional Implementation Committees at regional level are 
closely watching the progress and vigorously mon itoring the day to day 
happenings of the Project to ensure that the implementation is completed 
within the revised timelines set for the purpose.” 
 
11. The Committee had noted that IT Induction and Modernization is an important 
scheme of the DoP that got t he maximum outlay amongst all the schemes for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. However, the percentage achievement which ranged between 
5.06% and 47.88% during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, when compared with BE, depicts a 
dismal picture. According to the Department, th e factors responsible for the delayed 
implementation of IT Modernization Project broadly relate to reviewing the entire 
project on account of complaints received during the process of procurement, delay in 
finalization of the RFPs, etc. As a result of the delay, the time line approved by the 
Cabinet in November, 2012 for implementation/roll out/completion of the project got 
adversely affected and Department are yet to obtain approval for revised timelines for 
the P roject. The Department , in their A ction Taken Note, have stated that the IT 
Modernization Project, which has been approved in November 2012, with a total 
outlay of Rs . 4909 crore, is in the implementation phase and taking into account the 
present implementation status of all the eight segments of th e Project, revised 
timelines are being set for completion of implementation and O&M Phase.  The 
Committee, while observing that IT Induction and Modernization is an all 
encompassing Scheme that will improve the performance and efficiency of the 
Department across all their functional areas, are of the firm opinion that any delay in 
implementation of this Scheme is likely to have a cascading effect on other areas as 
well. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to give due importance to the 
Scheme and en sure that the eight segments are completed in a time -bound manner 
while making optimum utilization of the allocated funds. 
 
C. Utilization of Vacant Land 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“What is further disquieting to note is that as on 01.04.2014, 1797 plots 
measuring 6 72.12 acres of land are lying vacant with the Department. 
Out of this, 371 plots are situated at prime locations.   In this context, 
the Committee have been informed that  a proposal for commercial 
utilization of vacant land under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
was approved by the Cabinet for setting up of a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV),wholly owned company with limited liability for optimum 

 
 
8 
 
development management o f postal estates. The Plan of Action was 
stated to have been initiated in pursuance of the decision of the 
Committee of Secretaries in its meeting held 20.05.2009. Based on 
inputs received from the Circles, the Department learnt that few vacant 
lands could  be utilized for (PPP) purpose. All these plots were originally 
allotted for construction of buildings for postal operations and these 
lands could not be used for any other purpose as per allotment terms 
and conditions, or else the allotment will get cance lled automatically. 
Moreover, State Governments are reportedly not inclined to change 
the type of use of these lands situated on prime locations due to their 
own interest in PPP brand initiatives. In view of these developments, 
the entire project is being re-looked at by the Department. The 
Committee are very dissatisfied at the whole sequence of events 
regarding action taken for utilization of land under PPP which reflects 
poorly on the estate management of the Department. The procedural 
bottlenecks encoun tered in the process should have been taken care 
of by the Department while formulating the project proposal. 
Emphasizing expeditious utilization of vacant land and to avoid its 
possible encroachment in future recommend that a viable project be 
conceived w ith due diligence to give effect proposal to the project 
should be completed in a time bound manner and the Committee be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
 
13. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
“In this context, it is intimated that a revised/new viable proposal will be 
prepared/projected once a decision regarding finalization of Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) is taken by the competent authority and intimated to 
the Cabinet.” 
 
14. As on 01.04.2014, 179 7 plots measuring 6 72.12 acres of land were lying 
vacant with the Department  and out of this, 371 plots were situated at prime 
locations.  Based on inputs received from the Circles, the Department had learnt 
that a few of these vacant lands cou ld be utilize d for PPP  purpose.  The Committee 
had expressed their displeasure over  the whole sequence of events regarding 
action taken for utilization of land under PPP which, they felt reflected  poorly on 
the estate management of the Department.  Emphasizing  the need f or expeditious 
utilization of vacant land and to avoid its possible encroachment in future , the 
Committee had recommended that a viable project be conceived with due diligence 
to give effect to the proposal  and that the project should be completed in a tim e 
bound manner. The Department , in their A ction Taken Note, have stated that a 
revised/new viable proposal will be prepared/projected once a decision regarding 
finalization of Public Private Partnership is taken by the competent authority and 
intimated to the Cabinet. In view of the fact that despite holding a large land bank 
across the country and inc urring huge deficit, the Department are unable to 

 
 
9 
 
leverage/monetize their land assets, the Committee reiterate that necessary steps 
may be taken to unlock the  value of the large land bank lying idle at the disposal of 
the Department.  
 
D. Priority Areas in DoP 
(a) e-Commerce Sector  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the De partment are exploring new business 
opportunities to augment its revenue generation. The Department have 
identified ‘Capturing e -Commerce Markets’ as a priority area and have 
constituted a Task Force to facilitate their course of action. The Committee 
find that the Department are in touch with various e -Commerce 
companies using Speed Post for providing distribution solutions along with 
the Cash -on-Delivery (CoD) facility. The Committee are aware that with 
the advent of new age communication technologies, th e decline of 
ordinary mail has emerged as a global phenomenon even as the emerging 
e-Commerce market and the resultant increase in parcel business is being 
pursued by Postal Organizations across the world. Of late, the e -
Commerce market in India is also ex panding at an exponential rate. After 
the Metros and Tier -I cities, the next wave of growth in e -Commerce is 
expected to come from Tier-II/III cities and the rural areas. The Committee 
recognize that the major players in the e-Commerce market are eyeing the 
Department of Posts for delivery of their products to the Tier -2/3 cities 
and rural areas, leveraging the vast reach of the Department through its 
large postal network to access this untapped market. The Committee feel 
that this is precisely the area whe re the strength of the Department of 
Posts lies. The Committee are convinced that the emergence of e -
Commerce in India has presented a great opportunity to the Department 
of Posts to leverage its huge postal network to cater to the parcel business 
generated through expansion of e -Commerce. As e -Commerce picks up in 
India, substantial business is expected to originate from Tier-II/III cities and 
the rural areas where the Department of Posts face minimal/no 
competition due to the limited coverage of these are as by private 
players/courier companies. The Committee, therefore, stress that the 
Department should focus on the e -Commerce sector to garner maximum 
business from this sector and become a partner of choice for the e -
Commerce companies desirous of catering  to the e -Commerce business 
emanating from the Tier-II/III cities and the rural areas of the country.” 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
16. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
“Growth of e -commerce has provided a new window of opportunity for 
postal players worldwide, and Asia Pacific in particular. There is a huge 
untapped market for Department of Posts to provide delivery services to 
such firms targeting customers in ‘B’ & ‘C’ class cities and rural areas. 
Department of Posts is closely studying an d examining the market 
dynamics to make the services in tune with the requirements of online 
shopping companies to offer safe, secure and reliable delivery options 
along with a reliable and economical remittance solution for the amount 
collected towards co st of goods at the time of its delivery so that 
Department can increase its share in delivery of goods ordered online. Tie -
ups have been made with various e -commerce companies viz. Amazon.in, 
Snapdeal.com, Shopclues.com, M/s Naaptol, HomeShop 18, Telebrand s, 
etc.” 
 
17. The Committee had noted that the e-Commerce market in India is expanding at 
an exponential rate. After the Metros and Tier -I cities, the next wave of growth in e -
Commerce is expected to come from Tier -II/III cities and the rural areas where t he 
Department of Posts face minimal/no competition due to the limited coverage of 
these areas by private players/courier companies.  The Committee had recognized that 
the major players in the e -Commerce market are eyeing the Department of Posts for 
delivery of their products to the Tier -2/3 cities and rural areas, leveraging the vast 
reach of the Department through their large postal network to access this  untapped 
market. The Committee  had stressed that the Department should focus on the                   
e-Commerce sector to garner maximum business from this sector and become a 
partner of choice for the e -Commerce companies desirous of catering to the e -
Commerce business emanating from the Tier -II/III cities and the rural areas of the 
country. The Department, in their Action Taken Note, have stated that they are closely 
studying and examining the market dynamics to make the services in tune with the 
requirements of online shopping companies to offer safe, secure and reliable delivery 
options along  with a rel iable and economical remittance solution for the amount 
collected towards cost of goods at the time of delivery so that  the Department can 
increase share in delivery of goods ordered online. Tie -ups have also been made with 
various e -Commerce companies , viz. Amazon.in, Snapdeal.com, Shopclues.com, M/s 
Naaptol, HomeShop 18, Telebrands , etc. The C ommittee emphasize that the 
Department should focus on  the e-Commerce sector to garner a significant market  
share in the e -Commerce delivery segment and leverage their significant presence in 
the Tier- II/III cities to cater to business emanating from these cities. 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1) 
Budgetary Analysis 
  
Revenue Expenditure (PMU) 
 
 The Committee note that there has been persistent increase in the revenue 
expenditure of the Department of Posts (DOP) over the years viz. `13793.67 Crore in 
2010-11, `14163.91 Crore in 2011 -12, ` 15481.15 Crore in 2012 -13, ` 16796.71 Crore     (  
up to March, 2014) and projected at ` 18141.55 Crore (BE) in 2014 -15. According to the 
Department, the major components of gross expenditure are salaries and pensions 
which constitute over 90% of the entire segment of expenditure. Further, considering 
that India Post is the largest postal network with over 1.55 lakh post offices, the 
Department find it extremely difficult to cut down the operational expenses due to 
increasing costs on the one hand and the obligation to provide Postal Services 
throughout th e country on the other. The Department is reportedly taking necessary 
steps to strictly adhere to the instructions relating to austerity measures issued by the 
Ministry of Finance and also undertaking continuous monitoring of the expenditure at 
regular int ervals at the apex level to keep their expenditure under the budgetary 
allocations. While the Committee do recognize the constraints being faced by the 
Department in curtailing the operational expenditure of such a vast postal network 
carrying forward such  a huge social responsibility, the Committee are of the considered 
view that the Department should look for rapid technology induction and modernization 
as the thrust area for reducing manpower and curtailing operational expenses. This 
would enhance the ov erall operational efficiency of the Department as a service 
provider and help rationalize gross expenditure. With IT Induction and the 
modernization project being implemented, the Committee firmly believe that in the 
coming years, the Department will gain proficiency to deliver technology enabled 
services and in the process control expenditure. The Committee, therefore urge the 
Department to focus on accomplishing the project on modernization and 
computerization of all post offices in a time bound manner to  realize increased revenue 
and reduction in operation cost. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 IT Modernization Project, which has been approved in November 2012, with a 
total outlay of ` 4909 Crore, is in implementation phase. So far  the achievements made 
are as follows: 
Primary Data Centre has been deployed and started functioning at Navi Mumbai since 
3rd April, 2013. 
26835 Departmental Post offices including mail offices and administrative offices have 
been networked at single Wide Area Network (WAN) and connected to Data Centre. 
Core Banking Solution (CBS) has been rolled out in 2148 Post Offices.  
Core Insurance solution (CIS-PLI) has been rolled out in 6356 Post Offices. 
ATMs have started functioning in 11 Post Offices 
Rural Hardware vendor has been finalized and contract has been signed. Supply of Rural 
Hardware devices in BOs will start from the month of April 2015.  
  
 Further, the implementation of the project is expected to be completed by 2016 -
17 and October 2025 respectively . The Project Coordination Committee and Various 
Project Implementation Committees  set up at Directorate level and Circle Monitoring 
Committee at Circle level and Regional Implementation Committees at regional level are 
closely monitoring the project on d ay to basis to ensure that the  implementation is 
done as per prescribed timeline in each case. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  
Report  dated 26-03-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl.No.2) 
 
Recoveries  
   ‘Recoveries’ represent the amount of commission earned by the Department for 
Agency functions done on behalf of other Departments and organizations. This includes 
components like payments of coal mines and EPFs, family pensions, payments of 
Railway Pension, PLI, cus toms duty realization, commission on account of international 
money transfer through the Western Union Money Transfer (WUMT), etc. For the year 
2014-15, the amount under BE has been pegged at ` 665.19 crore as against the amount 
of ` 680.58 crore during 20 13-14. The Committee find that the recoveries of the 
Department showed an increasing trend over the last couple of years, with the amount 
being ` 458.64 crore during 2011 -12 and ` 688.77 crore during 2012 -13. However, for 
the year 2013-14, the recovery has come down to ` 593.19 crore, a shortfall of ` 64 crore 
over the RE of ` 657.12 crore. The Department, while submitting that recovery under PLI 
and RPLI has been more than the targeted figures, have stated that the shortfall in 
recovery is mainly on accoun t of downward trend of business in the Western Union 

 
 
13 
 
Money Transfer (WUMT) due to intense competition from organized and unorganized 
players in the market as well as non -realization of commission in respect of coal 
mines/EPF pensions, etc. Besides shortfal l in recoveries, the BE target fixed for the year 
2014-15 is less than that for 2013 -14 which indicates a decreasing trend. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to undertake all necessary 
initiatives to compete effectively with other players  and improve the realization under 
WUMT. The Committee also recommend to the Department to explore new avenues for 
expansion of Agency services to garner more revenues in future.  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.1, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
 Reply of the Government  
 The Department has taken various initiatives to earn more revenue through 
money remittance service in particular. In case of International Money Remittance apart 
from Western Union, the Department has tied up with Money Gram  Payment System 
Inc. for money remittance product. Further, for both Western Union and Money Gram 
services, Department is working to increase the number of locations offering the 
services and promotional activities to help increase the number of transactio ns thereby 
increasing revenue.  
 There is sustained increase towards recovery to Department of Posts for PLI and 
RPLI activities. The B.E. as well as R.E. has been projected as ` 571.69 crores for 2014 -15 
against actual recoveries of `. 532.99 crores in 20 13-14. However, the recoveries 
towards PLI and RPLI in 2014-15 is expected to increase by ` 50.00 crores than estimated 
due to increased business. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  
Report  dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 
Revenue Receipts  
 
 The Committee note that the major sources of Revenue Receipts for the Department 
include sale of postal articles, Speed Post, Postal Order, Business Post and remuneration from 
Savings Bank and saving certifica tes, etc. For the year 2013 -14, of the total revenue generation 
of ` 10730.42 crore (upto March, 2014), the postal operations accounted for  ` 4815.15 crore 
and remuneration generated was ` 5915.27 crore. The Committee also note that the Revenue 
Receipts have shown a consistent growth over the previous years and for the year 2014 -15, the 
BE is ` 10281.90 crore against the BE of ` 9101.81 crore for 2013 -14. Items like PRC on 
ordinary services, Business Post, commission on money orders and postal orders and S peed Post 
have shown considerable increase in 2013 -14 as compared to 2012 -13. The Committee desire 
that the Department should sustain the momentum and take further steps to increase their 
revenue to offset increasing working expenditure. In this regard, th e Committee note that the 

 
 
14 
 
Department, through its Business Development and Marketing Directorate (BD&MD), are 
engaged in exploring new business areas by way of customizing its existing services/introduction 
of new services. The BD&MD have reportedly taken several initiatives like exploring and 
capturing the emerging e -Commerce market, introduction of express parcel post and business 
parcel post and introduction of Cash on Delivery (CoD) facility as a value addition to the Speed 
Post. The BD&M Directorate is  also focusing on the service „Business Reply Speed Post 
Articles‟, booking of Notices/Summons issued by the Delhi High Court through Speed Post 
Service with Proof of Delivery facility, e-IPO (electronic Indian Postal Order) for Indian Citizens 
living abroad and in India for paying RTI fee online and tie -ups with third parties for the use of 
DoP network for selling their products/services through Post Offices, e.g. PRS for booking of 
railway tickets, sale of various application forms, collection of examinat ion fee, etc. have also 
been introduced by the Department. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department 
in exploring new business areas to augment their revenue by focusing on emerging areas having 
significant potential for revenue generation , the Committee emphasize that focus on emerging 
areas assumes even greater significance owing to intense competition from organized and 
unorganized players in the market. The Committee would also like to urge the Department to 
ensure implementation of sch emes envisaged during the Twelfth Plan like IT Induction and 
Modernization Project, Financial services, Human Resource Management, etc. so as to improve 
overall efficiency in their operations and better utilization of resources for achieving of the larger 
objective of bridging the revenue deficit. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives taken in this regard. 
 
(Observation/Recommendation Sl.No.3, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Posts has been actively working towards maximizing revenue 
generation. Towards this end it is focusing on growth sectors like e -commerce and insurance, to 
fulfill the needs of the urban and rural markets. As a part of the strategy to provide payment 
solutions to     e -commerce customers, Department of Posts has rationalized its service offerings 
and introduced Cash on Delivery (CoD)  facility. Tie -ups have been made with various e -
Commerce companies viz. Amazon.in, M/s Naaptol, Homeshop 18, Telebrands et c. Upgradation 
of the parcel distribution infrastructure is one of the prime focus areas of the Department. The 
Department is also expanding its Retail Post and Business Post opportunities. This will enable 
business to market and distribute their products through India Post. It has also been planned to 
expand the Passenger Reservation System (PRS) of Indian Railways through more post offices. 
Department has also taken aggressive marketing steps to popularize its services among all 
categories of the customer s as well as Departmental employees through internal marketing. 
Business Development and Marketing Directorate is also working towards providing more value 
additions and add-ons on existing products/services. For example a Single Account Management 
for bulk customers is under a pilot run. 
 „Project Arrow‟ which is an important plan scheme of the Department strives to make a visible 
impact on the working of Post Office by upgrading the „Look and Feel‟ of Post Offices as well as 
improving the working of Post Offices by focusing on „Core Operations‟. By bringing in a 
qualitative change in the products and services offered to the common man, Project arrow has 
resulted in an increase in number of foot falls in the Post Offices thereby enhancing the overall 
revenue generation. During the financial year 2013-14, 100 Post Offices  were covered under  on 
line „Core Operations‟ monitoring. During current financial year it is proposed to cover 292 post 
offices under „Look and Feel‟ and 2000 under „Core Operations‟. 

 
 
15 
 
Operation of POSB schemes does not strictly fall under the revenue generating category for DoP 
as Ministry of Finance  only reimburses the  cost of operations to the Department. However, all 
efforts are being made to increase revenue under POSB by allotting ta rgets to each Circle and 
constant monitoring of monthly achievement. Further, FS Division of the Department is 
exploring the possibilities of retailing third party products which may generate net revenue, e.g. 
Sale of Mutual Funds, Sale of Foreign Exchange etc. 
 
In order to increase PLI business, the Department has recently enhanced the maximum sum 
assured limits from ` 20 lac to ` 50 lac. The maximum sum assured in RPLI is proposed to be 
enhanced from ` 5 lac to ` 10 lac.  Besides, the categories of employees eligible for PLI has also 
been expanded to include teachers, employees of banks and local bodies etc. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.4,) 
Revenue Deficit 
  
 The Committee note with concern that the estimated Revenue Deficit has increased over 
the years from ` 5921.35 crore in 2012 -13 to ` 7093.78 crore in 2013 -14 and estimated at ` 
7194.46 crore for 2014 -15. However, the Department have managed to keep the actuals under 
check at Rs. 5425.88 crore in 2012 -13 and ` 5473.10 crore in 2013-14. The Committee find that 
the Department have taken several initiatives to keep the revenue deficit under ch eck which 
inter-alia include constant monitoring to reduce expenditure at the apex level, marketing of 
products offered by DoP, focus on increasing the customer base and improvement in the Quality 
of Services. While these efforts of the Department to contain the revenue deficit are laudable, the 
Committee recommends that the Department should continue with efforts to augment revenue 
and progressively gain control over expenditure in order to wipe out the deficit over a period of 
time.   
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.4, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to increase the revenue from the core areas of the Department such as mails, 
parcels, Post Office Savings Bank, money remittance and Life Insurance, the Departm ent has 
launched several initiatives to enhanced the quality of its services. 
 
  Department has taken a series of initiatives under Mail Network Optimization Project in 
order to improve the quality of Mail Services. The Department is also upgrading the 
infrastructure in Mail Offices. Improved processes, upgraded infrastructure and optimized 
network are expected to result in better quality of service. Steps are being taken to increase the 
volume of mail and speed post by focusing on corporate customers. In o rder to tap the growing 
e-commerce market, the Department is upgrading its infrastructure re -orienting its parcel 
handling and delivery operations. The Department has already partnered with e -commerce 
majors such Amazon, Flipkart, e -bay, Snapdeal, Shopclue s, Yepme etc. for delivering of their 
cash on delivery and pre -paid e -commerce consignments. More than ` 450 Crores have been 
collected by the Department for CoD consignments of various e -commerce partners in the 
current financial year.   

 
 
16 
 
 Business Develop ment and Marketing Directorate has been continually engaged in 
providing greater impetus to business activities of the Department and formulating/organizing 
and implementing various policies keeping in mind the market   considerations of its products 
and services. BD & Marketing Directorate is also working on exploring new business areas by 
way of customizing its existing services/introduction of new services. For example, BD&M 
Directorate has taken following new initiatives to increase the revenue of the Department: 
(a) Notices/Summons issued by Delhi High Court through Speed Post service with physical 
as well as electronic Proof of Delivery facility was started with effect from 03.02.2014. The 
service has been extended to Orissa High Court Cuttack with effect from 06.01.2015. 
(b) Tie up has been made with Steel Authority of India (Marketing wing) for sending their 
articles through Speed Post issued by its various offices located across the county under a Single 
Point Account Management scheme.  
(c) UIDAI has been mandated to give unique identification cards (“Aadhaar”) to all Indian 
residents and is considering to post more than almost 70 crores Aadhaar letter in the next phase. 
The delivery of these Aadhaar letter through Speed Post is under active consideration by both the 
organizations.  
(d) eIPO (Electronic Indian Postal Order) for Indian citizens living abroad for paying RTI fee 
online was launched on 22.03.2013. This facility has also been extended to Indian citizens living 
in India with effect from 13. 02.2014. Department of Posts is also working on acceptance of the 
eIPO for paying the RTI fee by other State Governments. 
(e) Besides  the above, Department is also entering into tie -ups with third parties for use of 
Department of Posts network for selling  their product/services through the Post Offices. Tie up 
has made with Railway Recruitment Boards, CBSE and various universities/institutions etc for 
collection of examination fee through ePayment service. These initiatives are expected to help 
the Department to increase its revenue outcomes and control the deficit. 
(f)  Considering the fact that more than 50% revenue of the Department is contributed by 
POSB, the Department is aggressively focusing on increasing the number of accounts under 
various schemes of POSB.  
(g) The allotted targets for PLI &RPLI are also being actively pursued by the field units and 
regularly monitored by the Directorate. Publicity and marketing of various products and services 
of the Department, using the expertise of professional agencies, has also yielded good results in 
popularizing the services of the Department. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.5) 
Capital Outlay 
 It is disquieting to note that there has been a persistent shortfall in the utilization of funds 
allocated to the Department under Capital Section. During the year 2013 -14, the allocation at BE 
stage was ` 433.31 crore which was reduced to ` 294.68 crore at RE stage while the actual 
utilization upto March, 2014 was ` 294.68 crore. The Committee find that during the years 
2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14, owing to poor performance of the Department during the first six 
months of each year of the annual plans, the Ministry of Fin ance had to reduce the funds at RE 
stage. However, even the reduced allocation could not be fully utilized by the Department. 
According to the Department, funds under the Capital Section were largely earmarked for IT 
induction and Modernization scheme duri ng the annual plan years. The under utilization of the 
funds have been attributed to non -materialisation of major activities under the project as 
anticipated. Evidently, it brings into question the efficacy of the implementation schedule 
formulated by the Department in the first two years of the plan period. The Committee have been 
informed that out of ` 518.30 crore capital outlay for the year 2014 -15, ` 474.54 crore have 
already been allocated to different units of the projects. The Department reportedly stated that 

 
 
17 
 
they would be able to fully utilize the funds in a planned manner in the current year. Considering 
the paramount importance of successful implementation of the modernization project, the 
Committee recommends that the Department should firm up t heir planning process for optimal 
utilization of allocated funds and rejuvenate the extant monitoring mechanism. The Committee 
should be informed about the progress made in this regard.  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.5, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The concluding phrase of the Para-5 speaks about firm processing planning to be undertaken by 
the Department to ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds and rejuvenate the monitoring 
mechanism and the Committee wants to know the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
The following response is submitted:-  
 
1.1. It is admitted that the funds allocated for the IT Modernization Project during the Year 2011 -12, 
2012-13 and 2013-14 have not been fully utilized. 
1.2. The IT Modernization Project is being implemented through eight different segments. During 
2011-12, no tender could be finalized due to complex nature of RFPs, queries, clarifications sought by 
the bidders to understand and prepare for the bid docu ments. Last date for submission of bids was 
extended several times in almost all the RFPs to give ample opportunity and to ensure maximum 
participation.  
1.3. During 2012 -13, Four RFPs were finalized while fifth was finalized in 2013 -14. The payment 
process involved a mandatory check of User Acceptance Test and Standardization Testing and Quality 
Certification by third party audit. This itself involves lot of time. Payment could be made only after 
finalization of due process. Since the scale of work is very  large and complex, the process consumes lots 
of time and payment could not be made as planned in advance. 
1.4. The different segments of the Project are interdependent. Though the Vendor for RSI was 
finalized it could not take off as the Vendor for RH was  not selected. The delay in RH segment was due 
to non boarding of the selected Vendor in 2012 -13. The Vendor’s Performance Bank Guarantee was 
forfeited and was blacklisted. Similarly the Mail Operation Hardware Vendor after being selected did not 
turn up. This kind of eventualities could not be anticipated in advance and hence the funds allotted for 
those activities could not be utilized. 
1.5. The completion time lines set for the implementation/commencement of Disaster Recovery 
Centre as ‘March 2015’ will not happen in the expected month due  to public complaint about generator 
triggered air pollution/noise’ issue,  there was a little delay in ensuring functioning as expected. The 
issue is being resolved and Disaster recovery Centre will start its working very shortly. The table showing 
the implementation and O&M Phase timelines may please be read as follows. 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the segment Completion of 
Implementation  
Completion of Operation 
and Maintenance 
1 Rural ICT- Application Oct   2016 Oct    2025 
2 Core System Integrator June 2016 June  2021 
3 Financial Solution June2016 May   2021 
 
4 
Data Centre & DRC DC: Functioning 
DRC: Very July   2020 

 
 
18 
 
Shortly 
5 Network Connectivity June  2015 Dec   2020 
6 Rural H/W & Connectivity Oct    2016 Oct    2021 
7 Mail Operation Hardware Sep    2015 Sep   2020 
8 Change Management Oct    2015 Oct   2015 
 
2. Now all the eight segments have entered the implementation phase. The monitoring 
mechanism is in place. Project Coordination Committee and Various Project Implemen tation 
Committees set up at Directorate level and Circle Monitoring committee at Circle level and Regional 
Implementation Committees at regional level are closely watching the progress and vigorously 
monitoring the day to day happenings of the Project to e nsure that the implementation is completed 
within the revised timelines set for the purpose and also ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds for 
the Project. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.8) 
Premium Services  
 
Speed Post 
  
  The Committee note that Speed Post service was introduced in 1986 to provide a fast and 
time bound delivery service between seven major cities in the country. Since then, the netw ork 
has been expanded across all major cities in the country. The Speed Post offers time bound and 
assured delivery of letters, documents and parcels weighing upto 35 kgs across the country and 
the delivery norms are fixed taking into account the fastest a vailable mode of transport between 
stations. It is managed as a business service with a commercial approach in its operations and 
management. The Committee have been informed that at present, in the established courier 
market valued at around ` 5,200 crore, Speed Post has been generating revenues to the tune of ` 
1,370 crore, which is around 26 per cent. The Committee find that the growth in revenue 
generated on Speed Post services during 2013 -14 has drastically come down compared to the 
previous year. The Department need to be vigilant in arresting this downswing and take remedial 
steps to propel growth in revenues from this sector. In order to compete in this market, the 
Department have been focusing on specific expansion of Speed Post in different areas w ith 
specific thrust on technology. The Department are also focusing on bringing forth improvement 
in the quality of service of Speed Post as well as improving the business revenue from this sector 
since the courier market, parcel market, e -commerce and business mail are the four areas where 
market growth is very high. To meet the competition from private players, the Department have 
taken a number of steps for marketing and promotion of Speed Post service highlighting the 
features such as Track & Trace faci lity, volume based discount, free pick -up, credit facility, etc. 
For this purpose, Business Development & Marketing Directorate has formulated a Plan Scheme 
“Marketing Function of the Department” with the objective of enhancing the visibility and brand 
value of existing as well as new products of the Department. While appreciating the fact that the 
market share of the Department has shown a gradual increase in the recent years and taking 

 
 
19 
 
cognizance of the steps taken by the Department for marketing and prom otion of Speed Post 
service, the Committee feel that there is tremendous scope for increasing the market share of the 
Department in this segment. The Committee recommend that the Department should highlight 
the value added features of Speed Post to popular ize it amongst the target customers and 
leverage its vast infrastructure and manpower to improve its market share in the express industry 
which is expected to witness very high growth rate in the near future, especially with the 
emergence of e-commerce in India. 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.8, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The marketing and product management efforts of India Post have resulted into a consistent 
Speed Post growth of for the past three financial ye ars. Revenue generated through Speed Post 
during last 3 years is as follows: 
 
Year Revenue (` in crores) Percentage increase in revenue 
2011-12 889.64 18.80 % 
2012-13 1261.47 41.79 % 
2013-14 1369.10 8.53 % 
 
Business Development and Marketing Directorat e is working to provide more value additions 
and add-ons on existing products.  Facility of tracking Speed Post articles by sending a SMS has 
been introduced. Department of Posts has also introduced FREE SMS alert to the MOBILE 
NUMBER of sender and address ee updated at the time of booking when the article reached the 
delivery Post Office as well as when it is delivered. A mobile application is also ready for roll 
out in order to enable the mobile users to easily track Speed Post,  Registered articles and 
parcels. 
 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.9) 
Express Parcel and Logistics Post  
 
 Express Parcel and Logistics Post are two other important components of pre mium 
services. Express Parcel and Business Parcel Services were introduced w.e.f 02.12.2013 as a 
result of the rationalization of parcel products in place of Express Parcel Post. At present, 
Express Parcel Service is operational between 47 cities. The Comm ittee have been informed that 
its coverage is being expanded Pan India w.e.f. 01.11.2014 to increase the revenue from the 
service. The Committee find that revenue generated from these services registered an increase 
from ` 71.80 crore in 2011 -12 to ` 78.87 crore in 2012-13. However, there is a marginal slump 
in revenue in 2013 -14 which stood at ` 77.63 crore. The Committee desire that with the 
rationalization of Express Parcel Services coupled with its national coverage, the Department 

 
 
20 
 
should monitor quality of performance of these services so as to give boost to revenue generation 
in the coming years. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.9, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
Parcel products were rationalized in Dec. 2013 and Exp ress and Business parcels services were 
introduced. In 2014 -15, a revenue of ` 48.92 Crore has been generated till Dec‟14 from these 
two parcel services. Express Parcel has been made available across the country w.e.f. 01.11.2014 
only and traffic/revenue would be monitored for reviewing performance.  In order to monitor the 
quality of performance of these services and to boost the revenue generation, the norms for 
delivery of Express and Business parcels have been fixed and regular monitoring is being done 
under Mail Network Optimisation Project (MNOP). Both these services are fully trackable 
online and quality monitoring is done at all levels using web based tools. New Parcel Centres are 
being set and existing ones upgraded in major cities across the countr y, in order to enhance the 
quality of service for Express Parcel and Business Parcels Electronic MIS is also made available 
to bulk customers. Further in order to address the customer‟s grievances, Speed Post and e -
Commerce monitoring cells have been set up in Circles. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 The Committee are concerned to find that the revenue contribution of Logistics Post, i.e. 
` 49.46 crore,  showed an increase in 2012 -13, but drastically came down to ` 15.25 crore in 
2013-14. Regarding expansion of Logistics Post, a plan scheme for “Establishment and 
Upgradation of Parcel and Logistic Centres/Hubs/Warehouses” with an outlay of Rs. 66 crore 
has been approved for the 12th Five Year Plan. The Department proposed to establish 23 
Logistics Posts/Warehousing Centres during the Plan period. The Committee are given to 
understand that while a Memorandum of Understanding has been signed with Air -India t o 
provide transmission solutions to the customers under Logistics Post through Air between select 
15 stations, transporters/logistics service providers have also been empanelled on select routes to 
assist in surface distribution of logistics services. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
efficacy of the recent institutional arrangements under Logistics Post in enhancing the revenue 
portfolio of the Department. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Logistics Post Service has been introduced to leverage available resources in the 
Department. Revenue has been more or less stable in past three years except in 2012 -13, when a 
large project of distribution of RGI census material was done. 
S.No. Year Revenue Earned (in Crore) 
1. 2011-12 15.93 
2. 2012-13 49.46 
3. 2013-14 15.25 
4. Upto December 2014 13.16 
  
The 12 th Plan Scheme for Establishment of Parcel Booking Centres and Logistics Post 
/Warehouse Centre mainly covers establishment a nd up -gradation of Parcel Booking 
Centres/Logistics Centres and Warehouses. Setting up of Logistics Post Centres is a component 

 
 
21 
 
of this scheme with financial outlay of ` 10 Crore. Keeping in view the emerging e -commerce 
market, the emphasis has been given on setting up of Parcel booking centres. Circles have been 
directed to utilize the services of the empanelled transporters for the business needs to 
accomplish the objective of revenue generation.  
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
Estates Management  
Encroachment 
12. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that out of a total of 1797 vacant plots 
available with the Department of Posts in 22 postal circ les, 241 plots (i.e. 13.41 per cent) are 
under encroachment. The situation is more worrisome in the States of Karnataka, Bihar, 
Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh, including Telangana where 39, 28, 26 and 24 plots, respectively, 
are under encroachment. On specif ic measures to reclaim the land from encroachers, the 
Committee note that the Department of Posts have issued necessary directions to the Heads of 
Postal Circles that eviction of unauthorized personnel from the encroached land may be 
undertaken with the as sistance of law enforcement agencies. It is also proposed to construct 
boundary walls on all the Departmental vacant plots where there is no boundary wall/ barbed 
wire. To prevent further encroachment, Committee note that there is a proposal to 
construct 1 75 boundary walls at an outlay o f ` 15 crore during the 12th Five Year Plan. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the issue of safeguarding the land assets of the 
Department has been dragging on for so long and stress that the procedure for eviction of 
unauthorized encroachers may be expedited. Further, the erection of boundary wall fencing 
may be taken up on a priority basis to prevent the occurrence of any fresh encroachment and 
also to ensure that the Department are spared the arduous task of recla iming the encroached 
property. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.12, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
i.  (a) The Circles have been directed to expedite the process of eviction of unauthorized 
personnel from the encroached la nd of the Department, by seeking assistance of the law 
enforcing agencies. For speedy disposal of the entire Sub judice/disputed cases regular 
follow up is being done and the cases are being closely monitored. 
(b) Instructions stand issued to all Heads of Circles to direct postman/delivery staff under 
whose jurisdiction the vacant land falls for regular ward and watch during his visit to the 
beat for letter delivery to guard against future encroachments.  
ii. To protect the vacant plots from encroachment, bound ary walls on important/sensitive 
plots are being constructed subject to availability of plan funds. Further the building 
projects on the vacant lands have started to make use of the property.  The total number 
of building projects completed in 2012-13 is 20 which include 16 Post Office buildings, 1 
Administrative building and 3 staff quarters. In the year 2013 -14, 5 building projects 
have been completed. Further the construction of boundary walls have also been done in 
the past two years and 30 boundary wal ls in 2012 -13 and 3 boundary walls in 2013 -14 
have been completed. During the current financial year, funds to the tune of ` 4 Crs. have 
been allotted for construction of 93 boundary walls around vacant plots in Circles. 
   
 

 
 
22 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  
Report  dated 26-03-2015)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.14) 
 
Post Offices operating from rented accommodation  
 
 The Committee note that a total of 21,003 Post Offices i n the twenty -two postal 
circles are operating from rented accommodation and the Department have incurred ` 54.55 
crore in 2011-12, ` 62.09 crore in 2012-13 and ` 69.49 crore in 2013-14 towards payment of rent 
during the last three years. The postal circles of Tamil Nadu, U.P., Andhra Pradesh, 
including Telangana State, and West Bengal have highest number of offices operating from 
rented accommodation and their numbers are 2325, 2241, 2125 and 1533, respectively. The 
Committee observe that in the postal Circles of Tamil nadu and Andhra Pradesh, including 
Telangana State, both the number of vacant plots available with the Department and the 
number of Post Offices operating from rented accommodation are amongst the highest. In 
Tamil Nadu circle, the Department have 143 vacant plots while 2325 post offices are 
operating from rented accommodation.  In Andhra Pradesh, including Telangana State, the 
Department have 218 vacant plots while 2125 post offices are operating from rented 
accommodation. The Committee recommend that the project mooted for utilization of 
vacant land should include proposals for construction of office buildings in those States 
where there is substantial outgo of revenue in the form of rent. Planning may also be made 
for other States depending upon availability of funds and on the premise of  cost-benefit 
analysis. The Department can ill-afford to pay a huge rent on the one side and keep their 
land meant for office buildings lying vacant for years together on the other. It is, therefore, 
essential to take urgent steps in the matter. The Commit tee would like to be outcome in this 
regard. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.14, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
The project for construction of post office buildings are mooted based on the priority list 
taking into ac count availability of clear title of land, threat to the land from encroachers, non -
availability of the Departmental building in the commercial/ business area, higher rental liability 
for the buildings and priority is given towards bigger offices such as H ead Post Office, Mukhya  
Dak Ghar (MDG), Higher Selection Grade Post Office, Lower Selection Grade Post Office, etc. 
depending on the Plan Fund made available and cost -benefit analysis for the construction of 
building under 12 th Five Year Plan. Accordingly,  a priority list of 75 locations has been drawn 
out by the Department which ensures that a good share of the buildings are constructed in the 
states  like Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh including Telangana and West Bengal 
where the  maximum numb er of post office buildings, which are functioning in rented buildings 
and vacant lands are available. The number of projects in Tamil Nadu is six, Uttar Pradesh five, 
Andhra Pradesh including Telangana State is eight and West Bengal is seven. Thus a total  of 26 
projects are from these four Circles (5 states) constituting 35% of the total share.  The 
construction of the Post Office buildings will be carried forward to the XIII thFive Year Plan 
subject to availability of funds.  A final outlay of `. 85.32 cro res were made available for 
construction/ reconstruction of 75 post office buildings all over India in 22 Postal Circles.        
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts No.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.15) 
Franchise Outlets 
 The Committee note that the Franchise Scheme of the Department is a commission based 
scheme which is being implemented as one of the activities/ sub -schemes under the Plan 
Scheme-“Rural Business & Access to Postal Network” d uring the 12th Plan with the objective of 
increasing access to the postal facilities in urban and semi -urban areas where there is need and 
justification for opening of post offices but the Department is not in a position to do so for some 
reasons. In this regard, the Committee note that there is a proposal for opening of 1,050 new 
Franchise Outlets during the 11 th  Plan period. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the 
Department in opening of Franchise Outlets during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 wherein the 
Department have merged to open 255 and 200 Franchise Outlets as against the targets of opening 
of 250 and 200 Franchise Outlets. The Committee feels that the Franchise Outlet Model provides 
a good alternative in areas where there is a need and justification of  opening of new post offices 
but the Department is unable to do so. The Franchise Outlets  model provide a low cost solution 
since the Department do not incur any cost towards setting up and running the Post Office and 
the private party is paid commission on the number of articles sold/ services rendered to the 
customers. The committee find that the scheme encourages private participation in the activities 
of the Department and feel that it must be encouraged to ensure improved coverage by the India 
Post ne twork. The committee would like to be apprised of the overall performance of the 
Scheme.   
(Recommendation Sl.No.15, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The objective of the Department‟s Franchise Scheme is to in crease access of basic postal 
facilities in areas where there is need and justification for opening of post offices but Department 
is not in a position to do so for some reason. The year -wise targets for opening of new franchise 
outlets during 2015-16 & 2016-17 are as under: 
 
2015-16 2016-17 
200 200 
 
 
Recently in pursuance of the direction of Hon‟ble Prime Minister, the Franchise Scheme 
has been revised to make its procedures simpler and more attractive to potential franchisees. 
Further, the coverage of t he Scheme has been extended to rural areas. There are two types of 
franchisees under the revised Franchise Scheme-  
(i)  Counter services through Franchise Outlets in urban and rural areas where there is 
demand for postal services, but a post office cannot be opened. 
(ii)  Sale of postal stamps and stationery through Postal Agents in urban and rural areas.  
 Details of the revised Franchise Scheme has already been circulated to all Heads of the 
Postal Circles vide letter dated 25.11.2014 with directions to take appropriate actions for 
implementation of the same with immediate effect. It has also been requested to launch publicity 
drive [including advertisement in local media] to spread awareness among people about the 
scheme. Details of the scheme also made available in the Department‟s Website 
www.indiapost.gov.in/ revised franchise scheme , for public information and create awareness 
among people. 
 Since the Franchise Scheme has been mad e simpler and also since its coverage now 
extends to both urban and rural areas, it is expected that more number of new franchise outlets 
will be opened in the coming  years. The projected number of 1050 for the 12 th Five Year Plan is 
therefore likely to be exceeded giving impetus to extension of access to postal services.  
 

 
 
24 
 
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.16) 
Postal Life Insurance 
  
  The Committee note that  the Postal Life Insurance (PLI) is amongst the few services 
offered by the Department of Posts which makes a significant contribution to the revenue of the 
Department. The target customers for PLI include employees of State/Central Government, 
PSUs, Defen se and Paramilitary forces, autonomous/local bodies, public and private sector 
banks, Credit cooperative societies, Joint Ventures having a minimum of 10% stakes, 
CBSE/AICTE/ICSE/MCI, accredited institutions etc. The Committee find that in terms of the 
number of policies, PLI and RPLI hold the second position after the LIC. The share of PLI and 
RPLI in the Life Insurance Industry in terms of policies is 295.04 lakhs as on 31.03.2014 which 
is 10.24% of the market share. In terms of premium income, the positi on as on 31.03.2014 was ` 
7634.45 crore which is 2.53% of market share for Life Insurance. The Committee also note that 
the number of PLI policies has increased from 52,19,326 in 2012 -13 to 62,72,169 in 2013 -14. 
The number of RPLI policies has also increas ed from 1,46,64,650 in 2012 -13 to 2,32,32,236 in 
2013-14. The Department are stated to have taken a number of steps to popularize the scheme 
amongst the targeted beneficiaries, such as release of advertisements and publicity through 
various channels, final izing a media agency for ensuring adequate publicity to the target 
clientele, computerization of all activities related to policy servicing and premium payments, TV 
commercials and Radio Jingles, coupled with publicity in print media, social media, mobile 
application, etc. Since Postal Life Insurance is a major source of revenue for the Department, the 
Committee recommend that all out efforts should be made to popularize the scheme amongst the 
target customers. The Department may also look at ways to divers ify the intended customer base 
through inclusion of new categories in the list of eligible segments along with competitive 
marketing of the various insurance products on offer. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.16, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
The following steps have been taken by the Department to popularize the scheme 
amongst the targeted customers -  
(a) 360 degree publicity of PLI & RPLI products through all available channels of publicity i.e. 
Print media, Television, Radio, outdoor media, SMS etc on regular intervals within the available 
outlays/funds at National/Directorate level. Specific awareness creation print advertisements are 
issued on special occasions;  
(b) Publicity guidelines have been issued to all Ci rcles to popularize the PLI/RPLI schemes 
through localized publicity campaign such as PLI & RPLI Melas so as to ensure publicity up to 
last mile, setting up of rural infrastructural facilities such as Bus shelters etc, distribution of 
leaflets /brochures amongst clientele group ;  
(c) Postal Life Insurance (PLI) was introduced on 1 st February 1884 as a welfare scheme for the 
benefit of Postal employees. Gradually its benefits were extended to covers employees of Central 
and State Governments, Public Sector Undertakings, Universities, Government aided educational 
institutions, Nationalized Banks, Local bodies etc. During 2011 scope of PLI was further 
expanded to provide insurance coverage to:(i)Employees engaged/ appointed on contract basis 
by Central/ State Governments, where the contract is extendable, (ii) Employees of Joint 
Ventures in which Central/ State Governments/ Public Sector Undertakings/ Nationalized Banks 

 
 
25 
 
have minimum holding of 10 percent, (iii) Members/ employees of Credit Cooperative Societies  
and other cooperative societies registered with Government under the Cooperative Societies Act 
and partly or fully funded from the Central/ State Governments/ RBI/ SBI/ Nationalized Banks/ 
NABARD, and other such institutions notified by Government, (iv) E mployees of Deemed 
Universities and Educational Institutes accredited by recognized bodies such as National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council, All India Council of Technical Education, Medical 
Council of India, etc. and/ or affiliated to Universities/ B oards, etc (v) Employees of all 
Scheduled Commercial Banks. Further, the proposal of expanding scope of PLI would be 
examined keeping in view the market demand and solvency of funds based on recommendations 
of Actuary. 
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.17) 
Postal Life Insurance – Withdrawal/Surrender of PLI/RPLI policies  
 The Committee also note that there is an upward trend in withdrawal/surrender of PLI 
and RPLI policies by the customers. The number of surrendered PLI policies has increased from 
14,200 in 2011 -12, 15,417 in 2012 -13 to 17,891 in 2013 -14. The number of surrendered RPLI 
policies has also increased from 28,776 in 2011-12, 33,788 in 2012-13 to 38,250 in 2013-14. The 
Department have taken various initiatives to check the growing withdrawal/surrender of 
PLI/RPLI policies which include educating Policy holders to seek/apply for loan against the 
policy instead of surrender of policy in case of immediat e financial need, helping policy holders 
to reduce the sum assured/value of policy thereby reducing the premium income in case they find 
it difficult to pay the higher premium and customer awareness and education in insurance 
products. The Committee recommend that the Department should make strenuous efforts to stem 
the rise in withdrawal/surrender of PLI/RPLI policies. Simultaneous efforts towards effective 
marketing of insurance products along with measures to prevent surrender/withdrawal of PLI & 
RPLI policies should be pursued to ensure that the customer base in PLI/RPLI keeps on growing, 
generating the much needed revenue for the Department of Posts.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.17, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
Reply of the Government 
In order to prevent/restrict the following steps are being taken to prevent withdrawal/surrender of 
PLI/RPLI policies:- 
(i)  Policy holders are being educated to seek/apply for loan against the policy instead of 
surrender of policy in case of immediate financ ial need. Insurants are also informed 
about the surrender value which is very less in proportion to maturity value. 
(ii) Policy holders are being advised to reduce the sum assured/value of the policy thereby 
reducing the premium income in case they find it diff icult to pay h \the higher 
premium. 
(iii)All out efforts being made for customer education & sensitizing. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.20) 
 
Speed Post Cash on Delivery (SP-CoD)  
  
  The Committee note that logistics, payment mechanism and information flow are crucial 
for e-Commerce and are developing to keep pace with the fast emerging e -Commerce market. 

 
 
26 
 
Due to the increasing penetration of e -Commerce in the Ind ian market, shopping trends are 
changing comprehensively and people prefer to shop online and make payment at the time of 
delivery. Payment through Cash -on-Delivery is a very prominent feature of the Indian e -
Commerce market. The Committee are pleased to n ote that the DoP launched the Cash on 
Delivery facility of Speed Post and Parcel products on 2nd December, 2013 and till September, 
2014, ` 254 crore was collected and paid to e -Commerce and other digital commerce companies 
for Business Parcel. The Committ ee appreciate the efforts of the Department towards electronic 
capacity building in the network for CoD facility for which a national capacity building exercise 
was also conducted by the Department for Speed Post Cash on Delivery facility in September, 
2014. The Committee, while observing that at present the Department are in touch with various 
e-Commerce companies for providing distribution solutions, trust that the Department would 
further strengthen its efforts in this direction to rope in different e-Commerce companies offering 
them distribution solution through its Speed Post Cash on Delivery facility.  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.20, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
Cash on Delivery facility of Speed Post and parcel products was launched on 02.12.2013. 
The Department is working towards electronics capacity building in the network of COD facility 
.National capacity building exercises are being conducted for Speed Post Cash on Delivery 
facility to strengthen the se rvice. At present Department is in touch with various e -commerce 
companies using Speed Post for providing distribution solution alongwith COD facility.  
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.22) 
Miscellaneous  
 
Gramin Dak Sewaks  
  The Committee note that out of 1,54,856 Post Offices, 1,29,388 (83.55 %) are Gramin 
Dak Sewak Post Offices and at 2,63,599 out of 4,66,301 employees, Gramin Dak Sewaks 
constitute 56.33 per cent of the total workforce. In essence, 56.33% of the workforce comprised 
of GDS is employed in 83.55% of the Post Offices which are mostly located in the rural areas 
and which serve the bulk of the population. The Committee feel that Gramin Dak Sewak s play 
an important role in the postal network by providing the last mile reach to areas which are 
unviable/unattractive to the private courier services and ensure access to the remotest parts of the 
country. The Committee also note that a Memorandum had b een received by the Department 
from the Gramin Dak Sewak Employees requesting that their category may also be included in 
the Seventh Central Pay Commission and that they should be given pay and other facilities as per 
regular Departmental employees. The D epartment have also informed the Committee that 
whenever a Central Pay Commission is constituted, the Department of Posts have been 
constituting a separate committee to decide on the pay and other facilities to be provided to the 
Gramin Dak Sewaks. Consequ ently, action is underway in the Department for constituting a 
GDS committee to look into the wage structure, emoluments and other service conditions of the 
GDS employees. It is imperative that the genuine concerns of more than half the workforce of 
the Department are addressed in a fair and judicious manner so that this critical section of the 
workforce do not feel left out vis-à-vis the regular Departmental employees and realize that they 
are equal stakeholders in the Department of Posts. While recognizin g the important role played 
by Gramin Dak Sewaks who constitute the backbone of the Department in the rural areas, the 

 
 
27 
 
Committee urge the Department that their genuine needs/grievances may be addressed on a 
priority basis.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.22, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has been taking steps to look into the welfare and other service 
conditions including the pay & allowances of GDS. A memorandum had been received from 
GDS Employees re questing that their category be also included in the Seventh Central Pay 
Commission and that they should be given pay and other facilities as per regular Departmental 
employees. Accordingly, the matter was referred to the Department of Expenditure, Ministr y of 
Finance for including GDS in the 7 th Pay Commission, but MoF rejected the proposal. However, 
as agreed with the staff side during the PJCA meeting, it was decided to refer the matter back to 
MoF for reconsideration of its decision. The matter has therefore being referred to Department of 
Expenditure with request to include GDS in the 7 th Pay Commission. Final reply from MoF is 
still awaited. The GDS employee forms a distinct and separate category in the Department of 
Posts. They are not regular Government employee but are engaged on a part time basis, mostly in 
rural areas for providing postal services to the rural public, The GDS employee in addition to 
working for the DOP also have their own means of livelihood and also pursue any further means 
of livelihoods. In fact, it is mandatory that a candidate has an independent means of livelihood, 
before they can be considered for engagement as GDS Employee. 
  
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
 
 
 

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.6) 
Review of Plan Schemes 
 
IT Induction & Modernization 
 
 The Committee note that the Eleventh Plan envisaged extensive technology up 
gradation and modernization in the Department of Posts. IT Induction schemes were taken 
up in two phases in the 11 th Plan and it is being continued in the 12 th Plan with a 
comprehensive IT roadmap to be developed for network architecture, integrated software, 
proper data management including strengthening/establishment of National Data Centre, 
Disaster Recovery Centre. Eight Requests for Proposals (RFPs), viz., Change Management 
(CM), Rural Hardware (RH), Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Mail Operation 
Hardware (MOH) were floated as proposed in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) and are 
pending finalization at various stages. The Committee also note that IT Induction and 
Modernization is an important scheme of the DoP that got the maximum outlay amongst 
all the schemes  for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. However, the percentage achievement 
which ranged between 5.06% and 47.88 % during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, when compared 
with BE, depicts a dismal picture. According to the Department, the factors responsible for 
the delayed imp lementation of IT Modernization Project broadly relate to reviewing the 
entire project on account of complaints received during the process of procurement, delay 
in finalization of the RFPs, etc. As a result of this delay, the time line approved by the 
Cabinet in November, 2012 for implementation/roll out/completion of the project got 
adversely affected. The Committee is concerned to find that out of over 1, 54,856 post 
offices, only 25145 Departmental post offices have been computerized and 25195 locations  
have been electronically networked. About computerization and networking of the 
remaining extra Departmental/rural post offices, it has been stated that the work will be 
undertaken after finalization of the RFP Contract with vendors of Rural Hardware and 
Rural System Integrator. The Department is yet to obtain approval for revised timelines 
for the project. The Committee, however, takes note of the fact that project activities have 
gained momentum in the year 2013 -14 and all efforts should be made to final ize RFPs in 
the current fiscal. The Committee would like to be appraised of the revised timelines set for 
the project along with plans of the Department to accomplish the modernization project 
within the envisaged time frame. 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.6, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
Reply of the Government 
IT Modernization Project, which has been approved in November 2012, with a total 
outlay of Rs 4909 Crore, is in implementation phase.  Rural Hardware contract has been finalized 
and the work has been awarded to M/s Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd on               
24-11-2014. Implementation of this segment has also begun. Under this segment supply and 
installation of various hardware will start from the month of April 2015 . The implementation of 
Rural System Integrator, for which contract   was signed on 28 -02-2013, which was kept on hold 
to align with the Rural hardware RFP, has also started work in alignment with the Rural 
Hardware RFP. After complete implementation o f Ru ral ICT project, all the 1, 29,389 extra 
Departmental Branch Post Offices will be computerized and networked by the end of October 
2016. 
 Taking in to account the present implementation status of all the eight segments of the 
Project, the following timelines are being set for completion of implementation and O&M Phase. 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the segment Completion of 
Implementation  
Completion of 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
1 Rural ICT- Application Oct   2016 Oct    2025 
2 Core System Integrator June 2016 June  2021 
3 Financial Solution June2016 May   2021 
4 Data Centre & DR DC  is operational  
DRC Mar 2015 July   2020 
5 Network Connectivity June  2015 Dec   2020 
6 Rural H/W & Connectivity Oct    2016 Oct    2021 
7 Mail Operation Hardware Sep    2015 Sep   2020 
8 Change Management Oct    2015 Oct   2015 
  
The Project Coordination Committee and Various Project Implementation Committees 
set up at Directorate level and Circle Monitoring committee at Circle level and Regional 
Implementation Committees at regional l evel are closely watching the progress and vigorously 
monitoring the day to day happenings of the Project to ensure that the implementation is 
completed within the revised timelines set for the purpose. 
 
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.13) 
Utilization of Vacant Land 
 What is further disquieting to note is that as on 01.04.2014, 1797 plots measur ing 
672.12 acres of land are lying vacant with the Department . Out of this, 371 plots are 
situated at prime locations.   In this context, the Committee have been informed that a 
proposal for commercial utilization of vacant land under Public Private Partne rship 

 
 
31 
 
(PPP) mode was approved by the Cabinet for setting up of a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV),wholly owned company with limited liability for optimum development 
management of postal estates. The Plan of Action was stated to have been initiated in 
pursuan ce of the decision of the Committee of Secretaries in its meeting held 
20.05.2009. Based on inputs received from the Circles, the Department  learnt that few 
vacant lands could be utilized for (PPP) purpose. All these plots were originally allotted 
for cons truction of buildings for postal operations and these lands could not be used 
for any other purpose as per allotment terms and conditions, or else the allotment will 
get cancelled automatically. Moreover, State Governments are reportedly not inclined 
to ch ange the type of use of these lands situated on prime locations due to their  own 
interest in PPP brand initiatives. In view of these developments, the entire project is 
being re -looked at by the Department . The Committee are very dissatisfied at the 
whole sequence of events regarding action taken for utilization of land under PPP which 
reflects poorly on the estate management of the Department . The procedural 
bottlenecks encountered in the process should have been taken care of by the 
Department  while formu lating the project proposal. Emphasizing expeditious 
utilization of vacant land and to avoid its possible encroachment in future recommend 
that a viable project be conceived with due diligence to give effect proposal to the 
project should be completed in a  time bound manner and the Committee be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.13, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
In this context, it is intimated that a revised/new viable propos al will be 
prepared/projected once a decision regarding finalization of Public Private Partnership  (PPP) is 
taken by the competent authority and intimated to the Cabinet. 
 ( Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl.No.19) 
Priority Areas in DoP 
 
e-Commerce Sector  
 
 The Committee note that the Department are exploring new business opportunities 
to augment its revenue generation. The Department have identified ‘Capturing                     
e-Commerce Markets’ as a priority area and have constituted a Task Force to facilitate 
their course of action. The Committee find that the Department are in touch with various  
e-Commerce companies using Speed Post for providing distribution solutions along with 
the Cash-on-Delivery (CoD) facility. The Committee are aware that with the advent of new 
age communication technologies, the decline of ordinary mail has emerged as a gl obal 
phenomenon even as the emerging e-Commerce market and the resultant increase in parcel 
business is being pursued by Postal Organizations across the world. Of late, the e -
Commerce market in India is also expanding at an exponential rate. After the Metr os and 
Tier-I cities, the next wave of growth in e -Commerce is expected to come from Tier -II/III 
cities and the rural areas. The Committee recognize that the major players in the e -
Commerce market are eyeing the Department of Posts for delivery of their pr oducts to the 

 
 
32 
 
Tier-2/3 cities and rural areas, leveraging the vast reach of the Department through its 
large postal network to access this untapped market. The Committee feel that this is 
precisely the area where the strength of the Department of Posts lie s. The Committee are 
convinced that the emergence of e-Commerce in India has presented a great opportunity to 
the Department of Posts to leverage its huge postal network to cater to the parcel business 
generated through expansion of e -Commerce. As e -Commerce picks up in India, 
substantial business is expected to originate from Tier -II/III cities and the rural areas 
where the Department of Posts face minimal/no competition due to the limited coverage of 
these areas by private players/courier companies. The Committee, therefore, stress that the 
Department should focus on the e-Commerce sector to garner maximum business from this 
sector and become a partner of choice for the e -Commerce companies desirous of catering 
to the e-Commerce business emanating from the Tier-II/III cities and the rural areas of the 
country.  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.19, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 
Reply of the Government 
Growth of e -commerce has provided a new window of opportunity for postal players 
worldwide, and Asia Pacific in particular. There is a huge untapped market for Department of 
Posts to provide delivery services to such firms targeting customers in „B‟ & „C‟ class cities and 
rural areas. Department of Posts is closely studying and examining the marke t dynamics to make 
the services in tune with the requirements of online shopping companies to offer safe, secure and 
reliable delivery options alongwith a reliable and economical remittance solution for the amount 
collected towards cost of goods at the tim e of its delivery so that Department can increase its 
share in delivery of goods ordered online. Tie -ups have been made with various e -commerce 
companies viz . Amazon.in, Snapdeal.com, Shopclues.com, M/s Naaptol, HomeShop 18, 
Telebrands etc. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I)

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7) 
Post Bank of India  
 
 The Committee note that over the many decades of its operation, the DoP has 
developed numerous intrinsic strengths relevant to banking operations that can be utilized 
by the proposed bank while it creates its own  capabilities in core areas of banking, to 
ensure that the synergy fulfils the country’s agenda of promoting inclusive banking. The 
Department of Posts possess various advantages such as a large existing customer base of 
31 crore accounts across savings ba nk and savings certificates, an unparalleled wide 
distribution network having 1.54 lakh points of presence and last mile reach through the 
Gramin Dak Sewak (GDS) network, an established brand equity of India Post, experience 
in financial services having ` 6,00,000 crore in outstanding balances across savings 
accounts, experience in life insurance, remittances services, a strong and established 
governance framework and the upcoming technological initiatives. In line with this, the 
Committee are of the view t hat the Department should make all efforts to enter the 
banking domain so that these inherent strengths can be leveraged/utilized to bring in the 
large un-banked population within the ambit of formal banking to further the objective of 
financial inclusion. The Committee also note that the Department of Posts employ about 
1.3 lakh Gramin Dak Sewaks (GDS) and plan to utilize their services as Business 
Correspondents (BCs) for the last mile reach in the rural areas. On an average, there are 
approximately 200 GDS for every district of India, with the majority of this presence in un-
banked rural regions. The Banking Correspondents can foster the Government’s financial 
inclusion agenda by providing simple yet the complete suite of financial products, including 
Deposits, Loans, Insurance, Remittances, Government subsidies and benefits and Pension 
products. While they are already providing quite a few of the above mentioned services, 
PBI would complete the suite by providing credit facilities to the un -banked masses 
through the effective use of local GDS knowledge and formation of Joint Liability Groups, 
as per the requirement. The DoP are also planning to equip the Gramin Dak Sewaks with 
hand-held devices to facilitate their postal as well as banking transactions. Re garding the 
present status of the setting up of the proposed Post Bank of India, the Committee note that 
on the recommendation of the High Level Committee set up by the RBI on issuing banking 
licence to DoP, the consultation with Government took place in t he Public Investment 
Board meeting held on 1.5.2014 wherein it was inter-alia recommended that the DoP may 
work out a viable business model incorporating the ingredients of a ‘narrow banking 
model’ or the ‘differentiated banking model’ with specific object ives in mind and apply 
afresh for the license as per the RBI guidelines on ‘differentiated banking’, as and when 
notified. The Committee have been informed that the DoP will take a decision on 
submitting a fresh application for banking license when the fin al guidelines are published. 
The Committee are of the view that the Department of Posts have unmatched presence in 
the rural areas of the country and this presence is stronger than the branch network of any 
Bank/Financial Institution in India, thereby prov iding the Post Bank of India with a 
unique opportunity to meet the financial inclusion agenda of the Government as a single 
entity. The Department should seize this opportunity and utilize the services of Gramin 
Dak Sewaks as Business Correspondents for th e proposed Post Bank of India. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT 

 
 
34 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The f ollowing developments have taken place a fter the previous appraisal about the 
implementation of the plan project i.e. setting up of Post Bank of India was made to the Standing 
Committee on Information Technology (2014 -15) on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) relating to 
the Ministry of Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
1. The Reserve Bank of India vide its press release No. 2014 -2015/1089 dated 27.11.2014 
published in its website the final guidelines for licensing of payments Banks and has called for  
applications along with business plans a nd other requisite from eligible promoters before the 
closure of its business on 02.02.2015.  Accordingly the fresh application seeking licence for 
setting up Post Bank of India under the rubric of Payments Banks has been submitted to RBI on 
30.01.2015 with due approval. 
 
2. Mention in budget speech:- 
 
However a mention about proposal of Department of Posts to set up Payments Banks has 
been made by Hon`ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2015 -16 dated 28.02.2015 
which has been published in the website of  Ministry of Finance. Relevant portions are 
reproduced hereunder for information:- 
 
Para (37) of Budget 2015 -16 speech of Shri Arun Jaitley, Hon`ble Finance Minister on 
28.02.2015. “The Government is committed to increasing access of the people to the form al 
financial system. In this context, Government proposes to utilize the vast Postal network with 
nearly 1,54,000 points of presence spread across the villages of the country. I hope that the 
Postal Department will make its proposed Payments Bank venture s uccessful so that it 
contributes further to the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana”. 
 
As per the approved detailed project report for the Payments Bank, the services of Gramin 
Dak Sevaks in rural areas shall be utilized as Business Correspondents for the Payme nts 
Bank. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.11) 
Setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs)  
   The Committee observe that as part of the Elevent h Plan scheme, 2 new AMPCs 
were established in New Delhi and Kolkata in the year 2012 -13 and it is proposed to set up 
four more AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru during the Twelfth 
Plan period. The AMPCs at Delhi and Kolkata have helped the  Department in 
consolidating the mail office (processing) network in these cities as multiple offices have 
been combined into single processing units. The setting up of AMPCs on a similar pattern 
in Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad would help the Department in 
consolidation of intra -city mail network in these cities and would lead to an optimized 
processing facility. This would also help in optimal utilization of transport schedules in 

 
 
35 
 
these cities. As the Department expects volumes of e-commerce driven shipments to grow in 
these cities, the enhanced capacity in the shape of automated sorting would lead to 
expeditious processing and delivery of parcels, in addition to other categories of mail. The 
processing capacity of the machines is much faster le ading to expedited delivery of mail. 
Besides, mail and parcels from nearby areas of these cities can also be consolidated in the 
proposed centres. The Committee take note that the setting up of the AMPCs as a part of 
the Mail Network Optimization Project w ould improve the mail delivery in a significant 
manner and bring in efficiency in the core activity of the Department, viz. processing, 
transmission and delivery of mails by speeding up the entire process through 
mechanization. The Committee feel that the significance of setting up of more AMPCs in 
improving and speeding up the delivery of mails cannot be over emphasized and therefore 
recommend that the setting up of AMPCs in Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad 
needs to be expedited and the Committee b e informed of the progress made in this regard. 
The Committee also emphasis that the proposed infrastructure upgrade at mail offices and 
upgradation of 50 Business Post Centres (BPCs) as planned in the year 2014 -15 be 
completed as per envisaged schedule. 
  
(Recommendation Sl.No.11, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The approved plan scheme for setting up of AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore and 
Hyderabad is under progress. The land at Hyderabad is under posses sion of DOP and 
procurement of land at Bengaluru, Mumbai and Chennai is in advanced stage. The expression of 
Interest (EOI) was floated for hiring consultant for project and four consultancy firms have been 
shortlisted for issue of RFP. The RFP for vendor shall be issued after having the consultant on 
board. The upgradation of 50 BPCs is under process and shall be completed by 31st March, 2015. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.18) 
Computerization of services offered through Postal Life Insurance  
 
 The Committee note that the Department have been able to meet the long pending 
demand for facility of online viewing and payment of premium of PLI/RPLI policies by the 
customers. The Committee have been informed that since February, 2014, a pilot project 
for the implementation of a new Core Insurance Solution has been rolled out in 127 Head 
Post Offices and 3,500 Departmental Post Offices in the States of Assam, Delhi, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. Over the next one year, the Core 
Insurance Solution will be rolled out in the remaining States of India. The system will allow 
processing and claim settlement work to be decentralized to 8 10 Head Post Offices all over 
the country. It will also have multiple payment options for customers as well as facility for 
viewing policy details online, web and mobile portals. A call centre will also be put in place 
during the current financial year. Wh ile appreciating the initiatives of the Department, the 
Committee recommend that the implementation of Core Insurance Solution may be 
expedited to enable the customers to view and pay their PLI/RPLI policies premium online 

 
 
36 
 
from the comfort of their home. T he Committee are of the firm view that such steps would 
make the PLI products more accessible and user -friendly which in turn, will increase their 
popularity amongst the targeted customers.  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.18, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
Reply of the Government 
All the PLI/RPLI operations are being further automated under FSI Project 2012 which 
was completed in Pilot offices on 24th March 2014. In phase I Postal Circles, the roll out is likely 
to be completed by June 2015. The Business processes developed for the new PLI Software in 
the FSI project involve all processing work to be done at CPCs with provision for online 
approval by the competent authority without any physical movement of files beyond CPC‟s. 
Data entry work o f new proposals will be minimal since the software will scan and read the 
information on Insurance proposals directly and populate the various tables having the state of 
art technology and integration of all processes as prevalent in other insurance compan ies. The 
project is in Phase-I and likely to be completed by December 2015. 
The implementation of FSI project will have the major facilities as follows:  
(i) Premium payment options - ECS, Debit/Credit Card, Net Banking, EFT (POSB account) and 
at Kiosks through ATMs. 
(ii) Facility to view policy details. 
(iii) Claim payment through NEFT. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts No.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.21) 
Launching e-Commerce Portal  
 
 The Co mmittee note that since the Department of Posts are actively working 
towards developing a logistics solution for e -Commerce players in India, there is scope for 
vertical alignment in this market segment where the Department may have its own              
e-Commerce portal which can further strengthen its position in the e -Commerce market. 
The Committee are glad to know that a functional e -Commerce portal is a part of the IT 
project which is being rolled out in the Department of Posts. In view of the fact tha t 
launching a full -fledged e-Commerce portal requires highly technical resources, as a first 
step, the Department have started e-Post Office facility wherein the customers can avail e -
IPO facility and also purchase philatelic stamps online. The Department gradually intend 
to increase the product line on its e -Commerce portal by developing suitable model/tie-ups, 
etc. The Committee observe that plans to launch the e -Commerce portal as part of the IT 
Project is a step in the right direction since running the e-Post Office facility would provide 
critical insights into the operational aspects of launching a full fledged e -Commerce portal. 
The Committee hope that more and more services/products are added to e -Post Office 
facility and in the near future steps will be taken to gradually scale up the facility into an e-
Commerce portal offering the entire bouquet of products/services offered by the 
Department of Posts which can be accessed by its customers. The Committee desire that 
the Department may also seek specific expertise by way of external consultation/conducting 
feasibility study on launching its own e-Commerce portal. The Committee may be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.21, Chapter–II of 1st Report of Standing Committee on IT) 
 

 
 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The e-commerce portal is a part of ongoing IT project However,  vertical alignment in     
e-commerce sector and generating revenue from e -commerce portal would require professional 
expertise. At present, Department is deliberating with NIC for increasing the functionalities of e -
Post Office to increase the product line of the Department, in addition to sale of philatelic 
stamps.  
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts No.F.20-2/2014/BGT(PA)/1st  Report  
dated 26-03-2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20  Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 

 
 
38 
 
Annexure-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20 and 22  
 Total 15 
 Percentage 68.18 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  6, 13 and 19  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 13.64 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 11, 18 and 21  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 18.18 
 
 
 