 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on             
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
  
19  


 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on         ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of replies of the Government………………………………. 
 
36 
CHAPTERIV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
39 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
41 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on                  
18th December, 2015  
43 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Eight Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha)  
 
          45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  
(2015-16) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
6. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
7. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
8. Shri P. Karunakaran  
9. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
11. Shrimati Hema Malini  
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
13. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Javed Akhtar  
23. Shri Salim Ansari  
24. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan  
25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
26. Shri Meghraj Jain  
27. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
28. Shri Derek O’Brien  
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
30. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
31. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Deputy Secretary  
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology       
(2015-16), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the Nineteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in t heir Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 24th April, 2015.  The Ministry of Information a nd Broadcasting furnished 
their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Eight Report on 20th July, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 18th December, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
(iii)

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants (2015-16)‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 24th April, 2015. It contained 16 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the O bservations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,15 and 16   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 3  
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 4  
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply 
of the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. No: 11  
 
4. The Committee, in their Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), had 
undertaken a comprehensive examination of the Demands for Grants   
(2015-16) of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. While 
undertaking a holistic Budget Analysis of the Ministry, the  Committee, 
under the Broadcasting wing, had focused on issues concerning Prasar 
Bharati like diversion of IEBR for salary and salary related expenses, 
monetization/ utilization of land resources, implementation of 

2 
 
recommendations of expert Committee heade d by Sam Pitroda, Roadmap 
for Revival of Prasar Bharati and amendment to various sections of the 
Prasar Bharati Act, 1990. Initiatives and Schemes like Kisan Channel 
under Doordarshan and AIR, Scheme of DD International, expansion of FM 
Radio, Schemes for the Strengthening of the Electronic Media Monitoring 
Centre, and Scheme for supporting Community Radio Movement (CRS) in 
India were also examined thoroughly. Under the Information Wing, the 
Committee had examined the Directorate of Advertising and Visual 
Publicity (DAVP) and under the Film Wing, the Committee had examined 
the Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune, National Film 
Heritage Mission (NFHM), the Scheme for Production of Film and 
Documentaries and the Central Board of Film Certificat ion. A majority of 
the Recommendations of the Committee have been accepted by the 
Government and are at different stages of implementation. 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the  Ministry of  Information 
and Broadcasting in respect of each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Eighth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this 
Report. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given on 
implementing the Observations/Recommendations accepted b y the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire th at Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
6. The Committee will no w deal with Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Prasar Bharati – Generation of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
7. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that during the year 2014 -15, the Government had 
allocated Rs. 436 crore under Plan funds and Rs. 2001.98 crore under Non -
Plan funds for Prasar Bharati to meet salary and salary related expenses.  
Separately, Prasar Bharati  allocates Rs. 200 crore annually from its IEBR for 
Content Development under Software Scheme as per the 12 th Five Year Plan 
proposal.  As against the projected revenue of Rs. 2195.00 crore, the revenue 
receipts of Prasar Bharati during the year 2014 - 2015 stood at Rs. 1380 crore 
up to February, 2015 which was expected to rise to Rs. 1800 crore.  The 
Committee have been informed that in addition to adopting aggressive 
marketing strategies, Prasar Bharati has also undertaken measures for better 
publicity of programmes to augment IEBR generation.  One of the areas of 
concern expressed by Prasar Bharati relates to diversion of IEBR resources 
towards meeting Non -Plan expenditure because the Ministry have not fulfilled 
the obligation to pay 100% salary of Governm ent servants recruited with 
Prasar Bharati for the past three years.  The Committee find that an amount of 
Rs. 429 crore is due to Prasar Bharati from the year 2012 -13 to 2014 -15.  
Diversion of resources of Prasar Bharati meant for Content Development has 
reportedly affected revenue generation by Prasar Bharati, especially 
Doordarshan.  In view of the Cabinet decision taken in September, 2012 
wherein it was decided that all operating expenses would be met by Prasar 
Bharati through IEBR, except salary and sa lary related expenses, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to take steps for early release of payment 
of Rs. 429 crore due to Prasar Bharati.” 
8. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken 
Note, have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 “During the discussions held for RE 2014 -15 between M/o I&B, 
Prasar Bharati & M/o Finance in which CEO: PB was also present, 
M/o Finance raised the issues whether the Grants -in-Aid for 
salaries being released to Prasar Bharati were being utilized for the 

4 
 
intended purpose. Consequent to issues raised by Ministry of 
Finance, a pay-roll audit of Prasar Bharati was instituted  by AS&FA 
of this Ministry vide letter dated 11.02.2015 to provide reasonable  
assurance to the Ministry of Finance  
  
The Ministry in March , 2015 referred the recouping proposal of 
excess expenditure of Rs. 281.22 crore (Rs. 146.56 for 2012 -13 & 
Rs. 134.66 for 2013 -14) incurred by Prasar Bharati during 2012 -13 
& 2013-14 on salaries  under Revenue Non-Plan to  M/o Finance.   
 
Budget Division, M/o Finance on this matter stated that 
Autonomous Bodies/ grantee institutions should restrict their 
expenditure within the sanction ed amount and any excess 
expenditure over and above sanctioned amount may need to be 
borne by them. If any, excess expenditure is incurred by them 
out of their own resources, Government cannot reimburse/ 
recoup them.   
 
However, in view of  the Cabinet decis ion dated 14.09.2012 „ during  
the next  five years from  2012 -13 to 2016 -17, Government Non -Plan 
support may be made available to Prasar Bharati for meeting 100% 
expenses towards salary and  salary related expenses.  All other 
operating expenses to be born e by Prasar Bharati out of internal 
revenue earnings’, the proposal of recoupment of excess expenditure 
was again referred to Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of the 
Ministry in April, 2015. 
 
IFD on this matter stated that the pay-roll audit of Prasar Bharati is 
in process. Once the audit is over, it would refer the matter to the 
Ministry of Finance for reconsideration of the issue in view the 
Cabinet decision in this regard.” 
 

5 
 
9. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to take steps 
for early release o f payment of Rs. 429 crore (2012 -13 to 2014 -15) 
which was due to Prasar Bharati, in view of the Cabinet decision 
taken in September, 2012 wherein it was decided that during the 
next five year s from 2012 -13 to 2016 -17, Government non -Plan 
support may be mad e available to Prasar Bharati for meeting 100% 
expenses towards salary and salary related expenses. The Committee 
have been informed that the matter was discussed in a meeting with 
the Ministry of Finance in the presence of CEO , Prasar Bharati.  
Based on t he discussions in the meeting, a pay -roll audit of Prasar 
Bharati was instituted by the Ministry of I&B in February, 2015 to 
provide reasonable assurance to the Ministry of Finance whether the 
Grants-in-aid for salaries being released to Prasar Bharati wer e being 
utilized for the intended purpose.  Pending pay -roll audit, the 
Ministry of I&B , in March, 2015 , referred the recouping proposal of 
excess expenditure of Rs. 281.22 crore (Rs. 146.56 crore for 2012 -13 
and Rs. 134.66 crore for 2013 -14) incurred by Prasar Bharati to the 
Ministry of Finance.  However, the Ministry of Finance reiterated that 
any excess expenditure incurred by Prasar Bharati over and above the 
sanctioned amount need to be borne by the Autonomous Body from 
their own resources and that the Government cannot 
recoup/reimburse them.  The Ministry of I&B have again referred the 
proposal for recouping of excess expenditure to their Integrated 
Finance Division (IFD) in April, 2015. According to the Ministry, once 
the audit is over, the proposal of Prasar Bharati would again be placed 
before the Ministry of Finance for reconsideration in view of the  
Cabinet decision dated 14 th September, 2012.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, the excess expenditure incurred by Prasar Bharati relate 
to salary and salary related expenses and need to be borne by the 
Government as per Cabinet decision of September, 2012 .  The 
viewpoint of the Budget Division in the Ministry of Finance on the 
excess expenditure in the salary segment of Prasar Bharati clearly 
dilutes the spirit of aforesaid Cabinet decision by way of linking the 

6 
 
matter with sanctioned amount at a given poi nt of time.  The 
outcome of pay-roll audit being conducted by IFD would give a clearer 
picture of the appropriate utilization of sanctioned amount meant for 
salaries of employees of Prasar Bharati.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the IFD should comp lete the audit in a time -bound 
manner and the Administrative Ministry take up the proposal of 
Prasar Bharati with the Ministry of Finance for recouping the excess 
expenditure incurred by them for the period 2012 -13 to 2014 -15 in 
view of the Cabinet decision of September, 2012.  The Committee are 
concerned over the diversion of IEBR of Prasar Bharati meant for 
Content Development, which has reportedly affected revenue 
generation of Prasar Bharati, especially Doordarshan.  The Committee 
are of the  considered view that recoup ing of excess expenditure 
incurred earlier would help Prasar Bharati with the much needed 
revenue which it can utilise for content generation. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter within a 
period of three months. 
 
Review of Prasar Bharati – Sam Pitroda Committee Recommendations 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
10. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “It is disquieting to note that there has not been much headway in 
the implementation of the recommendations of the Sam Pitroda 
Committee Report, which was presented to the Government in 
February, 2014. This Expert Committee was constituted to review 
the in stitutional framework of Prasar Bharati, including its 
relationship with the Government. There seems to be lack of 
coordination and cohesion between the Ministry of I&B and Prasar 
Bharati in so far as implementation of these recommendations are 
concerned, because Prasar Bharati claims to have taken several 
operational and policy initiatives separately, particularly in the 
absence of any clarity from the Government about the acceptance of 
the Sam Pitroda Committee‟s entire range of recommendations. The 

7 
 
Committee take a serious view of this casual and lackadaisical 
approach of the Government on such an important matter. 
Considering that the overall action plan of Prasar Bharati is getting 
delayed, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should come 
out with a definite action plan for the implementation of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee in a time-bound manner. 
The Committee should be apprised of the action taken in the matter 
within a period of three months.” 
11. The Ministry of Information and Broadc asting, in their Action Taken 
Note, have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 “The Ministry had requested Prasar Bharati  (PB) to prepare an 
action plan for undertaking suggestions/ review/ audits etc. on 
various issues recommended by the Sam Pitroda Committee . It was 
also brought to the notice of PB that these studies/ audits are 
critical to any action to be initiated as part of the Committee Report, 
by the Government. The desired action plan is awaited from Prasar 
Bharati. 
The recommendations of the Sam Pitroda  Committee shall be 
concretized after the studies on manpower, technology and funding 
are completed and a vision for Prasar Bharati is prepared on the 
basis of the outcome of the studies.” 
12. The Committee , while observing that the overall action plan of 
Prasar Bharati is getting delayed, had recommended that the Ministry 
should come out with a definite action plan for implementation of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee in a time -bound manner.  The 
Ministry have stated that the recommendations of the Sam Pitroda 
Committee shall be concretized after the studies on manpower, 
technology and funding are completed by Prasar Bharati.  Considering the 
fact that the implementation of the Pitroda Committee re commendations 
has been considerably delayed, the Committee  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and call upon the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati to work in tandem in actualizing the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee wi th regard to reviewing the 

8 
 
institutional framework of Prasar Bharati, including its relationship with 
the Government.        
Roadmap for Revival of Prasar Bharati 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
13. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee recognize that the idea of providing Free Dish and 
progressive Fmization can play vital role in shaping future roadmap 
for revival of Prasar Bharati. As part of its Free Dish endeavour, 
Doordarshan has upgraded the technical infrastructure  of DD Free 
Dish DTH Platform and is presently providing free to air 64 SDTV 
channels in MPEG -2DVB-S. The technical infrastructure of the 
remaining 48 SDTV channels has also been installed and tested. Once 
these channels are made Conditional Access System (CAS) enabled in 
free-to-view mode, subscribers can view these channels with a one -
time annual registration. Doordarshan is planning to commission 
these 48 SDTV channels in Free Dish mode only after implementing 
the CAS Service, upgrading its platform to 1 12 channels. The 
Committee need hardly emphasize that popularization of Free Dish 
may indeed prove to be one of the major keys which can turn around 
Doordarshan in a big way, especially when it is competing with 
private TV channels who are providing hundre ds of channels to its 
viewers. Therefore, the Ministry should make efforts to complete all 
the procedural formalities so as to facilitate the expeditious execution 
of the Free Dish Project. Further, to bring Prasar Bharati in the 
revival track, it needs to  move swiftly with its FMization initiative. On 
the issue of Fmization, the Ministry have informed that it is for the 
Prasar Bharati to take a call on Fmization. It had conveyed to Prasar 
Bharati that the issue can be addressed at the time of revision in t he 
12th Plan which may be got approved by the Prasar Bharati Board and 
the final scheme proposal may be forwarded to the Ministry for 
approval by CCEA. The Committee recommend that Prasar Bharati 

9 
 
should accordingly go ahead and formulate a comprehensive pr oposal 
on Fmization at the earliest for seeking Cabinet approval.”  
14. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken 
Note, have inter-alia stated as under:- 
 “Prasar Bharati has informed that Up -gradation/Expansion of DD 
Free Dish platform from 59 channels to 112 channels has been partly 
completed by the Engineering Wing of DD. Up -gradation involves 
introduction of Conditional Access System (CAS) enabled MPEG -4 
channels in addition to the existing “unscrambled” MPEG -2 channels 
available to current subscribers. Four upgraded and bandwidth 
efficient MPEG-2 streams have already been enabled with 64 channels. 
Two MPEG -4 streams capable of carrying 48 SD channels ar e also 
being uplinked, but cannot be received by viewers due to non -
implementation of CAS. Implementation of CAS has been held up due 
to inordinate delay in firming up a CAS vendor due to concerns raised 
with regard to the process adopted to identify a CAS  vendor and one of 
the shortlisted entities, it has been decided to issue a fresh tender to 
identify the CAS vendor.   
 
Once implemented, the CAS enabled MPEG -4 streams will open new 
opportunities for offering Value Added Services (VAS) such as EPG, 
home channels, overlay of advertisements, and similar other consumer 
oriented and revenue-generating services. It will also enable DD arrive 
at a precise estimate of Free Dish subscriber base, on the basis of 
which it will be able to demand higher carriage fees on its platform. 
For DD to realize the benefits of Upgradation/Expansion, DD Free 
Dish has to be supported by an active publicity, sales and support 
wing, which will help expand the subscriber base and make it the 
most popular DTH platform. This has to be supported by a dedicated 
customer service division, along with a 24x7 call/help centre. Both 
these efforts have been initiated by Prasar Bharati. 
 
Prasar Bharati has further informed that Radio Iistenership has moved 
over to FM Radio because of superior st ereo quality and variety of 

10 
 
programming.  In addition, availability of FM Radio on Mobile phones 
has further enhanced its popularity.  AIR FM Radio presently covers 
only 45% of population. Cost of ensuring FM across entire nation is 
3000 Crore (Approx).  T his would require enhanced Plan allocation, 
mid term 12th plan review and generation of new resources. 
 
The Ministry ha ve already communicated to Prasar Bharati that any 
revisions in the approved Plan Scheme will have to be taken up with 
CCEA after such pr oposals for revisions are furnished to the Ministry 
with due approval of Prasar Bharati Board. 
 
 The Ministry has noted recommendation of the Committee.” 
 
15. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to expedite the Free 
Dish Project and make necessary efforts to complete all procedural 
formalities in this regard.  The Committee are, however, concerned to 
note that the implementation of the CAS has been held up due to  the 
inordinate delay in firming up a CAS vendor. For DD to realize the 
benefits of upgradation/expansion, Prasar Bharati has taken initiatives to 
enhance the subscriber base and publicity of DD Free Dish DTH platform 
along with providing a dedicated customer service division and a 24x7 
call/help centre. The Committee, however, feel that all these initiatives 
will not yield the desired benefit unless the DD Free Dish initiative is 
expedited by fast tracking the implementation of CAS. Keeping in view 
the fact that providing Free Dish is crucial to enhance competitiveness of 
Doordarshan vis-a-vis the private TV channels, it is highly imperative that 
the procedural hurdles with regard to CAS need to be removed.  The 
Committee, therefore, stress that Prasar Bharati need to complete all the 
procedural formalities for expeditious execution of the Free Dish project. 
Similarly, with regard to FMization, the Committee had recommended the 
Prasar Bharati to formulate a comprehensive plan on F Mization at the 
earliest for seeking Cabinet approval.  The Committee are however, 
perturbed to note that no action has been initiated so far by the Prasar 
Bharati to prepare  a comprehensive proposal.  As F Mization needs 

11 
 
enhanced Plan allocation under the 12th Plan and the proposal can be 
approved at the time of revision of the 12th Plan before sending the final 
proposal for approval of CCEA, the Committee urge the Prasar Bharati to 
take urgent steps for preparation of a comprehensive proposal for 
FMization without any further delay .  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Budget Analysis 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
As per Demand No. 61 of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(I&B), the budgetary allocation for 2015-16 is for a total amount of Rs. 3711.11 
crore, which include Rs.914.53 crore for Plan and Rs.2796.58 crore for Non -
Plan. The Committee note that there is an overall increase in the size of the 
Budget by Rs.395.11 crore  for the year 2015 -16 crore compared to the 
budgetary support for the year 2014 -15 at BE stage. A look at the financial 
performance of the Ministry indicates that they have been able to achieve cent 
per cent utilization with respect to RE allocations in the year 2014-15, which is 
a healthy trend. Considering the fact that the expenditure registered a little 
above 50% at the BE stage, i.e. during the first two quarters of 2014 -15, the 
Ministry need to have better planning for improving the benchmark of 
expenditure. Taking note of the fact that the outlay for the Plan schemes 
pertaining to Prasar Bharati constitutes a major chunk of the total Plan outlay 
of the Ministry, specific steps need to be taken to improve the planning and 
implementation of different sc hemes by Prasar Bharati. The Committee note 
that the Ministry have taken steps in this direction which include delegation of 
financial power up to Rs.300 crore to the Prasar Bharati Board, restoration of 
sanctioning power to DGs up to Rs.20 crore and ratio nalizing the procurement 
period in Prasar Bharati. The Committee feel that these measures would 
facilitate quick decision making in Prasar Bharati, paving the way for the 
smooth and speedy execution of approved projects. The Committee‟s attention 
has been drawn to the fact that despite the decent pace of utilization at the BE 
stage, substantial reduction of funds take place which is undoubtedly 
hampering the timely execution of 33 planned schemes. In the opinion of the 
Committee, this is an area which requi res focused attention of the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee suggest that the Ministry of I&B, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, evolve a mechanism which should ensure that funds 
once allocated at the BE stage are not withdrawn, unless there  is a major 

13 
 
shortfall in utilization, so that the execution of planned schemes does not 
suffer mid -way due to want of funds. The Committee desire that their 
suggestion may be brought to the notice of the Ministry of Finance for 
appropriate action at the Mi nistry‟s end. Besides, the Committee want the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to make earnest efforts to bring 
improvement in their overall financial performance, which will enable them to 
achieve the laid down physical targets.  
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Committee, Ministry of I&B has brought the suggestion 
of the Committee to the notice of Ministry of Finance for appropriate action. 
Ministry of Finance vide their O.M. dated 1 st June, 2015 has conveyed that 
while deciding RE for an y programme, functional requirement and absorptive 
capacity are given due attention along with resources available. Further, apart 
from the extensive consultation with the Ministry while revising the estimates, 
Ministry of Finance has also assured that due care will be taken to ensure that 
adequate resources are available for programme implementation within the 
resource envelop available to the Govt.  
In addition, the Ministry would make earnest efforts to ensure speedy and 
effective utilisation of allocated funds during 2015-16. In order to ensure the 
same, the Ministry has taken steps such as: 
(i) Streamlining the process of implementation of Plan schemes; 
(ii) Undertaking periodic review of P lan implementation and expenditure in 
Senior Officers‟ Meeting chaired by Secretary (I&B); and 
(iii)Regular monitoring of the implementation of various schemes by the 
respective bureau heads.  
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. G-20016/7/2015-B&A dated 10.06.2015)  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Prasar Bharati – Generation of IEBR 
The Committee note that during the year 2014 -15, the Government had 
allocated Rs. 436 crore under Plan funds and Rs. 2001.98 crore under Non -

14 
 
Plan funds for Prasar Bharati to meet salary and salary related expenses.  
Separately, Prasar Bharati allocates Rs. 200  crore annually from its IEBR for 
Content Development under Software Scheme as per the 12 th Five Year Plan 
proposal.  As against the projected revenue of Rs. 2195.00 crore, the revenue 
receipts of Prasar Bharati during the year 2014 - 2015 stood at Rs. 1380  crore 
up to February, 2015 which was expected to rise to Rs. 1800 crore.  The 
Committee have been informed that in addition to adopting aggressive 
marketing strategies, Prasar Bharati has also undertaken measures for better 
publicity of programmes to augm ent IEBR generation.  One of the areas of 
concern expressed by Prasar Bharati relates to diversion of IEBR resources 
towards meeting Non -Plan expenditure because the Ministry have not fulfilled 
the obligation to pay 100% salary of Government servants recru ited with 
Prasar Bharati for the past three years.  The Committee find that an amount of 
Rs. 429 crore is due to Prasar Bharati from the year 2012 -13 to 2014 -15.  
Diversion of resources of Prasar Bharati meant for Content Development has 
reportedly affecte d revenue generation by Prasar Bharati, especially 
Doordarshan.  In view of the Cabinet decision taken in September, 2012 
wherein it was decided that all operating expenses would be met by Prasar 
Bharati through IEBR, except salary and salary related expen ses, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to take steps for early release of payment 
of Rs. 429 crore due to Prasar Bharati. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the discussions held for RE 2014 -15 between M/o I&B, Prasar 
Bharati & M/o Finance in which CEO: P B was also present, M/o Finance 
raised the issues whether the Grants -in-Aid for salaries being released to 
Prasar Bharati were being utilized for the intended purpose. Consequent to 
issues raised by Ministry of Finance, a pay -roll audit of Prasar Bharati w as 
instituted  by AS&FA of this Ministry vide letter dated 11.02.2015 to provide 
reasonable  assurance to the Ministry of Finance  
  
The Ministry in March, 2015 referred the recouping proposal of excess 
expenditure of Rs. 281.22 crore (Rs. 146.56 for 2012 -13 & Rs. 134.66 for 

15 
 
2013-14) incurred by Prasar Bharati during 2012 -13 & 2013 -14 on salaries  
under Revenue Non-Plan to  M/o Finance.   
 
Budget Division, M/o Finance on this matter stated that Autonomous 
Bodies/ grantee institutions should restrict their expenditure within the 
sanction amount and any excess expenditure over and above sanctioned 
amount may need to be borne by them. If an y, excess expenditure is 
incurred by them out of their own resources, Government cannot 
reimburse/ recoup them.   
 
However, in view of  the Cabinet decision dated 14.09.2012 „ during  the 
next  five years from  2012-13 to 2016-17, Government Non-Plan support may be 
made available to Prasar Bharati for meeting 100% expenses towards salary 
and  salary related expenses.  All other operating expenses to be borne by 
Prasar Bharati out of internal revenue earnings’ , the proposal of recoupment of 
excess expenditure was again referred to Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of 
the Ministry in April, 2015. 
 IFD on this matter stated that the pay -roll audit of Prasar Bharati is in 
process. Once the audit is over, it would refer the matter to the Ministry of 
Finance for reconsideration of the issue in view the Cabinet decision in this 
regard.  
(Ministry of I&B, B -Finance Section, O.M. No. G -20019/2/2015-B(Fin) dated 
02.07.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
Roadmap for Revival of Prasar Bharati 
           The Committee recognize that the idea of providing Free Dish and 
progressive Fmization can play vital role in shaping future roadmap for revival 
of Prasar Bharati. As part of its Free Dish endeavour, Doordar shan has 
upgraded the technical infrastructure of DD Free Dish DTH Platform and is 
presently providing free to air 64 SDTV channels in MPEG -2DVB-S. The 

16 
 
technical infrastructure of the remaining 48 SDTV channels has also been 
installed and tested. Once these channels are made Conditional Access System 
(CAS) enabled in free -to-view mode, subscribers can view these channels with 
a one-time annual registration. Doordarshan is planning to commission these 
48 SDTV channels in Free Dish mode only after implementing the CAS Service, 
upgrading its platform to 112 channels. The Committee need hardly emphasize 
that popularization of Free Dish may indeed prove to be one of the major keys 
which can turn around Doordarshan in a big way, especially when it is 
competing with private TV channels who are providing hundreds of channels to 
its viewers. Therefore, the Ministry should make efforts to complete all the 
procedural formalities so as to facilitate the expeditious execution of the Free 
Dish Project. Further, to bring Pr asar Bharati in the revival track, it needs to 
move swiftly with its FMization initiative. On the issue of Fmization, the 
Ministry have informed that it is for the Prasar Bharati to take a call on 
Fmization. It had conveyed to Prasar Bharati that the issue  can be addressed 
at the time of revision in the 12 th Plan which may be got approved by the 
Prasar Bharati Board and the final scheme proposal may be forwarded to the 
Ministry for approval by CCEA. The Committee recommend that Prasar Bharati 
should accordi ngly go ahead and formulate a comprehensive proposal on 
Fmization at the earliest for seeking Cabinet approval.  
Reply of the Government 
 Prasar Bharati has informed that Up -gradation/Expansion of DD Free 
Dish platform from 59 channels to 112 channels has been partly completed by 
the Engineering Wing of DD. Up -gradation involves introduction of Conditional 
Access System (CAS) enabled MPEG -4 channels in addition to the existing 
“unscrambled” MPEG -2 channels available to current subscribers. Four 
upgraded and bandwidth efficient MPEG -2 streams have already been enabled 
with 64 channels. Two MPEG -4 streams capable of carrying 48 SD channels 
are also being uplinked, but cannot be received by viewers due to non -
implementation of CAS. Implementation of CAS has been held up due to 
inordinate delay in firming up a CAS vendor due to concerns raised with regard 
to the process adopted to identify a CAS v endor and one of the shortlisted 
entities, it has been decided to issue a fresh tender to identify the CAS vendor.   

17 
 
 
 Once implemented, the CAS enabled MPEG -4 streams will open new 
opportunities for offering Value Added Services (VAS) such as EPG, home 
channels, overlay of advertisements, and similar other consumer oriented and 
revenue-generating services. It will also enable DD arrive at a precise estimate 
of Free Dish subscriber base, on the basis of which it will be able to demand 
higher carriage fees  on its platform. For DD to realize the benefits of 
Upgradation/Expansion, DD Free Dish has to be supported by an active 
publicity, sales and support wing, which will help expand the subscriber base 
and make it the most popular DTH platform. This has to be  supported by a 
dedicated customer service division, along with a 24x7 call/help centre. Both 
these efforts have been initiated by Prasar Bharati. 
 
Prasar Bharati has further informed that Radio Iistenership has moved 
over to FM Radio because of superior s tereo quality and variety of 
programming.  In addition, availability of FM Radio on Mobile phones has 
further enhanced its popularity.  AIR FM Radio presently covers only 45% of 
population. Cost of ensuring FM across entire nation is 3000 Crore (Approx).  
This would require enhanced Plan allocation, mid term 12 th plan review and 
generation of new resources. 
 
 The Ministry has already communicated to Prasar Bharati that any 
revisions in the approved Plan Scheme will have to be taken up with CCEA 
after such proposals for revisions are furnished to the Ministry with due 
approval of Prasar Bharati Board. 
 
 The Ministry has noted recommendation of the Committee. 
(Ministry of I&B‟s O.M. No. 18013/6/2015-B(D) dated 25.06.2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15  of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Amendments to various Sections of the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 
Another issue which has engaged the attention of the Committee relates 
to the functional autonomy of Prasar Bharati. The Committee have been given 
to understand that the sections in the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 which 
empower the Central Government to regulate the recruitment conditions in 
Prasar Bharati are impinging upon the autonomous character of the 
organization. Accordi ng to the Ministry, the Group of Ministers (GoM) on 
Prasar Bharati had reviewed the Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 and recommend 
certain amendments to the Act to improve the governance in Prasar Bharati. 
The Committee have, however, been informed that these cont entious Sections 
were not recovered in the GoM recommendations. The Ministry are in the 
process of assessing and analyzing the proposals made in the Prasar Bharati 
(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Bill. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry may suitably amend the provisions of the Prasar 
Bharati Act, 1990 so that the functional autonomy of Prasar Bharati envisaged 
in the Act is not diluted and the much desired autonomy for the national 
broadcaster is secured. 
Reply of the Government: 
 The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 
empowers the Prasar Bharati with full functional autonomy.  The Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting had requested the Group of Ministers on Prasar 
Bharati to consider the issue of amendment, i f any, of Prasar Bharati Act in 
the light of the working of the Act. The recommendations of Group of Ministers 
(GoM) on Prasar Bharati have been considered in the Ministry and a draft 
Cabinet Note towards making amendments to certain clauses of the Act was  
earlier circulated for inter -Ministerial consultation.  The Ministry has 
withdrawn the said draft Cabinet Note on 10.11.2014 with the approval of the 
Competent Authority as it was felt that there is a requirement to further assess 
and analyse the issue. T he recommendations made by the Committee have 
been noted for consideration. 
(File No. H-11013/16/2015-BA(P) dated 10.06.2015) 

19 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7) 
Kisan Channel under Doordarshan and AIR 
  The Committee note that the Scheme of Kisan Channel had been 
approved during the year 2014 -15, with an initial allocation of Rs. 100 crore, 
i.e. Rs. 90 crore for Doordarshan and Rs. 10 crore for All India Radio. However, 
the BE allocation was reduced to Rs. 26 crore at RE stage which was, of 
course, utilized fully during the year 2014-15. The Ministry have informed that 
the BE allocation for the Scheme was reduced to Rs. 26 crore at RE stage 
owing to factors such as gestation period involved in carrying out research for 
writing script authenticated by Agricultural Sci entists and experts preparing 
rich content. With regard to the targets, the Committee note that earmarking of 
a dedicated studio has been made; 51 professionals have joined the channel 
against 67 posts advertised; and efforts have been made to impart train ing and 
orientation of manpower working in Kisan Channel from the Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute (JARI). Integrated automated play out system 
for the channel has been installed and apart from procurement of equipment, 
the DTH facility has been upgr aded. During the year 2015 -16, the Ministry 
propose to spend Rs. 10 crore on infrastructure development and Rs. 35 crore 
on generating rich content. The Committee would like to stress the significance 
of a channel like the Kisan channel in an agrarian coun try like India where 
issues, like dissemination of real time information to farmers on farming 
techniques, water conservation, organic farming, etc. hold crucial importance 
to the farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to complete 
all the remaining infrastructural and studio up -gradation work for the scheme 
during the current fiscal itself and also spend Rs. 35 crore earmarked for 
content judiciously. The Committee urge the Ministry/ Prasar Bharati to focus 
on areas of advancement of the channel by generation of rich content and 
ensure active participation of experts in the field of agriculture and agronomy 
so that the dedicated Kisan Channel proves to be an advancement over the 
Krishi Darshan Programmes and that the farmers benefit out of it.  
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Kisan Channel was formally launched by the Hon‟ble. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi on the 26th of May, 2015 at Vigyan Bhawan in 
New Delhi and since then the channel has been running 24X7.   
Prasar Bharati has informed that content for Kisan Channel is very 
important, as it is substantially different from a normal entertainment 
channel.  The content of the channel ought to be scientific in nature carefully 
prepared with the help of agricultura l scientists from ICAR -IARI, agricultural 
universities and such institutes. Ministry of Agriculture has been keenly 
involved from the very beginning with the channel and regular meetings 
including various consultative briefings have taken place on generati ng good & 
rich content.  
Weather report is very important to the farmers. There has been a tie up 
with Agro -Met division of the IMD, Pune with the channel for disseminating 
weather inputs and its affect on the crops to the farmer including the requisite 
advisories through the Kisan Channel. Every possible step is being adopted to 
enrich the farmer/ artisans, the farm labourers and all others in rural India, 
with real time information on new and innovative farming techniques, water 
conservation, organic farm ing, Agro -Product market related informations etc. 
so as to strengthen the farmers in the rural population of the country.  
This Ministry is fully aware of the importance of the Kisan Channel and 
therefore, Ministry‟s representative in Prasar Bharati Board  meeting held on 
17.06.2015 has urged that serious attention is paid to its content and focus 
group of Kisan Channel keeps on working on it.   
 Prasar Bharati has further informed that the engineering department of 
Doordarshan Directorate is taking steps t o improve and refurbish the studio 
earmarked for Kisan channel at the CPC, Khel Gaon Marg. The studio 
upgradation work for the channel is expected to be accomplished by December 
2015 by the Engineering division.  NIT has been issued for majority of 
equipment including SITC of Multi Camera Studio Production facilities in 

21 
 
HDTV format.  Specifications for Collaborative Post -production facility is under 
finalization. 
The suggestions of the Committee on generation of rich content and 
ensuring active participatio ns of experts in the field of agricultu re and 
agronomy have been noted. 
(Ministry of I&B‟s O.M. No. 18013/6/2015-B(D) dated 25.06.2015) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
Scheme of DD International 
 
 The Committee find that for the Scheme of Global coverage for DD 
International, though a token amount of Rs. 50 lakh had been proposed during 
2015-16, no fund has been allocated at the BE stage. On this issue, Prasar 
Bharati has stated that while countries like Japan, Germany, China, Russia, 
France, etc. invest heavi ly in their international channels, Doordarshan 
currently has a very low budget for production of programmes under the DD 
International Scheme. Further, the Committee have been informed that Prasar 
Bharati does not have any overseas TV presence though a fe w private TV 
channels have made some inroads into the international arena. These channels 
do not present the true picture of India to Indians and foreign viewers abroad. 
Regarding the initiatives taken for global coverage of DD, the Committee are 
given to understand that DD had signed an agreement with M/s Pan SAT for 
achieving global foot print but its viewership remained insignificant due to non-
availability of the channel on the local distribution platform. Subsequently, 
even that contract got terminated . The Committee are further given to 
understand that even though Doordarshan made efforts to distribute the 
international channel, it could not make much progress due to policies not 
favourable for large scale spending on carriage fees. The efforts of Door darshan 
through regular correspondence with the Ministry of External Affairs have also 
not been very successful, except with the Central Asia Division. The Committee 
note that after detailed discussion and deliberations, an MoU has been signed 
with Duestsche Welle on 5th August, 2014 for providing DD India Free -to-Air 
basic package through DTH Ku band platform which is available to viewers 

22 
 
across Europe, Central Asia, the Arab world of West Asia and North America, 
connecting around 120 million households ab road. Prasar Bharati needs 
further help and support from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs as it has very limited financial resources to promote 
DD International. While appreciating the above initiative of the Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati, the Committee feel that they should both work more aggressively on 
tie-ups and ownership rights for the advancement of DD India programmes so 
that the channel gets international attention and acclaim, as the official voice 
of India. The Committee are of the considered view that adequate funds need to 
be allocated to the plan scheme of DD International and efforts be made to get 
financial and resource support from MEA, MOIA and other Ministries 
concerned. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet Secretariat vide their OM No. 31/CM/2012(i) dated 
18.09.2012 had conveyed Cabinet‟s decision that during the next five years 
from 2012 -13 to 2016 -17, Government non -Plan support may be made 
available to Prasar Bharati for meeting 100% expenses towa rds salary and 
salary related expenses.. All other operating expenses is to be borne by Prasar 
Bharati out of internal revenue earnings.  Content creation is the basic 
function of Prasar Bharati and they are aware about the afore -mentioned 
cabinet decision. As a result, Prasar Bharati has committed an expenditure of 
Rupees 1000 crore (200 crore per year) to Planning Commission during entire 
12th plan period out of Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IBER).  
 
As regards resource support to Prasar Bharati fro m MEA, MOIA and other 
Ministries, it is stated that two inter -ministerial meetings under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Information & Broadcasting were held on 
17.10.2014 & 08.12.2014 respectively  for projection of India‟s viewpoint to the 
global audience through the international channel and also to finalize a 
content strategy. The meetings were attended by officers from concerned 
Ministries and they offered their suggestions regarding programming content, 
which were conveyed to Prasar Bharti. MEA had offe red some excellent 

23 
 
documentary films (around 300 numbers) and a catalogue of documentaries to 
Doordarshan and they would provide budgetary support of Rs.50.00 lakh for 
sub-titling of the documentaries done through MEA‟s missions and authorized 
persons/ age ncies in the desired language and format. Though MEA is 
supportive of the efforts made by DD to expand India‟s International T.V. 
footprint but would not  drive the said expansion initiative as DD is the nodal 
agency and the expansion initiative should be d one using established 
marketing channels/professional marketing agencies rather than dependence 
on Embassies or Missions. Prasar Bharati to consolidate its efforts in this 
regard. Similarly, Ministry of Culture had already provided programme content 
of 3849 hours to Prasar Bharati. 
 
The driver of the channel is Prasar Bharati and other Ministries/ 
departments can play supportive role, which is being done. 
 
(Ministry of I&B I.D. No. N-34025/1/2014-BC-IV dated 22.06.2015) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
Expansion of FM Radio 
The Committee find  that the Government have approved the e-Auction of 
the 1st batch of 135 FM channels in 69 existing cities on 16 th January, 2015. 
C1 India has been selected as the e -Auctioneer through global tender.  The 
Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) have been issued on 2 nd March, 2015.  The 
Committee have been apprised that applications are being examined and a 
Committee has be en constituted with Secretaries of the Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Department of Telecommunications and 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for indicating and approving the list 
of successful bidders.  The auction is expected to be completed by the end of 
April or May 2015.  The Ministry, during evidence, has stated that the 
procedure of auction for the existing vacant 69 channels will be very 
transparent and that the next phase of auctioning will follow after the 
completion of  the first phase.  The Committee feel that commissioning of 
additional FM radios will bring added revenue to the Government exchequer 

24 
 
and improve the programme content by providing a wider choice to the 
listeners through carriage of non -news items such as sports, cultural events, 
traffic and weather information, public announcements, etc.  While welcoming 
the initiative of the Government, the Committee recommend to the Ministry to 
take all necessary steps to ensure that the auctioning takes place in a fair and 
transparent manner, and as per schedule.   
Reply of the Government 
The Government on 16.1.2015 approved the e -auction of 1 st batch of 
135 channels in 69 existing cities based on the reserve price formula approved 
by Cabinet in 2011. 
An e-auctioneer, C1 India, has been selected through global tender and 
in a transparent manner to conduct e-auction of private FM channels. 
The Information Memorandum (IM) was issued on 21 st January, 2015 
and was uploaded on the Ministry‟s website (www.mib.nic.in).  Thereafter, a 
pre-bid conference took place on 28th January, 2015 with the representatives of 
the stakeholders and prospective bidders for clarifying their queries and to 
seek suggestions.  In total 85 queries were received in p re-bid meeting after 
issuing IM.  Replies to all such queries have been uploaded on the website of 
this Ministry on 17.2.2015.  Subsequently, a Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) 
for bidding for the first batch was issued on 2 nd March, 2015.  Second pre -bid 
conference with the stakeholders regarding the NIA was held on 10.3.2015 in 
Soochna Bhawan, New Delhi.  In total 76 queries/suggestions were received on 
NIA.  Ministry considered all queries/suggestions and replied to them on 
20.3.15.  An addendum to NIA  was issued on 20.3.15 after incorporating 
certain suggestions and last date of giving application was extended upto 5 pm 
on 27.3.15 from 5 pm on 23.3.15. 
A total of 28 applications have been received till the last date i.e. 
27.3.2015.    The applications are being examined to short list pre -qualified 
bidders. Upon receipt of  security clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) the list of  pre -qualified bidders will be declared.  All pre -qualified 
bidders will submit their software  bids for channels of  their choice on  web 

25 
 
based ascending e -auction.  To  approve the list of successful bidders under 
FM Phase-III auctions, a Committee comprising of Secretaries of Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Department of Telecommunications and 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been constituted on 12.03.2015, 
with the senior most Secretary, to be its Chairperson. 
On the recommendations of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), 
Ministry has appointed an Independent External Monitor (IEM) for greater 
transparency in the auction process.  Similarly, Inter Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) and Application Review Committee (ARC) have been constituted under 
the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, M/o I&B and concerned Joint 
Secretary (Broadcasting), M/ o I&B, respectively, for conduct of e -auction for 
award of license of FM Channels under FM Radio (Phase-III) Expansion. 
The Ministry has taken all requisite steps to ensure fair auction and 
Ministry is also emphatic on following the completing the auction process by 
schedule in coordination with other Ministries/Departments.  
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No. N-38032/24/2015-FM dated 29.05.2015) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
Scheme of Strengthening Electronic Media Monitoring Centre 
 
The Committee note that the plan  scheme of Strengthening of Electronic 
Media Monitoring Centre (EMMC) has been sanctioned with a total allocation of 
Rs 90 crore in the 12 th Plan, with the objective of protecting citizens from 
broadcast of undesirable content. Under this plan Scheme, it i s proposed to 
enhance the monitoring facility for content from the existing 300 TV channels 
to 1500 TV channels in a phased manner. During the year 2014 -2015, out of 
the RE allocation of Rs25 crore, an amount of Rs 18.85 crore has been 
expended by the Mini stry. The Committee are given to understand that at 
present there are 836 permitted TV channels which are under the surveillance 
of the Monitoring Centre. During the period from 1.1.2014 to 30.3.2015, a total 
number of 36 TV channels were found to be viola ting the content guidelines 
and the Ministry have issued advisory / warnings to them. The Committee note 

26 
 
that apart from enhancing the monitoring capacity of 600 TV channels to 900 
channels, the Ministry propose to bring 60 Community Radios (from existing 
30) an all 170 CRSs under the ambit of EMMC by July, 2015 and March 2016, 
respectively. Keeping in view the above said targets and the fact that FM radio 
monitoring is also envisaged to be brought under the fold of EMMC, the 
Committee recommend the Ministr y to complete the technical and monitoring 
upgradation for the Centre without any delay and ensure deployment of 
adequate manpower needed for the purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
With reference to the above para of the report, BECIL has been entrusted 
to implement the plan scheme “Strengthening of EMMC” on turnkey basis. A 
Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) has been constituted to review the 
progress made in this respect. BECIL has been directed to execute the project 
within the timelines. All steps are bei ng taken to fill up vacancies for the posts 
of monitors and logistic assistants being filled after following due process for 
engagement of suitable manpower at the earliest. 
  
It is submitted that during the financial year 2014 -2015, out of the 
allocated and released amount of Rs 25 crore, EMMC had spent Rs 2475.47 
Lakhs.  
(File No. N-18013/7/2015-BC-1 dated 15.07.2015) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
Scheme for Supporting Community Radio Movement (CRS) in India  
The Committee note that the Ministry have been implementing the Plan 
Scheme of Supporting Community Radio Movement in India which aims at 
providing financial assistance to new and existing Community Radios for 
acquisition of equipment, training, etc. Keeping in view the huge potential for 
establishing a large number of CRS in India, the Committee in their 4 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2014 -15), had recommended the Ministry to take 
necessary steps to encourage the movement by simplifying the existing 
procedure and launching of awareness campaigns. Th e Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that the Budget Estimate of Rs. 13 crore for the 
scheme was reduced to Rs. 2.65 crore at the RE stage and full funds could not 

27 
 
be utilized due to non -finalisation of mode and content module of activities. 
The Committee further note that in total 209 applications for setting up of CRS 
are pending with various Ministries. Even though the number of applications 
pending in the Ministries concerned has come down substantially, 50 
applications are still pending which ha ve crossed the stipulated timeline 
beyond 3 months. The Committee are of the view that the matter of pendency 
of clearances should be taken up with the Ministries/agencies concerned for 
their early clearance. On the issue of engagement of a consulting agen cy for 
study of the effectiveness of CRS, the Committee have been informed that out 
of 16 proposals submitted by different agencies, one agency has been 
shortlisted and selected, which will assess the effectiveness of CRS. The study 
is likely to throw light on the training needs and capacity building of personnel. 
The Committee feel that the study will help in finalizing the content module 
which is partly coming in the way of the successful implementation of the 
scheme. Further, the Ministry need to identif y areas which warrant specific 
attention so that funds crucial for the Scheme do not remain idle and 
unutilized. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to expedite 
the study and apprise them of the progress made in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is continuously pursuing the matter regarding pendency of 
clearances with concerned Ministries/Departments to provide clearances 
within stipulated time period of 3 months. As on 15.06.2015 a total of 126 
applications are awaiting cleara nces of concerned Ministries/Departments. 
Applications are referred parallel to concerned Ministries. Therefore, each 
application may be pending in multiple Ministries.  
Total number of clearances awaited from each Ministry/Department and 
the cases pending  for more than stipulated period of 3 months are detailed 
below: 
Name of Ministry/ 
Department 
MHA WPC 
Wing 
Ministry 
of 
Defence 
MHRD ICAR 
 
 
Total Number of clearances 83 115 95 25 07 

28 
 
awaited out of 134 
Number of clearances 
awaited for more than 
stipulated period of 3 
months. 
20 49 38 15 02 
 
With regular follow ups most of the clearances are being received within 
stipulated time frame and number of applications pending beyond specified 
period of 3 months has been substantially reduced.  
 
 With regard to engagement of a consulting agency for study of the 
effectiveness of CRS, a need was felt to look into the issues arising out of 
agencies like IRS/ABC/BARC/TAM etc. Such issues are being examined. 
(Ministry of I&B, CRS Cell, O.M. No. 503/102/2014-CRS dated 02.07.2015) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12) 
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) 
The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) is the nodal 
organization for advertising and disseminating information on policies, 
programmes and achievements of Government of India.  The Committee note 
with satisfaction that out of an allocation of Rs.160.20 crore, the Ministry have 
been able to spend Rs.147.01 crore (91.76%). There has been a cent percent 
achievement of physical targets under Sche me of DAVP during 2014 -15.  The 
Committee are given to understand that due to total exhaustion of funds 
allocated for the entire 12 th Plan period, left over amount of Rs.23 crore only 
from original approved fund of Rs.470 crore has been allocated for the schemes 
of DAVP during 2015 -16.  The Committee have been informed that a Revised 
Cost Estimate (RCE) proposal for additional requirement of funds to the tune of 
Rs.350 crore has already been mooted and is in process.  The Ministry have 
expressed apprehension that if adequate funds are not made available under 
the scheme, the multimedia campaign of flagship programmes of the 
Government of India such as Make in India, Digital India, Skill India, Jan 

29 
 
Dhan Yojna, etc. will get adversely affected.  The Committee fully agree with 
this and are of the view that sustained campaign for people‟s participation in 
the flagship programmes of the Government of India should not suffer due to 
want of funds.  As such, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance for adequate allocation under the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Standing Committee on Information Technology has recommended 
that the Ministry should pursue with Ministry of Finance for adequate 
allocation under the scheme. 
 Revised requirement of additional funds for the DAVP‟s sub -scheme 
“People‟s Empowerment through Development Communication”  under the 
Development Communication and Information Dissemination (DCID) scheme of 
the Ministry  is Rs.180 crore during 2015 -16, ou t of which Rs.20 crore has 
already been made available in BE 2015 -16 from the remaining balance of 
DAVP‟s sub-scheme. An amount of Rs.131 crore will be made available from 
National Film Heritage Mission (NHFM), subject to EFC approval of the Revised 
Cost Estimate (RCE) proposal of DCID.  
Budgetary provision in respect of the above scheme of DAVP  can be 
raised from Rs.20 crore to Rs.151 crore during 2015 -16 once the EFC approval 
is obtained [BE 2015-16 Rs.20 crore + Rs.131 crore proposed to be transferred 
from NHFM]. The remaining balance of Rs.29 crore out of the proposed annual 
plan outlay of Rs.180 crore can be made available through normal budgetary 
mechanism during RE 2015-16 stage.  
RCE proposal of the above scheme has been circulated to Ministry of 
Finance and NITI Aayog for consideration / approval of EFC. As recommended 
by the Standing Committee on Information Technology, this Ministry is making 
every effort to provide adequate allocation under the scheme.   
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.M-24014/2/2015-MUC dated 09.06.2015) 
 

30 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune 
 
The Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune, is a premier 
institute under the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting for imparting 
training in the art and technique of film making and television programming. 
The committee  note that under the Plan Scheme of upgradation of 
infrastructure and procurement of equipment, Rs.19 crore and had been 
allocated to FTII during the year 2014 -15 out of which F TII has released 
Rs.11.5 crore to the civil construction work for them. An amount of Rs.6.5 
crore were utilized for procurement of machinery and equipment. The 
Committee also note that FTII offers various courses, viz. three -year Post 
Graduate Diploma in F ilm, two -year post Graduate Diploma in Acting, Art 
direction and Production Design, one -year Certificate Courses in Television, 
one-year Post Graduate Certification Courses in Feature Film, Screen Play 
writing, etc. Presently, as against the sanctioned str ength of 252 students for 
the above courses, 342 students are on the roll of FTII. So far so the faculty 
strength concerned, the Institute has a sanctioned strength of 50 of which 24 
are regular and 26 are being filled (through  contract basis empanelled a gainst 
vacancies). During the examination of the  Demands for Grants (2014 -15), the 
Ministry had informed that the institute is facing many difficulties such as 
non-recognition of major courses by higher educational institutes, low pay 
scale of faculty, etc ., and  to address these issues, the Ministry are in the 
process of introducing a Bill to declare both the Film and Television Institute of 
India (FTII) and the Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata, 
as Institute of national importance  and draft Cabinet Note in this regard has 
been submitted for approval. The Committee are, however, concerned to note 
that not much progress has been made on in this matter. In the meantime, on 
the suggestion of PMO, the Ministry of Human Resource Developm ent have 
requested the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to consider including 
these Institutes under the existing Central University Act. The Committee are 
also of the view that the problem of non -recognition of the Institute s will be 
addressed to a great extent by attracting the best of students and faculties if 

31 
 
these Institutes are included under the Central University Act.  Therefore, the 
Ministry should consider the above proposal seriously and pursue its feasibility 
with the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress on both the proposals, i.e. introduction of the draft Bill 
and the proposal of MHRD on the inclusion of the Institutes in the Central 
University Act.  
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry is of the view that there may not be any impediments in 
bringing Film and Televisio n Institute of India (FTII) and the Satyajit Ray Film 
and Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata under the Central University Act.  
However, it is pertinent to mention that  the Committee of Government 
Assurance (LokSabha), in its meeting held on 06.05.2015  with representatives 
of Ministry on assurance given on Parliament, has strongly recommended for 
declaring FTII & SRFTI as “Institute of National Importance ”through an Act of 
Parliament as both the Institutes are unique and have imparted high quality 
education in the art and craft of film and television and their functioning 
should not be restricted under the norms of a general University.   
 
On the background of advice of PMO, a decision of CoS is being sought 
on the feasibility of a single legislation in place of a number of enactments as 
proposed by different ministries under the ambit of Ministry of HRD. 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.202/35/2012-F(PSU) dated 05.06.2015) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM) 
The Ministry of I&B have been implementing the Plan Scheme of National 
Film Heritage Mission (NFHM).  The Scheme aims at undertaking preservation 
and restoration of Indian film heritage in a mission mode, spreading over 2014-
15 to 2020-21.  The total allocation for the scheme is Rs. 597.41 crore (Rs. 291 
crore for the 12 thPlan and Rs. 306.41 crore for the 13 thPlan.  The activities of 
the Scheme include, inter-alia, restoration of 1050 feature films and 960 short 
films, dissemination of 1050 feature films and 1200 short films, construction of 

32 
 
vaults of international standards for preservation of restored material, etc.  The 
RE allocation of Rs. 10.01 crore has been fully utilized and an allocation of Rs. 
137 crore has been made for 2015 -16 which includes the allocation meant for  
the DAVP scheme.  As part of the preparatory exercise, the National Film 
Archives of India (NFAI), the organization responsible for the execution of the 
Scheme, has initiated the process of identification and appointment of 
manpower which is likely to be achieved within six months. The Committee 
have been informed that a high power Committee has been constituted with 
eminent experts of the film industry to monitor the various stages of 
implementation. Additionally, the Ministry propose to engage a project 
management team to review the progress of the Mission.  The Committee may 
be apprised of the progress of the Scheme along with deliverables/targets 
achieved for the year 2015-16.   
Reply of the Government 
Administrative approval for implementation of the N FHM Scheme was 
issued on 24 thNovember, 2014. The scheme is executed through National Film 
Archive of India (NFAI). NFAI has initiated preparatory work of the scheme 
which includes setting up of high level committee, identification of consultants 
for deploy ment of project management team and development of RFP for 
engaging a service provider for undertaking the job of restoration, conversion 
and digitization of archival material.  Setting up of office for project 
management team and initial work regarding co nstruction of vaults is also 
proposed during 2015 -16.  The process regarding identification and 
appointment of manpower for various Divisions of NFHM has been initiated 
and is being expedited.   
Physical Targets for 2015-16. 
i. Setting up of High Level Committee.   
ii. Setting up of Project Management Team. 
iii. Preparatory phase which includes consultations with stake holders for 
preparing RFPs for various works including scoping exercise. 
iv. Stock taking of available archival material. 

33 
 
v. Floating RFP & Identifying service provider for restoration work. 
vi. Preventive conservation. 
vii. Initiating restoration/digitization process. 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.202/35/2012-F(PSU) dated 05.06.2015) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
Scheme for Production of Films and Documentaries: 
 
The Committee note that under the Plan Scheme of Production of Films 
and Documentaries in various Indian languages, the BE allocation for the year 
2014-15 was reduced to Rs. 7.82 crore at RE stage and even the entire RE 
allocation could not be utilized. Non-receipt of worthy proposals from children's 
film makers, non -furnishing of new proposals by the Children's Film Society, 
non-finalization of guidelines regarding production of documentaries through 
NG0s, etc. have been cited as the main reasons by the Mi nistry for 
underutilization of funds. The Committee note with concern that apart from the 
above reasons, an Executive Directive issued on 07.06.2013 for reviewing the 
financial arrangement between the Ministry of I&B and the National Film 
Development Corpo ration (NFDC) severely affected the utilization of funds 
under the Scheme. The Committee learn that as the financial arrangement 
between the Government and NFDC could not been finalized, funds could not 
be released to NFDC during 2014 -15. A look at the tot al number of 
documentaries/ short films created during the year 2014 -15 reveals that 
though the Films Division created 22 documentaries/short films, the 
Children's Film Society produced only 2 children's films and not a single 
feature film in regional lang uages could be produced with support of NFDC. 
The Committee feel that in a country like India, with a rich tradition of films in 
regional languages, there is an urgent need to promote more feature films in 
regional languages by way of providing more funds/  resources and nurturing 
and pooling the available talent. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to expedite finalization of financial arrangement with the NFDC by 
taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. Efforts need to be intensified 

34 
 
for production of more feature films in regional languages. The Committee may 
be apprised of the progress on the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
For examining financial arrangements between the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting and NFDC for implemen ting plan scheme 
“Production of films in Various Indian languages”, the Ministry constituted a 
committee consisting of two members – Ms SomiTandon, former secretary, 
Defence Finance and Shri Bhaskar Ghose, former Secretary, M/o I&B and also 
ex-DG, Doordarshan and ex -CEO Lok Sabha TV channel. The committee has 
already submitted its report. After examination by the Internal Finance 
Division of the Ministry, it was found that certain recommendations were not 
entirely in accordance with the provisions of General Financial Rules. 
 
Considering the unique nature of activities associated with film 
production and that it pertains to the creative space, the matter was referred to 
Ministry of Finance on 27.01.2015 for examination and accord relaxation of the 
provisions of GFR for implementing the plan scheme “Production of films in 
Various Indian languages” as per the recommendations of the Committee of ex-
secretaries. Reminders were also sent on 20.04.2015 & 21.05.2015. The reply 
of Ministry of Finance is awaited.  
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.202/35/2012-F(PSU) dated 05.06.2015) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) 
 
The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) has been set up under 
Section 3 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 for certifying films.  The Plan 
Scheme of “Up-gradation, Modernization and Expansion of CBFC and 
Certification Process” envisages provision of digital projection at regional offices 
of CBFC, creation of additional space and putting in place online certification 
mechanism.  The Committee are concerned to note that the online certification 
process in CBFC got delayed due to shortcomings in the RFP proposal which 
did not contain the technical detai ls and functional requirement. The existing 
online process is partial in nature, limited to submission of application.  It is 
understood that complete online process would provide an end -to-end solution 

35 
 
with high level of security. The enhanced allocation of Rs. 4 crore is proposed 
to be utilized for progressing with online project b eing implemented with the 
held o f the National Informatics Centre.  The Committee, while trusting that 
online certification wil l bring in more transparency and efficiency in the 
certification process, recommend the Government to complete the online 
certification process in a time bound manner.  The Committee are also given to 
understand that based on the recommendations of justice  MukulMudgal 
Committee constituted to examine issues of certificate un der the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Ministry have prepared a draft Bill for amend ing 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952; the draft Bill has been forwarded to the Board of 
CBFC for their commen ts.  The Committee, while hoping that all the concerns 
of the Mudgal Committee, viz. composition of advertisement panel, 
classification of certification of films, jurisdiction of Appellate Tribunal, etc. 
have suitably been addressed in the Bill, recommende d the Government to 
expedite all the processes and formalities involved in the introduction of the 
Bill in Parliament.  
Reply of the Government 
 
CBFC is at present adopting partial online certification process and is in 
the process of upgrading to an onlin e certification process by making it fully 
online.  Necessary action is being taken with the help of NIC/NICSI for 
identification of a reliable service provider.  A sizeable portion of  online process 
would be completed in 2015-16. On completion of the project the complete end 
to end process from application to issue of certificate will be online.  The 
recommendations of the Committee were examined in consultation with 
concerned stakeholders.  The recommendations of the Mudgal Committee as 
well as the suggestions received have been examined and incorporated into the 
Cinematograph amendment Bill.  The suggestion received alongwith the Draft 
Cinematograph Bill were forwarded to the Chairman of the newly constituted 
Board of CBFC.  The Chairperson has now forwar ded his comments on the 
proposed Bill.  The Cabinet Note would then be circulated prior to the 
introduction of the Bill in Parliament. 
(Ministry of I&B O.M. No.202/35/2012-F(PSU) dated 05.06.2015) 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER –III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3) 
Monetization/Utilization of land Resources 
The Committee have been given to understand that Prasar Bharati has 
submitted certain proposals to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
for monetization of available land resources for garnering revenue which could 
be effectively utilized by them f or development purposes. However, these 
proposals are yet to be approved by the Ministry pending 36ulfilment of 
procedural formalities required under provisions of the Prasar Bharati Act, 
1990. Under Section 16 of the Prasar Bharati Act, all property and as sets shall 
stand transferred to (Prasar Bharati) on such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the Central Government and the book value of all such property 
and assets shall be treated as the capital provided by the Central Government 
to the Corpor ation, on the terms and conditions to be determined by the 
Central Government. The Committee have also been given to understand that 
the proposal for financial restructuring of Prasar Bharati was approved by the 
Cabinet in September, 2012. According to the  Ministry, the Cabinet 
decision/approval has to be effected on issue of formal transfer order spelling 
out the terms and conditions after completion of inventorisation of all assets 
under them. The Committee find it very hard to believe that even after a l apse 
of 17 years, the Central Government has not yet formulated the terms and 
conditions of such transfer. Since Prasar Bharati needs funds, and 
monetization of land can provide the much needed revenue, the Committee 
suggest that while complete inventorisa tion is undertaken, simultaneous 
efforts may be made to unlock the value of a few select identified properties as 
a „pilot case‟.  
Reply of the Government 
Section 16 (a) of Prasar Bharati Act, 1990 stipulates that all property and 
assets (including the Non -Lapsable Fund) which immediately before the 
appointed day vested in the Central Government for the purpose of Akashwani 

37 
 
or Doordarshan or both shall stand  transferred to the Corporation on such 
terms and conditions  as may be determined by the Central Government and 
the Book value of all such property and assets shall be treated as the capital 
provided by the Central Government to the Corporation. 
 
As per Ca binet approval to the proposal for financial restructuring of 
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) dated 14.09.2012:- 
 
“Property and Assets will be transferred on book value to Prasar 
Bharati as per provisions of Section 16(a) of Prasar Bhara ti Act, 1990. 
Normal accounting  principles will be followed to determine their future 
value”. 
 
This Ministry vide its letter dated 19.03.2014 followed by reminders dated 
29.04.2014, 21.07.2014 and 07.10.2014 requested Prasar Bharati to furnish 
the complete information in  respect of movable and immovable properties in 
the uniform format as on 31.03.2014 within two months. Thereafter, the 
Ministry requested Prasar Bharati several times to furnish the requisite 
information.  Prasar Bharati vide letter dated 14.10.2014, furnished partial 
data of immovable property of AIR and DD. Moreover, the information 
furnished by Prasar Bharati in respect of immovable property  is incomplete in 
respect of book value, ownership status etc. Vide D.O.No.511/2/1/2010 -OA III 
dated 21.03.2011, Cabinet Secretariat had instructed that a policy on the 
issue of sale or long -term lease is being framed by the Government. In the 
meanwhile, all the Ministries/ Departments have been directed to seek specific 
approval of the Cabinet in eac h case of sale or long -term lease of land 
belonging to the Government or Government controlled statutory authorities. 
 
On 21.11.2011, Cabinet Secretariat conveyed approval of Prime Minister 
that the instructions issued on 21.03.2011 do not apply in case of  transfer of 
land from Central Government/ Ministry to another.  The Prime Minister 
further directed that all the concerned Ministries should bring policy proposals 
covering all other types of land transfer cases to Cabinet expeditiously, so as to 

38 
 
obviate the need for Ministries to come to Cabinet for each land transfer 
proposal on a case-by-case basis. 
 
On 30.07.2012, instructions by Cabinet Secretariat stated that all cases of 
land transfers from Ministries to statutory authorities or PSUs be allowed, 
subject to the requirements of Government of India (Transaction of Business) 
Rules.  In terms of Transactions of Business Rules, approval of the Cabinet is 
required for transfer of property and assets to Prasar Bharati by treating the 
book value of the assets  and property as capital to the Corporation, as 
envisaged in section 16(a) of the Prasar Bharati act, 1990. 
 
In view of the above instructions of Cabinet Secretariat, it is evident that 
complete information on immovable property would help in taking Cabine t 
approval to implement Section 16 (a) of PB Act,1990. Moreover, inventorization 
of details of immovable property will help PB in preventing land etc. from being 
encroached upon. Any specific proposal from PB, duly approved by Prasar 
Bharati Board can be e xamined by this Ministry in consultation with Ministry 
of Finance before taking approval from the Cabinet.  
The valuable suggestions of the Committee have been noted. 
(Ministry of I&B‟s O.M. No. 18013/6/2015-B(D) dated 25.06.2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
  
Review of Prasar Bharati – Sam Pitroda Committee Recommendations  
 
It is disquieting to note that there has not been much headway in the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Sam Pitroda Committee Report, 
which was presented to the Government in February, 2014. This Expert 
Committee was constituted to review the institut ional framework of Prasar 
Bharati, including its relationship with the Government. There seems to be 
lack of coordination and cohesion between the Ministry of I&B and Prasar 
Bharati in so far as implementation of these recommendations are concerned, 
because Prasar Bharati claims to have taken several operational and policy 
initiatives separately, particularly in the absence of any clarity from the 
Government about the acceptance of the Sam Pitroda Committee‟s entire range 
of recommendations. The Committee t ake a serious view of this casual and 
lackadaisical approach of the Government on such an important matter. 
Considering that the overall action plan of Prasar Bharati is getting delayed, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should come out with a defi nite 
action plan for the implementation of the recommendations of the Expert 
Committee in a time -bound manner. The Committee should be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter within a period of three months. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry had requested Prasar Bharati (PB) to prepare an action plan 
for undertaking suggestions/ review/ audits etc. on various issues  
recommended by the Sam Pitroda Committee . It was also brought to the notice 
of PB that these studies/ audits are critical to any acti on to be initiated as part 

40 
 
of the Committee Report, by the Government. The desired action plan is 
awaited from Prasar Bharati. 
 The recommendations of the Sam Pitroda Committee shall be concretized 
after the studies on manpower, technology and funding are completed and a 
vision for Prasar Bharati is prepared on the basis of the outcome of the studies. 
(File No. H-11013/16/2015-BA(P) dated 10.06.2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
Scheme for Supporting Community Radio Movement (CRS) in India  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that the Ministry have been implementing the Plan 
Scheme of Supporting Community Radio Move ment in India which aims at 
providing financial assistance to new and existing Community Radios for 
acquisition of equipment, training, etc. Keeping in view the huge potential for 
establishing a large number of CRS in India, the Committee in their 4 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2014 -15), had recommended the Ministry to take 
necessary steps to encourage the movement by simplifying the existing 
procedure and launching of awareness campaigns. The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that the Budget Est imate of Rs. 13 crore for the 
scheme was reduced to Rs. 2.65 crore at the RE stage and full funds could not 
be utilized due to non -finalisation of mode and content module of activities. 
The Committee further note that in total 209 applications for setting up of CRS 
are pending with various Ministries. Even though the number of applications 
pending in the Ministries concerned has come down substantially, 50 
applications are still pending which have crossed the stipulated timeline 
beyond 3 months. The Committ ee are of the view that the matter of pendency 
of clearances should be taken up with the Ministries/agencies concerned for 
their early clearance. On the issue of engagement of a consulting agency for 
study of the effectiveness of CRS, the Committee have be en informed that out 
of 16 proposals submitted by different agencies, one agency has been 
shortlisted and selected, which will assess the effectiveness of CRS. The study 
is likely to throw light on the training needs and capacity building of personnel. 
The Committee feel that the study will help in finalizing the content module 
which is partly coming in the way of the successful implementation of the 
scheme. Further, the Ministry need to identify areas which warrant specific 
attention so that funds crucial for the Scheme do not remain idle and 
unutilized. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to expedite 
the study and apprise them of the progress made in this regard. 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is continuously pursuing the matter regarding pendency of 
clearances with concerned Ministries/Departments to provide clearances 
within stipulated time period of 3 months. As on 15.06.2015 a total of 126 
applications are awaiting clearances of con cerned Ministries/Departments. 
Applications are referred parallel to concerned Ministries. Therefore, each 
application may be pending in multiple Ministries.  
 
Total number of clearances awaited from each Ministry/Department and 
the cases pending for more than stipulated period of 3 months are detailed 
below: 
Name of Ministry/ 
Department 
MHA WPC 
Wing 
Ministry of 
Defence 
MHRD ICAR 
Total Number of clearances 
awaited out of 134 
83 115 95 25 07 
Number of clearances 
awaited for more than 
stipulated period of 3 
months. 
20 49 38 15 02 
 
With regular follow ups most of the clearances are being received within 
stipulated time frame and number of applications pending beyond specified 
period of 3 months has been substantially reduced.  
 
With regard to engagement of a  consulting agency for study of the 
effectiveness of CRS, a need was felt to look into the issues arising out of 
agencies like IRS/ABC/BARC/TAM etc. Such issues are being examined. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
  

43 
 
Appendix-I  
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2015 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18th December, 2015, from 1000 hours                     
to 1040 hours in Committee Room ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Shri Paresh Rawal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Salim Ansari  
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following six Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
II. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
III. Action Taken Report on the Eighth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2015 -16)’ of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
IV. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..….. 
V. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx.;and  
VI. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the above Report and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
  

45 
 
Appendix-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,15 and 16  
 Total 13 
 Percentage 81.25 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 3  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 6.25 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 4  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 6.25 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of 
interim nature 
 Rec. Sl. No: 11  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 6.25 
 