 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(201
8
-
1
9
)
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
 
 
[
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Forty
-
Four
th Report                       
 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘
Status of Cable TV Digitization and Interoperability 
of Set Top Boxes’
]
 
 
 
FIFTY
-
SIXTH
 
REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
December
, 2018/
Pausha
, 1940 (Saka)
 
 
5
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
FIFTY
-
SIXTH
 
REPORT
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(201
8
-
1
9
)
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Forty
-
Fourth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok abha) on 
‘
Status of Cable TV Digitization and Interoperability of Set Top Boxes’
]
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
 
02.01.2019
 
Laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 02.01.2019
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
December
, 2018/
Pausha
, 1940 (Saka)
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
Page 
No.
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
(ii)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
(iii)
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report…………………………………………………………
 
 
1
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government………………………………………………...................
 
 
1
9
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………
………………………….
 
 
4
5
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration …………………………………………….............................
 
 
4
8
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………………………
 
60
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
 
 
I.
 
Minutes of the 
Fifth
 
sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Information Technology held on 
28.12.
2018
 
6
7
 
II.
 
Analysis of 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Forty
 
fourth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
 
4343       
6
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2018
-
19)
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
-
 
Chairperson
 
Lok Sabha
 
2
.
 
 
Shri Lal Krishna Advani 
 
3
.
 
 
Shri Prasun Banerjee 
 
4
.
 
 
Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad
 
5
.
 
 
Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse
 
6
.
 
 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
 
7
.
 
 
Dr. Anupam Hazra 
 
8
.
 
 
Smt. Hema Malini
 
9
.
 
 
Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
 
10
.
 
 
Shri P. Karunakaran 
 
11
.
 
 
Shri Virender Kashyap 
 
12
.
 
 
Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
 
13
.
 
 
Dr. K.C. Patel
 
14
.
 
 
Shri Raosaheb Patil Danve
 
15
.
 
 
Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
16
.
 
 
Shri Paresh Rawal 
 
17
.
 
 
Dr. Bharatiben D. Shyal 
 
18
.
 
 
Shri Abhishek Singh 
 
19
.
 
 
Shri D.K. Suresh 
 
20
.
 
 
Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
21
.
 
 
Shri Nagendra Pratap Singh Patel
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
22.
 
Shri Raj Babbar
 
23.
 
Dr. Subhash Chandra
 
24.
 
Shri Suresh Gopi
 
25.
 
Shri K.G. Kenye
 
26.
 
Shri Santiuse Kujur
 
27.
 
Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
 
28.
 
Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
 
29.
 
Dr. Vinay P. 
Sahasrabuddhe
 
30.
 
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
31.
 
Shri Binoy Viswam
 
 
Secretariat
 
1
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
 
 
-
Director  
 
2
.
 
Smt. Geeta Parmar
 
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
3
.
 
Shri Sandip Prasad
 
 
 
 
-
 
Sr. Executive Assistant
 
_______________________________________________________________________
___________________
 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 1
st
 
September, 2018 
vide 
Bulletin Part
-
II  Para No. 7324 dated 18
th
 
September, 2018.
 
 
(ii)
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I
, the Chairperson, Standing 
Committee on Information Technology
 
(201
8
-
201
9
), 
having been authorised by the Committee, present this F
ifty
 
sixth
 
Report on ‘Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 
Forty f
ourth
 
Report (Sixtee
nth Lok Sabha) on 
‘
Status of Cable TV 
Digitization and Interoperability of Set Top Boxes’
 
of the Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting
.
 
 
2.
 
The 
Forty f
ourth
 
Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 
29 December
, 201
7
.  The 
Ministry 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on 
the 
Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 
Forty f
ourth
 
Report on 
17
 
Ju
ly
, 
201
8
.
 
 
3.
 
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 
28
 
December
, 201
8
.
 
 
4.
 
For facility of reference and convenience, 
Observations/Recommendations 
of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter
-
I of the Report. 
 
 
5.
 
An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 
Forty
-
f
ou
rth
 
Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure
-
II.
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
ANURAG SINGH THAKUR,
 
28 December
, 201
8
 
 
Chairperson, 
 
 
07
 
Pausha
, 1940
(Saka)
 
 
Standing Committee on
 
Information Technology. 
 
(iii)

1
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
 
            
REPORT
 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘
Status of Cable TV 
Digitization and 
Interoperability of Set Top Boxes’
 
relating to the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting.
 
 
2.
 
The Forty
-
Fourth
 
Report was presented to Lok Sabha on the 29 December, 2017 
and also laid in Rajya Sabha, the same day. It contained 24 Observations/ 
Recommend
ations. Replies of the Government in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:
-
 
 
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Gove
rnment:
-
 
 
Para Nos. 1,2,3,6,7,8,9,10,17,18,19,21,23 and 24
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total :  14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Chapter II
 
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:
-
 
 
Para No.  20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total : 01 
 
Chapter III
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
-
 
 
Para Nos. 4, 5, 11, 12, 15 and 22  
 
Total : 06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                                 
       
Chapter IV
 
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:
-
 
 
 
Para No.  13, 14 and 16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Total : 03
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Chapter V
 

2
 
 
3.
 
The Committee trust that utmost 
importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter
-
I and Final Action Taken Re
ply 
in respect of the Observation/Recommendation contained in Chapter
-
V for which 
interim reply has been given by the Government be furnished to them at an early 
date.
 
 
4.
 
The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  
 
 
Status of Digitisation in Chennai/TamilNadu
  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4)
 
 
5.
 
The Committee in their Report had noted with concern that only 33% digitisatio
n 
was achieved in Tamil Nadu as the  court had  ordered not to disturb the analog signals 
of Arasu cable till a decision is taken by the Ministry of I&B on their application for MSO 
registration. Considering the court directive and to complete digitisation
 
in Tamil Nadu, 
the Ministry had granted a provisional registration  to Arasu cable on 17 April, 2017 
against the TRAI recommendation not to allow Government entities to operate in the 
broadcasting and distribution sector. The Ministry also gave extension 
to Arasu cable 
first upto 17 July, 2017 and thereafter upto 17 August, 2017 for digitisation in Tamil 
Nadu. After the issue of registration to Arasu cable, the Ministry had received 
complaints from the registered MSOs and their LCOs in Tamil Nadu that they
 
were being 
forced by Arasu cable to take signals only from them. Some of the complainants had 

3
 
 
even moved to Chennai High Court. The Ministry then requested to the Chief Secretary 
of the State 
to look into the matter and to ensure that Arasu cable does not
 
have 
monopoly
. The Committee, had therefore, desired the Ministry to address effectively 
the issues raised in the complaints and apprise them of the decision so taken.
 
 
6
.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their action taken notes have 
submitte
d as under:
 
 
" After granting MSO registration to Arasu Cable in April, 2017, they have 
seeded about 14 lakh STBs in the Tamil Nadu State, as per MIS. The 
complaints received against Arasu have been forwarded to Chief Secy. (TN) 
with the request to   look 
into these complaints and to ensure that Arasu Cable 
does not have monopoly and allows the others registered MSOs to continue to 
provide digital Cable TV services as they are already providing the same to 
meet the cut
-
off date of 31.03.2017." 
 
 
7.
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the oft
-
repeated submission of the 
Ministry of I & B that 
the complaints received from registered MSOs and LCOs against 
Arasu cable have been forwarded to Chief Secretary, Tamil Nadu for redressal. Taking 
note of the ma
gnitude of the 
issues raised against Arasu Cable that some of the 
complainants had even moved to Chennai High Court, the Committee are of the 
considered opinion that matter being  serious in nature needs urgent redressal as this 
goes against the principals
 
of fair play and competition. 
The Committee are of utmost 
desire that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) should 
address 
urgently the issues raised by the registered MSOs and their LCOs against Arasu in 
Tamil Nadu by constantly 
 
pursuing th
e matter with Tamil Nadu Government 
authorities.  The Committee
 
would like to be informed of the findings of authorities  

4
 
 
and action taken  in the matter including action on MSOs still running their networks 
on analog signals as well as present status of d
igitisation in Tamil Nadu
. 
 
 
Digitisation in Rural and Remote Areas 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
 
 
8.
 
The Committee had noted with concern that one of the challenges in achieving 
100% digitization was non
-
availability of digital signals in some remote and inaccessible 
areas which constituted Phase IV of Cable TV digitization. In these areas there were no 
d
igital signals from registered MSOs as it was not cost effective to lay fibre optical cables 
to extend digital signals in remote areas. The cable operators had, therefore, been 
suggested either to set up their own digital Head End after taking MSO registra
tion or 
take signals from HITS operators for further distribution. MIB had been requesting the 
nodal officers time and again to review the progress of digitisation with all the 
stakeholders and motivate the existing MSOs to extend services in remote areas.
 
The 
Committee had desired that options such as allowing infrastructure sharing for cable 
distributor or providing necessary resources or subsidy to MSOs for making investment 
in rural areas for developing necessary infrastructure should be considered. Fur
ther, as 
consumer had a choice to go for private DTH/ DD Free Dish connection as they were not 
required to pay any monthly charge for the service, the Committee had recommended 
that the planned scheme of Doordarshan for distribution of DTH Set Top Boxes in
 
remote, tribal, hilly and border areas should be continued and DD free Dish in the rural 
areas should be popularised by improving its content and rationalizing the costs in a 
better way. 
 
 
9.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their action ta
ken notes have 
submitted as under:
 

5
 
 
" DD Free Dish platform has a rich bouquet of channels consisting of 
Doordarshan Channels, Parliamentary channels, General Entertainment, Movie, 
News, Music, Sports etc. making it a very popular and cost effective medium 
for 
source of information and entertainment. As per the industry estimates more 
than 22 million household are having DD Free Dish connection. MIB has recently 
issued an advisory to Prasar Bharati for formulation of policy on filling up of 
slots on DD Free 
Dish, which is under consideration. The distribution of DD Free 
Dish receive systems is part of the sanctioned Plan scheme. These receive 
systems are for distribution in remote, tribal, hilly, difficult terrain and border 
areas. STBs are handed over to the
 
nodal officers appointed by the respective 
State Government for further distribution. So far 66,000 DD Free Dish receive 
systems have been distributed under various previous Plans. Further, a scheme 
of distribution of 30,000 DD Free Dish receive systems h
as been approved. Out 
of these, distribution plan of 11,200 DD Free Dish receive systems has already 
been approved for distribution in border and remote areas through Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA). For the rest of the DTH sets, Prasar Bharati will finalis
e its 
distribution plan and will hand over the sets to the respective state 
governments. "
 
 
 
10.
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that MIB has not taken any action on their 
recommendation to look into the  options for allowing infrastructure sharing for c
able 
distributors or providing necessary resources or subsidy to MSOs for making 
investment in rural areas for developing necessary infrastructure, etc. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation in this regard.
 
11.
 
The Committee furt
her note that Ministry of IB has issued an advisory to Prasar 
Bharati for formulation of Policy on filling up of slots on DD  Free Dish and the same is 
under consideration. The Committee would like to be updated in this regard.
 
12.
 
The Committee have been 
informed that about 66000 DTH/DD Free Dish sets 
have been distributed under various previous plans. Out of the approved scheme of 

6
 
 
30,000 DD Free Dish sets, 11200 DD free dish receive system has already been 
approved for border and remote areas and for rema
ining  18800 sets, Prasar Bharati 
will finalise its distribution plan. The Committee would like to reiterate that in order 
to make available DD Free Dish in remote and hilly areas, DD free Dish should be 
popularised by improving its content and rationalizi
ng the costs in a better way and 
would like to be informed of steps being taken in this regard. The Committee also call 
upon the Government to take every required steps to ensure that benefits of Cable TV 
digitization are available all over the Country inc
luding rural and remote areas and 
that the services remain within the reach of common man living in such areas. 
 
 
Concerns of stakeholders in the Broadcasting Industry/New Regulatory Framework by 
TRAI  
 
(Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 6,7,8,9 &10)
 
13.
 
The Com
mittee had observed in their earlier Report that the cable TV services 
value chain which comprised of four main supply side entities i.e. Broadcaster, Multi 
System Operator (MSO), Local Cable Operator (LCO) and the end consumer had their 
own issues like Br
oadcasters were concerned on 'concerning payment of Carriage fee to 
DPOs, non
-
availability of subscriber data and lack of addressability, subscription fee and 
freedom for pricing of channels etc. The MSOs had issues relating to Inter
-
connect 
agreements, no
n
-
transparent pricing of channels, tendency of broadcasters to offer 
bouquets rather than individual channels, discrimination between MSOs for providing 
content and high pricing of channels by the Broadcasters etc. The local cable operators 
were not satisf
ied by the fall back arrangement specified by TRAI for interconnection 
agreement with MSOs and are unwilling to share subscriber data with MSOs and the 

7
 
 
consumers had been forced with channels in Bouquets instead of choice of a
-
la
-
carte 
channels and many ot
her related issues. The Committee had noted with some 
satisfaction that TRAI had notified a new Regulatory Framework on 3 March, 2017 
consisting of Tariff Order, Interconnection Regulation, Quality of Service and Consumer 
Protection Regulations to address 
the concerns of the consumers and other 
stakeholders and these revised Regulations had the flexibility to Broadcasters to price 
the channel on a
-
la
-
carte basis, network capacity fee for DP0s, Interconnection 
Agreements to be on the basis of RIO, cap on car
riage fee charged by DPO, mandatory 
display of MRP of channels, transparent declaration of information on choice of 
channels, price, terms of subscriptions, provisioning of STBs, mandatory offering of all 
channels on monthly subscription basis etc. However
, the Committee were concerned 
to note that some Broadcasters had challenged the new Regulatory Framework in High 
Court of Madras on jurisdictional issue and some DTH operators have challenged it in 
the High Court of Delhi. The Committee had hoped that the
 
new regulatory framework 
would address the concerns of consumers and stakeholders to a great extent and 
recommended that efforts should be made for early listing of the cases so that concerns 
of all the stakeholders are addressed in a fair and transparent
 
manner.
 
14.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their  action taken notes have 
stated as under: 
 
 
“ Hon’ble Madras High Court on 23.5.2018 passed judgement in favour of 
TRAI’s tariff order and interconnection regulation for the broadcasting 
sector. 
TRAI is likely to issue Notification in the matter. ”
 
 
15.
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that Hon’ble Madras High Court on 
23.5.2018 have passed judgement in favour of TRAI’s tariff order and interconnection 
regulation for the broadcasting s
ector. The Committee are hopeful that now all the 

8
 
 
four entities i.e. B
roadcaster, Multi System Operator (MSO), Local Cable Operator 
(LCO) and the end consumer
 
will find an amicable solution to their issues in the 
effective implementation of the Cable TV di
gitization in the country. The Committee 
will like to be informed of the status with regard to TRAI’s notification in the matter 
and progress of Cable TV digitization in the country.
 
 
Advertisement Revenue vs. Subscription Revenue and Regulation of Advertisement  
 
(Recommendation at Sl. No. 11)
 
16.
 
The Committee had noted that in the post digitization era, the percentage of 
advertisement revenue of the TV industry as per Industry Report
 
had remained static in 
the range of 33
-
35% of the total revenue of TV industry and therefore there was no 
noticeable shift from advertising revenue to subscription revenue. Further, as per Rule 7 
of the Cable Rules, no programme telecast in Pay Channel or
 
Free to Air (FTA) Channel 
should carry advertisement exceeding 12 minutes per hour which may include up to 10 
minutes for commercial advertising and up to 2 minutes for self
-
promotional 
programmes, however, both the FTA as well as the pay channels were no
t following the 
said rules subjecting consumers to frequent advertisements during the programmes. 
Also TRAI had brought out detailed Regulations on the issue but the matter was 
reported to be sub
-
judice. The Committee had recommended to the MIB  to take st
eps 
in order to regulate the permissible duration and frequency of advertisements during a 
programme. They had further desired ensure that advertisements which were being run 
in scroll ticker did not cover more than 10% of the TV screen space and thus main
tain 
the aesthetic sense of the programmes. Further, there should not be any vertical display 
(running or static) of advertisement on TV screen by any TV channel. 
 

9
 
 
17.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their action taken notes have 
stated as 
under: 
 
 
“ Rule 7(11) enshrined in The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 stipulates 
that no programme shall carry advertisement exceeding twelve minutes per 
hour, which may include up to ten minutes per hour of commercial 
advertisements, and up to two minutes p
er hour of a channel’s self
-
promotional 
programmes. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) had notified the 
regulations namely “Standards of Quality of Service (Duration of Advertisements 
in Television Channels) (Amendment) Regulations, 2012 and subs
equent 
amendment dated 22.03.2013. Some of the broadcasters filed an appeal in the 
High Court of Delhi challenging the said regulations.  The Hon’ble High Court has 
passed an interim order on 17.12.2013 restricting TRAI from taking any coercive 
measure aga
inst the petitioners or their members to make them abide by the 
impugned Regulations. There are about 17 similar matters which have been 
tagged along with the above Writ Petition against TRAI. Ministry of I&B is also a 
party in the tagged case. 
 
 
As such, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting cannot take any coercive 
action against the broadcasters. The matter relating to 12 minutes per hour 
advertisement cap on broadcasting TV channels is unresolved and the 
Government has decided to await the directions
 
of the Hon’ble Court in this 
regard. ”
 
 
 
18.
 
The Committee note that certain broadcasters have filed an appeal in the 
High Court of Delhi challenging the TRAI regulations namely “Standards of Quality 
of Service (Duration of Advertisements in Television Ch
annels) (Amendment) 
Regulations, 2012 and subsequent amendment dated 22.03.2013.  The Hon’ble 
High Court has then passed an interim order on 17.12.2013 restricting TRAI from 
taking any coercive measure against the petitioners or their members to make 
them 
abide by the impugned Regulations. As such, the matter relating to 12 
minutes per hour advertisement cap on broadcasting TV channels is unresolved 

10
 
 
and the Government has decided to await the directions of the Hon’ble Court in 
this regard.  The Committee wo
uld like to be apprised of the decision taken by the 
High Court and also action taken on the same.
 
19.
 
The Committee further find that the reply of the Ministry is silent on their 
another recommendation to
 
ensure that advertisements which were being run in
 
scroll ticker did not cover more than 10% of the TV screen space and thus 
maintain the aesthetic sense of the programmes and further there should not be 
any vertical display (running or static) of advertisement on TV screen by any TV 
channel.  The Committ
ee wonder if the   issue not connected with the 
advertisement capping can be dealt with administratively and would like to be 
informed of action in the matter.
 
 
Transparency, Quality of Service and Consumer Grievance Redressal System  
 
(Recommendation at S
l. No. 12)
 
 
20.
 
The Committee had observed that though TRAI had mandated for every 
MSO/LCO to have a Toll Free helpline and a website for logging of complaints and also 
to nominate a Nodal Officer whom the subscribers could approach in case of  non
-
redress
al of their complaints besides specifying a timeframe for redressal of the 
complaints, most of the MSOs/LCOs were not doing that. No computerized bills were 
provided to the consumers and complaint redressal mechanism was also not activated. 
Though several 
grievance redressal avenues were available to the consumers, most of 
those were either non
-
operational or quite ineffective in providing the desired relief. 
Therefore, it was proposed to set up a Centralized Monitoring Mechanism to be linked 

11
 
 
to  cable netw
ork through internet and would have access to the Grievance Redressal 
System of MSOs. This system would have information on number of subscribers, 
channels being carried by MSOs/LCOs, subscription charge and GST paid by subscribers, 
etc. and would thus tak
e action against the defaulters in case of non redressal of the 
complaints. C
-
DAC and the C
-
DoT had been asked to suggest low cost solutions for this 
system. The Committee had recommended for early roll out of the Centralized 
Monitoring Mechanism and to wo
rk out with the stake holders to link subscription 
charges to a central account and releasing the same to cable operator, subject to their 
resolution of complaints, as suggested by the Ministry. If required, necessary 
amendments in the Cable Rules should b
e made to make it effective.
 
21.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under:
 
“ To ensure Service Quality and Consumer protection, TRAI has also notified 
Quality of Service and Consumer Protection 
Regulation dated 3
rd
 
March, 2017 
that provides norms for service providers to be adhered by them. The said 
regulation is also sub
-
judice before the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. However, 
the Consumer Complaint Redressal Regulation notified by the Authority 
in 2012 
is in force. Any violation of the provisions of these regulations is dealt as per the 
provisions of TRAI Act. 
 
As recommended by the Committee regarding Centralized
 
Monitoring System, 
it may be mentioned that, such type of system may require networ
king and 
linking of existing consumer 
Grievance Redressal System of MSOs to the 
Centralized computerised Monitoring System
. For this 
Centralized Monitoring 
System will require MSO to provide access to their respective consumer 
Grievance Redressal System. T
his may require further discussion with the 
stakeholders. 
 
However, the Ministry has asked BECIL, a PSU under the Ministry, to take 
necessary action for establishment of Central Monitoring System in 
consultation with C
-
DOT and C
-
DAC to develop a low cost v
iable solution to 
address the issue. ”
 
 
 
22.
 
The Committee note that 
TRAI has notified Quality of Service and Consumer 
Protection Regulation dated 3 March, 2017 to ensure Service Quality and Consumer 

12
 
 
protection that provides norms for service providers to be adhered by them, however, 
the said regulation is sub
-
judice before the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. The 
Committee desire that the matter should be pursued vigorously for early listing of the 
case i
n the Court to save the interest of the consumers. They would like to be updated 
in this regard.
 
23.
 
The Committee regret to note that no progress has so far been made to set up a
 
Centralized Computerised Monitoring System (CMS) and the matter is still at 
a 
conceptual stage
. As informed, 
such type of system may require networking and 
linking of existing consumer 
Grievance Redressal System of MSOs to the 
CMS and f
or 
this 
CMS will require MSO to provide access to their respective consumer 
Grievance 
Redressal 
System which may require further discussion with the stakeholders. It is 
evident from the reply that nothing concrete has been done in this direction.
 
The 
Committee while feeling the need for such a system to bring efficiency and 
transparency in the system
 
would stress upon the Ministry to give due importance to 
this matter and take all necessary steps for expeditious and effective roll out of the  
Centralized Computerised Monitoring System.
 
Infrastructure Status to Broadcasting Industry 
 
(Recommendation at
 
Sl. No.15)
 
24.
 
The Committee were concerned to note that though the National Telecom Policy, 
1999, mentioned use of Cable TV networks for broadband penetration and 
subsequently TRAI recommended for the same, no practical steps were taken in this 
regard. T
he Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had made a proposal for grant of 

13
 
 
fiscal incentives/duty concessions to the broadcasting industry to facilitate time
-
bound 
transition of analog Cable TV services to Digital, which also included grant of 
infrastruc
ture status to the broadcasting industry, reduction of basic custom duty on 
digital Head
-
ends and STBs and rationalization of Taxes on the Broadcasting & 
distribution Sector. The same was discussed in the meeting of the Committee of 
Secretaries held on 10.
2.2012, however, was not agreed to. The Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting, of late in 2017, had again moved this proposal to Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance, which was discussed on 20 Feb, 2017, in the 
12th meeting of the I
nstitutional Mechanism (IM) on the Harmonized Master List of 
Infrastructure, where Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was asked to submit a 
revised proposal. The Committee had deprecated the delays on the part of Ministry in 
making a fresh proposal l
ate in 2017 on the issue of granting the infrastructure status to 
the Broadcasting Industry.  As granting infrastructure status to the broadcasting industry 
would facilitate digitisation in a big way, the Committee had recommended to the 
Ministry of Inform
ation and Broadcasting to submit the revised proposal in this regard 
expeditiously. 
 
 
25.
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under:
 
“ This Ministry forwarded the request of various stakeholders for grant of 
infrastructure status to broadcasting industry to Ministry of Finance on 
02.11.2015 for consideration during formulation of Budget 2016
-
17. This Ministry 
on 28.01.2016 forwarded a c
omparative chart of characteristics of infrastructure 
and justification of Broadcasting Industry to Ministry of Finance for grant of 
infrastructure status. Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 26.07.2016 informed this 
Ministry that the proposal of Indian Broa
dcasting Foundation (IBF) submitted by 
the Ministry for grant of Infrastructure status to Broadcasting Industry was 
circulated to Institutional Mechanism (IM) members for seeking their comments/ 
views and upon receipt from IM members, the issue will be con
sidered. The 
meeting of the Institutional Mechanism on Harmonized Master List of 
Infrastructure Sub
-
sectors was held on 20.02.2017. The agenda of the meeting 

14
 
 
included “Inclusion of Broadcasting Industry in the Master List of Infrastructure 
Sub
-
sectors”. Th
e IM recommended that inclusion of “Broadcasting Industry” in 
Harmonized Master List of infrastructure sub
-
sector cannot be considered as 
presented. M/o Information & Broadcasting may submit a revised proposal 
identifying specific items that qualify for in
clusion as ‘Infrastructure’. ”
 
 
26.
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
 
proposal 
for inclusion of Broadcasting Industry in the Master List of Infrastructure Sub
-
sectors 
was included in the agenda of the meeting of the Insti
tutional Mechanism(IM) on 
Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure Sub
-
sectors held on 20.02.2017. The IM 
recommended that inclusion of “Broadcasting Industry” in Harmonized Master List of 
infrastructure sub
-
sector cannot be considered as presented. The Co
mmittee are 
deeply concerned to note that even after of lapse of about 1 year and 10 months, the 
Ministry have not prepared the revised proposal. Expressing displeasure over the 
inordinate delay in preparing the revised proposal and in view of the imperati
ves 
involved in granting infrastructure to the Broadcasting Industry, the Committee 
impress upon the Ministry of I & B to prepare the required proposal without any 
further delays and place it before IM. The Committee may be informed of progress 
made. 
 
 
Int
eroperability of STBs 
 
(Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 19)
 
27.
 
The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that an STB had been tied to a 
specific operator and could not be used interchangeably across different service 
providers. STB interoperability would empower the consumers to change their Cable TV 

15
 
 
(or DTH) se
rvice providers whenever required, without changing their STBs. TRAI had 
been working on interoperability of STBs with C
-
DOT and IIT, Mumbai to work out an 
acceptable solution and in order to ensure commercial interoperability, TRAI had 
notified tariff ord
ers for cable TV service provided through DASs and DTH service which 
provide an easy exit option to subscribers, ensure availability of consumer
-
premises
-
equipment (CPE
-
that primarily consists of STB and Dish antenna) at reasonable prices, 
easy to understa
nd terms and conditions and, at the same time, protect the interests of 
the service providers. These Tariff Orders prescribed standard tariff packages for making 
available a CPE/STB to the consumers in addition to and not to the exclusion of other 
rental s
chemes, hire purchase schemes or outright purchase schemes offered by the 
DTH operator/MSO. In essence, these tariff orders provided for commercial 
interoperability. Those tariff orders, however, applicable for DTH services, were 
challenged by a couple of 
DTH operators in the TDSAT and the matter was subjudice 
before Hon’ble TDSAT. While appreciating the efforts of the Ministry and TRAI in 
achieving interoperability of STBs in the interest of the Consumers, the Committee had 
recommended to take urgent steps
 
to achieve interoperability of the Set Top Boxes in a 
definite time
-
frame. 
 
 
28.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their  action taken reply have 
stated as under: 
 
“
 
Report gives a positive outlook on the efforts carried out by TRAI/CDOT for
 
achieving interoperability while on the contrary, the Ministry has been 
discussing the issue with BECIL that due to present eco
-
system of digitization 
and efforts involved in managing the complexity involved in this task, there is 
need to arbitrate on the
 
topic of interoperability and come
-
up with clear 
approach; topic has been open for several years without clear planning and 
approach to achieve the goal.
 
  
From technical perspective interoperability requirements need to be 
detailed out due to its huge im
pact at all the levels of implementation and to 
the entire eco
-
system including OEMs and distribution system starting from 

16
 
 
head
-
end. Current implementation is too much OEM specific while 
interoperability shall need major changes to harmonize the implementa
tion 
of various components in software and security. Also, it is not clear what will 
happen with existing boxes deployed in field. Operating system/Middleware 
and EPG, boot loaders are specific to chip vendors and OEMs and it allows the 
updating of STB sof
tware by specific operators after proper verification. 
Operators due to concerns of piracy make STB tightly coupled by integrating.
 
 
  
In view of above, it may be stated that presently, the interoperability of Set 
Top Boxes in Cable Section is not viable. 
”
 
 
 
29.
 
The Committee are made to understand that from technical perspective, 
interoperability requirements need to be detailed out due to its huge impact at all 
levels of implementation and to the entire eco
-
system including Original Equipment 
Manufacture
rs (OEMs) and presently, the interoperability of Set Top Boxes in Cable 
Section is not viable. However, keeping in view the interest of the end consumers, the 
Committee are of utmost desire that TRAI efforts with C
-
DOT and IIT, Mumbai until 
now on interope
rability of STBs should not go in vain and hope that the Ministry of I & 
B  would move a step further towards STB interoperability.
 
 
Quality of Set Top Boxes 
 
(Recommendations at Sl. No. 22)
 
 
30.
 
The Committee in their Report had noted that TRAI had been emphasizing the 
use of high quality BIS compliant STBs for cable TV networks and taken up the issue with 
different MSOs from time to time where compliances were taken from MSO, certifying 
the use o
f BIS compliant STBs only. Further, as per Section 9 of The Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, it was obligatory for every cable operator to use only BIS 
compliant STBs and under Section 11, authorised officers were given powers to seize the 
equip
ment of the operators in case of detection of non
-
BIS compliant STBs. MeitY had 
mandated that all the STBs should meet the safety standards and had also outlined a 

17
 
 
procedure for Testing/Certification of the STBs before import. The Committee had 
recommended
 
that in order to ensure supply of good quality STBs and to effectively 
detect the non
-
BIS compliant STBs, customers should be educated on how to check the 
BIS
-
compliant of the STBs  along with the details of the authorized officers whom they 
could report 
non
-
compliance of BIS. Steps should also taken to make provision for some 
independent laboratories/facilities where the customers could get their STBs tested for 
quality compliance at a nominal fee and thereafter report any lack of compliance to the 
author
ized officers in order to empower the customers while instilling a sense of fear 
amongst the operators for providing poor quality non
-
BIS compliant STBs.
 
31.
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their  action taken reply have 
stated as under: 
 
"
 
There is no strong compliance standard/ procedure imposed by BIS to ensure the 
quality of STBs, presently BIS mandates need of only safety testing and certificate. 
Due to technology evolution and growth of eco
-
system in the field of STB 
design/manufacturi
ng it is desired
 
that specifications for Safety (IS13252), 
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) (IS 
6873
-
Part3) and Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) compliance need to 
be improved and many of the requirements
 
should be mandated for OEMs of Set 
Top boxes to regulate the quality of devices.
 
Over last one decade, India has made significant growth in this sector in terms of 
indigenous manufacturing, adapting standards, test and measurement labs so it is 
right time
 
to impose reasonable certification requirements to manage the quality 
of boxes including the poor quality of huge number of imported boxes. Putting 
strong compliance framework shall boost the local manufacturing of STBs. "
 
 
32.
 
The Committee are disappointed by the vague response of the Ministry on 
their observation/recommendation. The Committee are aware there is no strong 
compliance standard/ procedure imposed by BIS to ensure the quality of STBs. This 
is precisely for the same
 
reason that the Committee had recommended to make 
arrangements for  educating the customers so that they themselves could check 

18
 
 
the non BIS
-
compliant STBs and ensure supply of good quality STBs. Further,  
details of the authorized officers should be made 
available to the customers for 
reporting cases of  supply of non
-
compliant BIS. It was desired that steps should 
also taken to make provision for some independent laboratories/facilities where 
the customers could get their STBs tested for quality complianc
e at a nominal fee 
and thereafter report any lack of compliance in this regard. The Committee, while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like  to know the specific action 
taken by the Ministry to their recommendation  for putting a strong compli
ance 
framework in supply of  STBs.  
 
 
 

19
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
Introductory. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1)
 
 
The Committee note that cable TV forms the backbone of the broadcasting 
distribution industry and has played a prominent role in the growth of the electronic 
media sector in the past 20 years. Despite the fast growth of the DTH services, cable 
services con
tinue to dominate the distribution of TV channels as of today. Out of 181 
million TV homes, 93 million (51.1%) homes have cable TV. However, the analog 
cable TV had been afflicted with certain inherent drawbacks as it can carry only 70
-
80 channels, it does
 
not have technical feature of facilitating a
-
la
-
carte (individual) 
selection of channels, lacks transparency due to inaccurate subscriber base resulting 
in underreporting of subscription revenue and concealment of tax revenues, have 
poor picture quality b
esides severe competition from Direct to Home (DTH) and 
Internet Protocol TV (IPTV) services etc. Recognizing the inherent drawbacks in the 
analog cable TV system, TRAI on 5th August, 2010 gave its recommendations to the 
Central Government for implementati
on of Digital Addressable Cable TV Systems 
(DAS) across the country along with a roadmap to achieve the same. The Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India(TRAI) had also recommended a timeframe comprising 
four phases for switch over from analog systems to DAS
 
in the cable TV sector. The 

20
 
 
Union Cabinet on 13th October, 2010 approved the proposal of the Ministry of I&B 
for mandatory introduction of DAS in the cable TV services which inter alia covered a 
timeframe and roadmap for implementation of digitisation wit
h addressability on a 
pan India basis in cable TV services leading to a complete switch off of analog TV 
services by 31st December, 2014. The Cabinet also approved certain amendments in 
the Cable TV Network Regulation Act, 1995 which came into force with e
ffect from 
31st December, 2011. On 28th April, 2012, the Government notified the Cable 
Television Network (Amendment) Rules, 2012 paving the way for cable TV 
digitisation. The Ministry of I&B in their Notification 68 dated 11th November, 2011 
laid down a f
our phase schedule for digitisation of cable TV networks in India. In the 
opinion of the Committee this was a necessary policy initiative on the part of the 
Government which would go a long way benefitting all the stakeholders in the cable 
TV industry with
 
its successful implementation. In the succeeding paras, the 
Committee review the progress of implementation of DAS in the cable TV system 
along with challenges which need to be addressed by the administrative Ministry 
and the sector regulator.
 
Reply of th
e Government
 
It is observed that the first paragraph is Introductory in nature and carries no 
recommendation. Hence, it require no reply from MIB.
 
 
Progress of Implementation of Cable TV Digitisation  
 

21
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2)
 
 
As per Notification dated 1
1th November, 2011 the digitisation process was to be 
implemented in four phases with the objective of complete switch off of analog TV 
services by 31.12.2014. Phase I digitisation covering Metro Cities of Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata and Chennai was originally 
slated for 30th June, 2012 which was subsequently 
modified to 31st October, 2012. Phase II digitisation covering 38 cities (with population 
more than one million) was planned to be completed by 31st March, 2013. Phase III 
covering all other urban areas (Mu
nicipal Corporations/Municipalities) was originally 
slated for 30th September, 2014 which was subsequently extended up to 31st January, 
2017. Phase IV digitisation covering rest of India was originally slated for 31st December, 
2014 which was subsequently 
extended up to 31st March, 2017. Digitisation of cable TV 
in all the cities in Phase I & Phase II areas is complete except for Chennai in Phase I and 
Coimbatore in Phase II. As regards Phase Ill and IV, about 75% digitisation has been 
achieved excluding Ta
mil Nadu. Digitisation in Tamilnadu could not be achieved due to 
court order not to disturb the analog signals of Arasu cable till a decision was taken by 
the Ministry on their application for MSO registration. The Committee observe that 
apart from the dif
ficulties in the State of Tamilnadu (which is discussed in the 
subsequent paragraph), the process of digitisation has witnessed significant delays 
particularly during the last two phases of its implementation i.e. Phase Ill and Phase IV. 
According to the M
inistry, the progress of digitisation in these two phases was affected 
due to the stay/extension granted by some High Courts in a large number of court cases 
filed in different High Courts. The Committee have been informed that after the Ministry 
moved to 
the Supreme Court all these cases were transferred to Delhi High Court which 
disposed off the cases by first week of December 2016 after a lapse of considerable 
time. The court had given time of three weeks to the petitioners to switch over to digital 
Howe
ver, to avoid inconvenience to the consumers who had not taken STBs because of 

22
 
 
court cases, the Ministry had allowed time upto 31st January, 2017 for Phase 111 areas 
and the cut off date of Phase IV was modified to 31st March, 2017. The Committee are 
given
 
to understand that a number of MSOs delayed the registration with the 
impression of getting further extension from the Ministry after 31st March, 2017 which 
also delayed the digitisation process. In the 21st Task Force meeting held on 14th 
March, 2017, it
 
was unanimously decided not to extend the cut off date of Phase IV as it 
will send wrong signals and it will amount to a great disincentive to the operators who 
acted well in time and made investments to meet the target. Chairman, TRAI was also 
against an
y further extension. Therefore, with the approval of Minister of MB, it was 
decided not to extend the cut off date of Phase IV. On the cut off date of 31st March, 
2017, the progress of digitisation was 70% (excluding Tamilnadu). The Committee have 
been inf
ormed that cable TV digitisation has been mandated throughout the country 
from 1st April, 2017. The Ministry on 30th March, 2017 issued a Circular directing all the 
Broadcasters, MSOs, LCOs to ensure that no analog signals are transmitted over the 
cable ne
tworks after 31st March, 2017 failing which action would be taken against the 
defaulters as per the provision in the cable TV Act/Rules. From the foregoing it is 
evident that digitisation has not only been delayed . but would take longer time for 
complete
-
sWitch off of analog TV services in the country. About the steps taken for 
achieving 100% digitisation after the cut off dates, the Ministry have stated that they 
have issued an Advisory to 41 the Authorized Officers of States/UTs, Chief Secretaries of 
Sta
tes/UTs and Ada' Officers of States/UTs to ensure that no analog signals are 
transmitted by cable operators. Authorized Officers are now responsible to ensure that 
the operators carry only digital encrypted signals and meet all the conditions of cable 
Act/
Rules and TRAI Regulations/Orders. From the above submission of the Ministry 
which was also reiterated in evidence, it appears as if with the legal deadline for 
digitisation getting over, the Ministry now do not have any role to play in digitisation 
and it
 
is now the Authorized Officers and TRAI who are responsible for the unfinished 

23
 
 
task. However, from the complaints received after the issue of Directions, it is evident 
that Authorized Officers have failed in discharge of their duties to take forward the 
p
rocess of digitisation and check illegal practices by MSOoperators. The Committee are 
of the considered view that the Ministry cannot absolve themselves from the 
responsibility since it is the Ministry of I&B which being the administrative Ministry have 
to
 
oversee the overall implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an 
accountable monitoring mechanism be put in place at the central level at once to co
-
ordinate with the Authorized Officers for tracking the violations by the operators and 
also
 
to hold periodic meetings with the concerned to ensure that the mandated 
digitisation in the Cable TV services is enforced.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry developed a Management Information System (MIS) portal wherein all the 
registered MSOs are 
mandatorily required to feed the number of Set Top Boxes they 
have installed in the premises of subscribers. The seeding status of STBs on MIS is 
constantly monitored by the Ministry through its 12 regional units across the country.  
The team of 12 regiona
l units regularly interact/liaise with MSOs as well as Nodal Officer 
of the concerned District of the State. Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs have also been 
requested to direct the State Govt. Official in this regard. With the concerted efforts, it 
woul
d be seen that 90% seeding of STBs have been taken place so far.
 
MSO Registration and Seeding of data in the Management Information System (MIS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3)
 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of l&
B have developed a Management 
Information System (MIS) for each of the registered MSOs, DTH & HITS operators to 
enter STB seeding status. For this, every registered MSO  has been provided user ID and 

24
 
 
Password. As on 09.11.2017, out of 1471 registered MSOs,
 
952 MSOs have started 
entering data in MIS. Out of the remaining 519 MSOs, Show
-
cause Notices have been 
issued to 307 MSOs in the first round who are registered licensee for more than one 
year. In the second round upto March, 2017, Notices have been issue
d to 149 MSOs. It 
is a matter
-
of grave concern that while MIS has been activated and operationalized to 
gather information on MSOs seedingstatus, many MSOs are not seeding the data to the 
MIS database as per requirement. Unless the MSOs seed the data regar
ding subscriber 
information and other prescribed information, there will be no transparency and 
accountability of the stakeholders. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
to persuade the MSOs to complete seeding of data in the MIS at the earliest 
and to 
ensure proper agreements between MSOs and Broadcasters in this regard. The 
Committee may be apprised about the action taken against the defaulting MSOs 
including cancellation of their registration, etc. for not seeding the data in MIS.
 
 
Reply of the
 
Government
 
 
As per MIS report, 427 MSOs are showing poor/zero seeding of STBs. Ministry has 
written to the Chief Secretaries with a request to review the progress of seeding of STBs 
in the State, particularly in the areas where low seeding has been report
ed. Further, 
State Govts. have also been requested to issue instructions to the DMs/SDMs/CPs not 
just to carry out inspection of MSOs but also take strict action, as per the provisions in 
the Cable TV Act so that MSOs don’t carry analog signals and report 
actual number of 
STBs installed.Further, the team of 12 regional units under Mission Digitization Scheme 
visit the premises of the registered MSOs who have not seeded the data in MIS Portal 
and submit reports to the Ministry for further action. Action agai
nst defaulter MSOs 
including cancellation of their registration will be taken as per the provisions of the CTN 
Act/Rules.
 

25
 
 
 
Concerns of stakeholders in the Broadcasting Industry 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6)
 
 
The Committee note that the cable TV services value
 
chain comprises four main supply 
side entities i.e. broadcaster, Multi System Operator (MSO), Local Cable Operator (LCO) 
and the end consumer. The Ministry had constituted a Task Force with representatives 
from various stakeholders such as Broadcasters, M
SOs, LCOs, DTH Operators, domestic 
STB manufacturers, State Nodal Officers, Consumer Forums, FICCI, CII, TRAI and other 
Government organisations such as BIS, MeitY, DoT, Prasar Bharat' etc. The meetings of 
the Task Force were held to steer the process of i
mplementation of cable TV digitisation 
in Phase III and Phise IV. The Task Force used to meet regularly on monthly basis to 
review the progress. In Phase I 20 meetings, in Phase II 6 and in Phase III and IV 21 
meetings were held. Though the Ministry and th
e regulator have stated that the 
issues/concerns raised by various stakeholders were invariably discussed in these Task 
Force meetings and efforts were made to accommodate their demands and address the 
concerns, the Committee find that there are many issue
s lingering post digitisation 
which need to be resolved. The Broadcasters have highlighted issues 'concerning 
payment of Carriage fee to DPOs, non
-
availability of subscriber data and lack of 
addressability, subscription fee and freedom for pricing of chann
els etc. The MSOs have 
issues relating to Inter
-
connect agreements, non
-
transparent pricing of channels, 
tendency of broadcasters to offer bouquets rather than individual channels, 
discrimination between MSOs for providing content and high pricing of chann
els by the 
Broadcasters etc. The local cable operators are not satisfied by the fall back 
arrangement specified by TRAI for interconnection agreement with MSOs and are 
unwilling to share subscriber data with MSOs. The consumers are still being forced with 
channels in Bouquets instead of choice of a
-
la
-
carte channels and itemised bills for the 

26
 
 
service including tax details and content cost are not being provided by LCOs. Their 
problems range from abrupt stoppage of services and/or channels by cable operators
 
without any notice, no fixed price of
-
STBs
-
 
different operators continue to charge 
different rates, non
-
filling up of Consumer Application Form (CAF) by LCOs, complete 
lack of consumer grievances redressal mechanism such as tell
-
free number, web
-
site 
etc.
 
for logging of complaints and their resolution.'The Committee are given to 
understand that once new regulatory framework consisting of Tariff Order, 
Interconnection Regulation and Quality of Service and Consumer Protection regulations 
comes into force, it
 
will address the concerns of the stakeholders. The Committee 
further note that besides the above issues relating to Cable TV Digitisation, stakeholders 
have also raised certain issues which relate to the broadcasting industry as a whole viz. 
industry stat
us to broadcasting sector, 8% AGR for providing broadband via cable, level 
playing field for small players, lack of access to formal/institutional credit 
interoperability of Set Top Boxes, etc. Some of these issues are already under 
consideration of Govern
ment. The Committee recommend the Ministry/TRAI to take 
note of the submission of the stakeholders and take steps on actionable points 
suggested without compromising with the legitimate rights of consumers. This will not 
only raise the confidence of the st
akeholders but also provide a conducive eco
-
system 
for intended digitisation of the Cable industry and the benefit of the broadcasting sector 
as a whole.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
TRAI has notified a comprehensive regulatory framework on 3
rd
 
March, 2017 comprising 
of Tariff Order, Interconnection Regulation and Quality of Service Regulations to address 
the concerns of Broadcasters, Multi System Operators and Local Cable Operators and to 
provide them a level playing field. The framework provid
es a greater flexibility to the 
subscribers, so that they can select their channels/services as per their needs. The 

27
 
 
Standing Committee has recognized that the new regulatory framework would address 
the concerns of the stakeholders and consumers. The revis
ed TRAI’s regulations will 
take care of most of the issues of all the Stakeholders (Broadcasters, MSOs, LCOs and 
consumers).The matter was challenged before Hon’ble Madras High Court. Hon’ble High 
Court vide Order dated 23.5.2018 has upheld the TRAI’s tari
ff order and interconnection 
regulation for the broadcasting sector. TRAI is likely to issue Notification in the matter.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
New Regulatory Framework by TRAI  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7)
 
 
The Committee note that TRAI being the regulator for the broadcast services had 
notified a comprehensive regulatory framework for implementation of DAS consisting of 
Tariff Order, Interconnection Regulations, Quality of Services Regulations and Consumer 
Gr
ievance Redressal Regulations on 28th April, 2012. As digitisation progressed, a need 
was felt to have a relook at the existing regulatory framework in order to meet the 
expectation of various stakeholders. Accordingly, TRAI has notified a new Regulatory 
F
ramework on 3rd March, 2017 consisting of Tariff Order, Interconnection Regulation, 
Quality of Service and Consumer Protection Regulations to address the concerns of the 
consumers and other stakeholders. The new regulatory framework aims at bringing 
unifor
m regulations for all addressable systems including DAS. Emphasizing the 
importance of these new Regulations, the Chairman, TRAI had stated during evidence 
that TRAI's Regulations, Notifications, Guidelines and Orders are guided by four over 
arching princi
ples i.e. non
-
discrimination, level playing field among players, customer 
protection and growth of the sector as a whole. The latest Regulation is also guided by 
these principles. Some of the salient features of the revised Regulations are flexibility to 
B
roadcasters to price the channel on a
-
la
-
carte basis, network capacity fee for DP0i, 

28
 
 
Interconnection Agreements to be on the basis of RIO, cap on carriage fee charged by 
DPO, mandatory display of MRP of channels, transparent declaration of information on 
c
hoice of channels, price, terms of subscriptions, provisioning of STBs, mandatory 
offering of all channels on monthly subscription basis etc. With the introduction of the 
new framework, it is expected that the needs of the consumer will be fulfilled and it
 
will 
provide adequate opportunity to all stakeholders for business ingenuity and offering 
their services. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that some Broadcasters 
have challenged the new Regulatory Framework in High Court of Madras on 
jurisdic
tional issue and some DTH operators have challenged it in the High Court of 
Delhi. The matter is sub judice and at presently under judicial scrutiny. Looking at the 
new features inbuilt in the new regulatory framework, the Committee are hopeful that 
it is 
definitely going to address the concerns of consumers and stakeholders to a great 
extent. The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts be made for persuading the 
Court for early hearing of these cases so that the uncertainty relating to the regulations
 
are not allowed to continue for long and concerns of the stakeholders and consumers at 
large are addressed in a fair and transparent manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Hon’ble Madras High Court on 23.5.2018 passed judgement in favour of TRAI’s 
tariff order 
and interconnection regulation for the broadcasting sector. TRAI is likely to 
issue Notification in the matter. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 

29
 
 
Choice of a
-
la
-
carte Selection of Channels by Consumers  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8)
 
 
The Committee note that one of the major benefits of digitisation was stated to be 
empowering consumers to exercise a
-
la
-
carte for individual selection of channels so that 
they will pay only for what they decide to watch but the
 
ground reality is entirely 
different. The Cable operators Federation of India (COFI) raised serious concern on the 
issue stating bit a
-
la
-
carte choice is not given to consumers and wherever it is offered, it 
is made out of reach of the customers. The NBA 
expressed similar concern stating that 
DPO packages are pushed to consumers and a
-
la
-
carte pricing is made unattractive at 
retail. Also, there is no transparency with regard to pricing of individual channels as a 
number of LCOs do not provide full details 
of the channels/rates to the consumers and 
do not get the consumer application forms filled properly. Stating the reasons, the 
Ministry have informed that MSOs often find it difficult to provide this facility
-
as the 
rates of bouquet by Broadcasters are muc
h more attractive than the a
-
la
-
carte rates. 
The Committee are concerned to note the absurdity in the pricing of the bouquets of 
channels that a channel within the bouquet when chosen separately may cost more 
than the cost of the entire bouquet. The Commit
tee observe that it a deliberate attempt 
by MSOsIDTH operators to discourage selection of individual channels by pushing their 
tailor made packages for their vested interests. This practice coupled with reluctance on 
the part of Broadcasters to disclose MR
P of individual channels strongly impinges on the 
freedom of consumers to choose channels of their choice. The Ministry have admitted 
that some operators are not extending choice of a
-
la
-
carte as they are getting bouquets 
of channels from Broadcasters rath
er than a
-
la
-
carte at individual price. Whatever may 
be the reason for operators not extending a
-
Ia
-
carte choice of channels, it is the 
consumer who is at the receiving end and whose interests are at stake in the whole 
process. The Committee further learn 
that as per TRAI Regulations, it is mandatory for 
every MSO/LCO to offer a Basic Service Tier (BST) consisting of at least 100 FTA channels 

30
 
 
at a price not exceeding Rs.100 plus taxes. In view of this, consumers should have choice 
of a
-
la
-
carte selection of
 
channels so that they can add channels to BST to have full 
flexibility for subscribing pay channels of their choice. However, this is not being 
followed. Most of the MSOs offer at least 3 to 4 bouquets in addition to BST. TRAI has, 
therefore, come out wit
h a revised Regulations which will take care of the issue. The 
new Regulations include measures such as Broadcasters to declare nature of its 
channels (Pay or FTA); no charges on FTA channels; Broadcasters to declare MRP of its 
channels; offering all chann
els on a
-
la
-
carte basis to distributors, MRP to be displayed 
on electronic programme guide; transparent declaration of information relating to 
channels choice; price etc. The Committee observe that ideally there should also re a 
mechanism to have consultat
ion with LCOs by MSOs in finalizing the channels in the 
basic package of FTA channels to take into account the interests of the consumers. 
Taking note of the fact that the issue is sub
-
judice, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should make concerted ef
forts for early hearing and disposal of the cases so 
that the consumer is able to avail the benefits of choice of channels. The Committee 
also recommend that the option of Pay Per Use as is already available in the DTH 
platform should be explored which wil
l give the consumer more flexible option.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
To provide transparency, thenew regulatory framework contains provisions that 
ensure effective choices to the consumers as well as it gives flexibility to the service 
providers to offer the
ir services as per their business plans.
 
 
After judgement of Hon’ble Madras High court, TRAI is likely to issue Notification 
in this regard to make it mandatory. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter
-
I)
 

31
 
 
 
Issue of Carriage Fee  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9)
 
 
The Committee are given to understand that in the analog system, the Broadcasters 
were paying carriage fee to the MSOs for carriage of channels. As per the 
Interconnection Regulation issued by TRAI on 30th April, 2012, MSOs were
 
allowed to 
carry carriage fee from Broadcasters but the rate of the carriage fee to be charged was 
not specified. In the analog era, when the carrying capacity was limited, there were 
three bands, VHF
-
1, VHF
-
3 and UHF. VHF
-
1 band offered the best signal q
uality followed 
by VHF
-
3 band which offered slightly inferior quality and the UHF band which was 
inferior to VHF
-
3 band. VHF
-
1 had the capacity of only seven to eight channels and every 
Broadcaster wanted to be placed in this band. The Ministry also wanted
 
to put the 
mandatory channels such as Doordarshan National Channel and Lok Sabha Channel in 
the VHF
-
1 Band. Out of the remaining slots, there was a race between all the 
broadcasters to be in the VHF
-
1 band. Whosoever paid the higher price, their channel 
w
as carried in the VHF
-
1 band. The fee paid by Broadcasters to MSOs/LCOs for carrying 
the channel in a particular band came to be known as Carriage fee. There are two other 
concepts of Placement fee and Marketing fee. Broadcasters often want to place their 
Channel next to popular channels or at the beginning of a particular genre of channels. 
This is called placement of a channel and often huge premium is paid by Broadcasters 
for such a placement. Marketing fee refers to insertion of a channel in a popular 
b
undle/bouquet of channels so as to increase its viewership. After digitization of 
transmission, the carrying capacity has increased manifold and there is no 
differentiation in quality of signals. As a result, the erstwhile race amongst the 
Broadcasters to 
put their channel in the prime VHF '1 band no longer holds any 
relevance. However, placement and marketing of channels still continues. The News 
Broadcasters Association (NBA) while deposing before the Committee expressed 

32
 
 
concern that even after digitizati
on, they have to pay huge amount of carriage fee. Even 
if the consumer pays to cable operator or MSOs for the news that he is watching that 
money hardly comes back for news gathering. Therefore, all the news channels are 
Free
-
to
-
Air channels. The Ministry 
of l&B have informed that the issue of carriage fee 
was raised in the Task Force meetings and when the Ministry and the sector regulator 
TRAI asked the Broadcasters to disclose the Carriage fee paid to the DPOs, none of the 
Broadcasters shared the informat
ion. Some Broadcasters provided the combined
-
 
information on Carriage. fee, Placement fee, and Marketing fee which makes it difficult 
to measure the carriage fee separately, as placement and marketing fee are mutually 
agreed upon and commercial in nature. 
The Committee find it perplexing that 
Broadcasters often complain that the DPOs charge exorbitant amounts in the name of 
carriage fee and that it should be regulated, however, when asked to share the details 
of the same, there has been extreme reluctance o
n the part of the Broadcasters to 
share the details of Carriage Fee with the Ministry and TRAI. The Committee appreciate 
the efforts of TRAI which despite extreme reluctance on the part of Broadcasters to 
share the details of the Carriage fee, has now addr
essed the issue of carriage fee in its 
new regulatory framework wherein a cap of 20 paise per subscriber per channel has 
been prescribed which will further reduce as number of subscribers subscribing to the 
channel increases and will become zero when 20% o
f the subscribers will be available on 
platform who choose the channel. However, this framework is under judicial Scrutiny in 
the Hon'ble High court of Chennai and Delhi. The Committee hope that efforts of TRAI 
would go a long way in addressing the issue o
f Carriage fee to the satisfaction of all the 
stakeholders. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The digitization of cable TV network has largely addressed the issue relating to 
the capacity constraints on cable TV networks. Necessary provisions have been made in 

33
 
 
the
 
interconnection regulations notified by TRAI on 3
rd
 
March, 2017 to address the 
concerns of carriage fee paid by the broadcasters. 
 
This issue was also challenged in Hon’ble Madras High Court. Now, after 
pronouncement of judgement by Hon’ble High Court in 
favour of TRAI, they are taking 
necessary action in the matter.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
Tariff Regulations and Revenue Sharing Arrangements 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10)
 
 
The Committee note that the revenue sharing arrangement between MSOs and LCOs 
are mostly on mutually agreed amount basis or revenue sharing percentage basis. The 
Committee note that TRAI, in the year 2016 after consultation with all the stakeholders 
in the
 
Tariff Order came out with Model Interconnection Agreement (MIA) and Standard 
Interconnection Agreement (SIA) in which different works between the MSOs and LCOs 
were identified. MIA provides for revenue share between MSOs and LCOs based on 
negotiations. T
he SIA would prevail in cases where mutual negotiations fail. The revenue 
may be shared in the ratio of 55:45 for FTA channels and 65:35 for pay channels. 
According to TRAI, this framework is very transparent and adequately protects the 
interest of both th
e stakeholders. The Cable Operators Federation of India (COFI) were, 
however, critical of the framework stating that the revenue had been left to mutual 
agreements between Broadcaster's and MSOs and between MSOs and LMOs/LCOs. 
LMOs could never reach a mutu
al agreement since MSOs were also made their 
competitors and permitted to run a last mile network. It led to discrimination and 
uncertainty. Even in the fallback arrangement suggested by TRAI, LMOs business 
become unviable causing unemployment and helping 
'Pay' Broadcasters and allied 

34
 
 
MSOs and DTH players to dominate the market through, monopolies. When the 
Committee desired to know if consensus was not achieved beforefinalizing the revenue 
sharing arrangement, TRAI have stated that the draft Regulation was
 
issued asking for 
comments before issue of final Regulation. In the Explanatory Memorandum of the 
Regulation, the issues, comments of stakeholders and justification for the provision in 
the Regulation has been outlined. TRAI further admitted that there we
re certain issues 
resulting in non
-
level playing field and discriminatory practices in the sector, when 
major MSOs are getting favourable treatment from the broadcasters. These issues have 
largely been addressed by TRAI in the new regulatory framework, as 
the new framework 
has the key features, viz. for transparency, broadcaster is required to declare MRP up to 
which a DPO can charge from a subscriber, assured Distribution fee of 20% of MRP to 
DP0s, discounts offered should be measurable, transparent and wi
thin reasonable limits 
of 15% (Not exceeding 35% with distribution fee), and distribution fee is to be shared 
between MSOs and LCOs. However, the new framework is sub
-
judice in the Hon'ble 
High courts of Chennai and Delhi and is under judicial scrutiny. Th
e Committee hope the 
court case will be finalized at the earliest to bring certainty to all the stakeholders.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The revenue share arrangement prescribed in the new regulatory framework 
take care the issues between MSOs and LCOs. The 
framework provides more 
transparency and protect the interest of both the service providers. The same was 
challenged before Hon’ble Madras High Court. High Court on 23.5.2018 passed Order in 
favour of TRAI. Now further necessary action is being taken by TR
AI. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 

35
 
 
 
Training and Capacity Building 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.17)
 
 
The Committee note that considering the tasks involved in training and capacity building 
of local cable operators to
-
facilitate the digital switch over with least inconvenience to 
the consumers, the Ministry of 184B had engaged Broadcast Engineering Consul
tants 
India Limited (BECIL) to launch training programmes in batches to impart training to 
cable operators. Initially, the training programme was designed for five days to cover all 
aspects of the digital broadcasting. This was reduced to three days subseq
uently. In all, 
between December 2011 and March 2013, 12 training courses were conducted. Out of 
these, 7 were conducted in Delhi /Noida and 5 in Bangalore. Out of 12, five courses 
were meant for LCOs. 277 persons got training in these courses. However, su
bsequently 
BECIL had to discontinue the training course because of lack of response from the cable 
operators. The Committee's analysis reflect that while there was an urgent need to 
provide training facilities to a sector employing 20 lakh people, the Mini
stry surprisingly 
cited poor response and lack of participation by cable operators as the reason for 
discontinuation of the training programme. The Committee feel that a sector with such 
a potential for employment generation cannot be left to meet its trai
ning requirement 
on its own. For facilitating digital switch over, a huge workforce engaged with the cable 
operators need to be trained to adapt themselves to new technologies as it is they who 
have to play a significant role and supplement the efforts of 
the Government in 
digitisation. The Ministry need to arrange adequate training facilities to Local Cable 
Operators(LCOs) to upgrade their skills. The Committee are given to understand that the 
Ministry have made a reference to the Ministry of Skill Develop
ment and 
Entrepreneurship to mount training programme in this regard. The Committee hope 
that the proposed App based training modules for LCOs and their staff to get them 

36
 
 
trained at their work place itself at their convenience, will bring desired result. T
he 
Committee also emphasized that adequate funds should also be allocated to meet the 
training requirements on this count. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken 
in the direction of training and capacity building, along with the status of the abo
ve two 
initiatives. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Tutorial App in English language (text based) has been developed for providing 
the information to technicians employed by cable TV operators. However, it is observed 
that for effective training via this tutorial app, lot of Audio
-
Visual content in multiple
 
languages is required to be made. The provision of funds for the same have been made 
in the revised “Mission Digitisation” Scheme. 
 
 
Awareness Generation  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.18)
 
 
The Committee note that for providing information to the people and for
 
generating 
awareness on cable TV digitisation, Public Awareness Campaigns were launched in each 
phase via electronic and print media. During implementation of Phase HI & IV, a TV 
spotlAd on the advantages of digital cable and mandatory digitisation in all
 
areas had 
been developed through 
❑
AVP and the same had been provided to Doordarshan, IBF, 
NBA and ARTBI with request to transmit the spot at regular intervals on their networks. 
Audio visual campaign on TV was regularly transmitted over many channels. The
 
Scrolls/Tickers were run by TV channels voluntarily enforcing people to install STBs. 
Because of this intensive campaign launched by the Ministry, a large number of people 
across the country moved from analog to digital TV. With regard to steps for spread
ing 
awareness about consumer grievance redressal mechanism post digitisation, the 

37
 
 
Ministry have informed that MSOs and LCOs have been asked to carry out public 
awareness campaign on price of channels, quality of service and grievance redressal as 
mandated 
in Rule 13 of the Cable Rules. The service providers in the Broadcasting sector 
had played an effective role in initiating and carrying out a sustained campaign for 
switchover from analog to digital transmission of signals over the cable TV networks 
across
 
India but the Committee are disturbed to observe that the same stakeholders 
have not shown much interest or enthusiasm in carrying out the awareness campaign 
about grievance redressal mechanism in the post digitisation phase. The Committee, in 
this regard
, do not see a single advertisement/scroll in any of the electronic media. 
Awareness of consumer is an essential prerequisite for a healthy and responsive cable 
TV eco
-
system. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to increase their 
awareness driv
es/campaigns in the post digitisation phase also so that there is greater 
awareness among the consumers about the Grievance Redressal Mechanism available 
for dealing with the grievances of the customers. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry vide letter 
dated 07/9/2017 directed all the registered MSOs to 
provide the details of the Grievance Redressal System i.e. Toll
-
Free Helpline, Website 
and Nodal Officers maintained by them. The requisite information 
from 404 MSOs 
have 
been received in the Ministry so 
far. Remaining MSOs are being persuaded to furnish 
the requisite information.
 
The Ministry have also put this information in public domain i.e. the website of 
www.digitalindiamib.com so that the consumer can be aware of the same to register 
their complaints to the concerned MSOs and have them redressed.  Further, ‘Consumer 
Section’ 
in the website of 
www.digitalIndiamib.com
 
is being developed by BECIL.
 
 

38
 
 
Interoperability of STBs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.19)
 
 
The Committee note that presently an STB is tied to a specific operator due to variou
s 
technical, commercial and market driven reasons. As such, the same STB cannot be used 
interchangeably across different service providers. The Committee observe that the STB 
interoperability would empower the consumers to change their Cable TV (or DTH) 
se
rvice providers whenever required, without changing their STBs. This would shift the 
focus of the sector towards providing better quality of services to the consumers at 
competitive prices as consumers will have an option to switch their service providers 
in 
case of unsatisfactory services. Implementation of STB inter
-
operability, will also make 
them available in the open market, and will drastically reduce the challenge of e
-
waste 
resulting due to discarded set
-
top boxes. Availability of set
-
top
-
box in ope
n market will 
reduce capital requirement of service providers and improve the cash flow position of 
the industry. The objective of achieving technical interoperability is to facilitate greater 
consumer convenience and consumer choice, while spurring innova
tion and healthy 
competition in the industry, as well as its orderly growth. Interoperability can be 
achieved either through technical interoperability or commercial interoperability. 
Technical interoperability as provided for in the existing BIS specifica
tions/DTH 
Guidelines, is expected to be achieved by means of a combination of Common Interface 
(Cl) slot in the STB and pluggable Conditional Access Module (CAM). In this 
arrangement, it is envisaged that services of any particular operator can be availed 
by 
simply plugging in the CAM of that operator into the CI slot of the STB of any another 
operator. However, technical interoperability, as envisaged in
-
the existing DTH 
Guidelines, has, so far, not proved to be effective as cost of the Conditional access 
Module is almost similar to the cost of the new Set top box due to very low volume. 
Commercial interoperability basically refers to availability of such scheme(s) wherein 
consumers can obtain STB from a service provider, at such terms and conditions that 

39
 
 
t
hey can exit the services of the service provider at any point of time and gets 
adequately compensated on return of the STB. Commercial interoperability has the 
advantage that it does not involve any technological issues. It also has the advantage 
that a c
onsumer has a wider choice in terms of operators; consumers can migrate to 
operators across the platforms. Further, the nature of broadcasting networks being 
unidirectional, they are prone to piracy of signals of TV channels as point of piracy is 
relativel
y more difficult to identify. Piracy adversely impacts broadcasters' revenue and 
stakes are high. Nevertheless, stakeholders are co
-
operating and discussing for 
interoperability of STBs. However, they have many concerns. The Committee are given 
to understa
nd that TRAI is working on interoperability. of STBs with CDOT and IIT, 
Mumbai to work out an acceptable solution. In this backdrop, to ensure commercial 
interoperability, TRAI has notified tariff orders for cable TV service provided through 
Digital Addres
sable systems and DTH service which provides an easy exit option to 
subscribers, ensures availability of consumer
—
premises
-
equipment (CPE 
-
 
that primarily 
consists of STB and Dish antenna) at reasonable prices, easy to understand terms and 
conditions and, 
at the same time, protects the interests of the service providers. These 
Tariff Orders prescribe standard tariff packages for making available a CPEISTB to the 
consumers. These packages are in addition to and not to the exclusion of other rental 
schemes, h
ire purchase schemes or outright purchase schemes offered by the DTH 
operator/MSO. In essence, these tariff orders provides for commercial interoperability. 
However, the tariff order, applicable for DTH services, has been challenged by a couple 
of DTH oper
ators in the TDSAT and the matter is subjudice before Hon'ble TDSAT. While 
taking note of the fact that interoperability of STBs is a complex issue and has not been 
achieved anywhere in world, the Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry and 
TRAI i
n achieving interoperability of STBs in the interest of the Consumers and 
recommend that all steps may be taken to achieve interoperability of the Set Top Boxes 
in a definite time
-
frame as it will benefit all the stakeholders. 
 

40
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Repo
rt gives a positive outlook on the efforts carried out by TRAI/CDOT for 
achieving interoperability while on the contrary, the Ministry has been discussing the 
issue with BECIL that due to present eco
-
system of digitization and efforts involved in 
managing 
the complexity involved in this task, there is need to arbitrate on the topic of 
interoperability and come
-
up with clear approach; topic has been open for several years 
without clear planning and approach to achieve the goal.
 
         
From technical perspe
ctive interoperability requirements need to be detailed out 
due to its huge impact at all the levels of implementation and to the entire eco
-
system 
including OEMs and distribution system starting from head
-
end. Current 
implementation is too much OEM specif
ic while interoperability shall need major 
changes to harmonize the implementation of various components in software and 
security. Also, it is not clear what will happen with existing boxes deployed in field. 
Operating system/Middleware and EPG, boot loade
rs are specific to chip vendors and 
OEMs and it allows the updating of STB software by specific operators after proper 
verification. Operators due to concerns of piracy make STB tightly coupled by 
integrating.
 
In view of above, it may be stated that presen
tly, the interoperability of Set Top 
Boxes in Cable Section is not viable. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter
-
I)
 
Domestic manufacturing of Set Top Boxes  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.21)
 
 
The Committee note that each subscriber in a digital network requires a set top box to 
view TV channels. In order to project the requirement of Set top box, it is imperative to 
know the correct number of digital subscribers. As subscriber figures were not 
clearly 
available in the analog network, it was difficult to project future demand of STBs. 

41
 
 
However, industry projections indicate a demand of 10
-
15 million STBs in near future. 
As per industry estimates, about 11
-
 
crore STBs have already been installed th
roughout 
the Country out of which
-
 
only about 20% to 30% have been procured from the 
domestic STB manufacturers although the domestic manufacturers claim that they have 
installed capacity to meet the full demand. While the Ministry has been encouraging the
 
use of indigenous manufactured STBs and taken several steps such as increasing import 
duty on STBs from 5% to 10% and putting most of the components used for the 
manufacturing of STBs in the 0% import duty bracket, the percentage of domestic STBs 
already 
installed presents a different picture. The Committee also note that Conditional 
Access System is one of the part in any STBs and it was felt that the domestic 
manufacturing of STBs will pick up if there is an Indian CAS. Accordingly, MeitY has got 
an iCAS
 
developed from a Bangalore based company. As per the terms of contract, the 
design of i
-
CAS cannot be given to any foreign company for three years. About 80 MSOs 
has already adopted Indian CAS and it is learnt that over 3 Lakh iCAS STBs has already 
been d
eployed. Doordarshan has also selected i
-
CAS STBs for the DD Free Dish service 
which is planned to be encrypted. Manufacturing of STBs is tightly coupled with CAS 
system with digital addressable network. Since India initially did not have its own CAS 
syste
m, most of their] were imported while introducing digitization in the Indian cable. 
TV system. With the initiative taken by the Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology(Meity), an indigenous CAS i.e. iCAS has been developed which is likely to 
give 
fillip to the use of domestically manufactured STBs. While appreciating the efforts 
of Meity in development of an indigenous CAS(iCAS),the Committee strongly 
recommend that sincere efforts need to be made to promote the usage of domestically 
manufactured S
TBs and hope that with the development of iCAS, adoption of 
domestically manufactured STBs would pick up at a faster rate thereby reducing the 
dependence on imported STBs. 
 
 

42
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
To promote domestic manufacturing of STBs, Ministry of Ele
ctronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) has taken following steps: 
 
(a) MeitY, through a novel PPP model, funded a unique project for the development and 
implementation of Indian Conditional Access System (iCAS) for STBs. M/s. ByDesign 
India Pvt. Ltd.,
 
Bangalore, in association with C
-
DAC has successfully developed the iCAS. 
The development of iCAS has enabled India to enter a niche market hitherto dominated 
by few big global companies. Approx. 12,32,000 STBs with iCAS have already been 
deployed across 
the country. More than 147 Cable Operators have installed iCAS 
enabled head
-
ends. Doordarshan has also decided to leverage the iCAS solution to 
upgrade its Dish DTH platform. The iCAS is beneficial to domestic STB manufacturers 
and Operators because it is 
available to them at a price of USD 0.5/ license for a period 
of three years, as against market price of USD 3
-
5/ license for other competing products. 
The iCAS enabled STBs have been deployed even in remote regions of the country. 
 
(b) In the Budget 2016
-
17, a differential Excise Duty dispensation, i.e. Countervailing 
Duty (CVD) on imports @12.5% and Excise Duty @4% without input tax credit or 12.5% 
with input tax credit was made available to domestic manufacturers of STBs. To enable
 
the domestic manufacturers to clear the STBs at 4% Excise Duty; parts, components, 
accessories and sub
-
parts used for the manufacture of parts, components, accessories 
were exempted from Basic Customs Duty (BCD), Excise Duty/ CVD and Special Additional 
Du
ty of Customs (SAD). This gave an impetus to the manufacturing of STBs in the 
country. However, since continuation of differential Excise Duty dispensation was not 
considered feasible under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, BCD has been 
increased fr
om 10% to 20% on STBs for Televisions vide Notification No.91/2017
-
Customs dated 14.12.2017. 
 
 
 

43
 
 
Role of TRAI in Broadcasting Sector 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.23)
 
 
The Committee note that TRAI was entrusted with the responsibility to regulate 
broadcasting ser
vices on 9th January 2004 and since then it has been discharging its 
functions as per the provisions of TRAI Act. During this period, the broadcasting sector 
has seen enormous growth in the number of satellite TV channels, introduction of DTH 
services, dig
itization of cable TV networks, setting up of independent TV rating agency 
and introduction of FM radio services across the country etc. TRAI has brought out 
several regulations to address various issues in broadcasting sector which has enabled 
transparenc
y and non
-
discrimination in the value chain, reduction of disputes amongst 
the stakeholders, improvement in quality of service to consumers and overall growth of 
the sector. The recommendations of TRAI have also been the basis of several key policy 
decisio
ns of the Government for broadcasting sector. The Committee are however, 
constrained to note that TRAI at present has got very limited powers due to which 
enforcement of its regulations, directions and tariff orders becomes difficult. TRAI has 
noticed seve
ral violations of its regulations by service providers and cases have been 
filed in the court under provision of TRAI Act against such service providers. The 
Committee do not find this as a very effective mechanism to ensure compliance of the 
provisions of
 
the Act. It is learnt that TRAI has suggested some modifications in the TRAI 
Act, which are under consideration of the Government. In view of the tremendous 
growth in the broadcasting sector and ever increasing number of satellite TV channels, 
the Governm
ent may undertake evaluation of the need to have a separate regulator for 
the broadcasting sector. Till the time the Government decide to have a separate 
regulator for broadcasting sector, steps may be taken to empower TRAI through 
modifications in the TRA
I Act for effective enforcement of its regulations by the 
Authority. 
 
 

44
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
There is no strong compliance standard/ procedure imposed by BIS to ensure the 
quality of STBs, presently BIS mandates need of only safety testing and certificate. 
Due 
to technology evolution and growth of eco
-
system in the field of STB 
design/manufacturin
g it is desiredthat specifications for Safety (IS13252), 
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) (IS 6873
-
Part3) and Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) compliance need to be improved 
and many of the requirements s
hould be mandated for OEMs of Set Top boxes to 
regulate the quality of devices.
 
Over last one decade, India has made significant growth in this sector in terms of 
indigenous manufacturing, adapting standards, test and measurement labs so it is right 
time t
o impose reasonable certification requirements to manage the quality of boxes 
including the poor quality of huge number of imported boxes. Putting strong compliance 
framework shall boost the local manufacturing of STBs.
 
 
Impact Assessment
 
 
 
(Recommendation
 
Sl. No.24)
 
 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have not carried out any formal impact 
assessment of cable TV digitisation so far. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
carry out an Impact Assessment Study of cable TV digitisation including all its aspects so 
that 
a clear picture emerges as to how far digitisation has actually been able to achieve 
its intended objectives. This will also enable the Government to intervene from time to 
time and take suitable corrective measures if need be. The Committee may be apprise
d 
of the action taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry has asked Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) to conduct 
Impact Assessment Study of Cable TV digitization. 
 

45
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
Pricing of Set Top Boxes  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.20)
 
 
The Committee note that a large variety of Set Top Boxes (STBs) are available in the 
market and the price of an STB depends up
on its features & capabilities. MSOs are 
charging about Rs. 1000 to Rs. 1200 for a basic STB. The price varies depending upon 
whether it has provision for receiving HD channels and/or recording facility. As per pare 
17(5) of the Standards of Quality Servic
e Regulations issued by TRAI on 14.5.2012, every 
subscriber is free to buy STB of approved quality from the open market, if available, 
which is technically compatible with the system of MSO and the MSO/LCO should not 
force any subscriber to buy or take on 
rent or on hire purchase the STB from him alone. 
TRAI in its regulation has specified that the MSO/LCO should have at least three 
schemes for supply of STBs (1) outright purchase, (ii) rental and (iii) installments. Rates 
for rental and installment have be
en specified by TRAI. However, no rates have been 
specified for outright purchase. It is observed that most of the MSOs charge activation 
fee for supply of STBs wherein the STBs remain the property of the MSO/LCO. The 
amount of activation charge depends on
 
a number of factors such as features in the 
STBs, competition status, type of package selected by the consumer and the duration 
for which the subscription charges are paid. When digitisation started, the STBs were 
introduced in the market with basic featu
res. At that time, the priority was for seeding 
of STBs. The prices have been kept unregulated but TRAI has mandated provision of 
rental scheme, so that subscribers are not burdened with STB cost. Four different 
options having varying rates of security dep
osit and rental have been specified so that 
customer can take as per his /her requirement. This was done keeping in view the 

46
 
 
market forces and competition which will ensure rational pricing of STBs and not to 
hinder technical innovations in the features of
fered by STB
-
s. This ensured that STBs are 
made available at affordable and competitive prices. Since market is still competitive, 
prices have come down drastically. Therefore, no intervention has been made to 
regulate the price of STB. However, TRAI notic
ed that very high installationand 
activation fees for STBs were being charged from consumers after it is supplied to them. 
Accordingly, to protect the interests of consumers, TRAI has prescribed a ceiling tariff of 
Rs 350 for installation and Rs.100 for ac
tivation of STBs through the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services Standards of Quality of Services and Consumer 
Protection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, 2017. Regarding the depreciated value of 
STB, TRAI prescribed the method of calcula
ting the depreciated values for the STBs in 
-
the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) services (seventh) (the direct to home 
services) tariff order, 2015. As per the said order, on return of the customer premises 
equipment by the subscriber, DTH oper
ator shall refund the depreciated value of the 
said equipment, by calculating using straight line method at the rate not exceeding 1.7 
percent for every completed calendar month or part thereof. However, this is under 
judicial scrutiny of Hon'ble TDSAT. Th
e Committee find that owing to the technical 
nature of work in installation of STB and its interconnection with Cable wire/Dish 
Antenna and the allied software, which the consumers are unable to do themselves and 
for which they have to invariably depend on
 
the Cable/DTH Operator and the bundling 
of hardware and services by the Cable/DTH operators, they are unable to buy 
technically compatible STB of their choice from the open market and get it installed. 
There is a need to unbundle the product and service c
omponents and foster 
competition to enable the customer to choose hardware/services of their choice. The 
lack of technical expertise on part of the customer is exploited by Cable/DTH providers 
who force the customers to use the hardware proVided by them an
d bundle it with their 
installation, service and maintenance thereby restricting consumer choice. This amounts 

47
 
 
to unfair exploitation of the customer. While lauding the efforts of TRAI in this regard, 
the Committee strongly recommend for unbundling of hard
ware and associated services 
and making provision for itemized billing for hardware as well as associated services 
such as installation, activation and maintenance and providing more option to the 
customer to procure similar compatible hardware from the op
en market. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The regulatory framework notified by TRAI has special emphasis on transparency 
and subscribers billing. TRAI is working with C
-
DOT and stakeholders to achieve 
technical solution for interoperability of STBs. The 
regulatory framework contains 
provisions for commercial interoperability to ensure subscribers have easy exit option. 
For Cable Sector, a standard tariff package has been mandated for the service providers 
for providing STBs.
 
 
 

48
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECO
MMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION
 
 
Status of Digitisation in Chennai
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4)
 
The Committee are disturbed to note that only 33% digitisation has been achieved in 
the State of Tamilnadu. According to the Ministry, digitisation in Tamil Nadu could not 
be achieved due to court order not to disturb the analog signals of Arasu cable till
 
a 
decision is taken by the Ministry of I&B on their application for MSC registration. The 
Committee find that in view of the TRAI recommendation not to allow Government 
entities to operate in the broadcasting and distribution sector, the Ministry were una
ble 
to take a final view on the issue as a provisional registration was granted to Arasu cable 
earlier in the year 2008. However, considering the court directive and to complete 
digitisation in Tamil Nadu a provisional registration was granted to Arasu cab
le on 17th 
April, 2017 against the TRAI recommendation. What is disquieting to note is the fact 
that the Ministry also granted extension of time to the Arasu cable, first upto 17th_ July, 
2017 and thereafter upto 17th August, 2017. After the issue of regis
tration to Arasu 
cable, the Ministry have also received complaints from the registered MSOs and their 
LCOs
-
in Tamil Nadu that they are being forced by Arasu cable to take signals only from 
them. The Ministry have requested the Chief Secretary of the State 
to look into the 
matter and to ensure that Arasu cable does not have monopoly. Some of the 
complainants have also moved to Chennai High Court in this regard. It is a matter of 
deep concern to the Committee that undue indulgence has been shown to Arasu cabl
e 
which has badly affected the progress of digitisation
-
 
in the State of Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should take a concrete decision in conformity 

49
 
 
to the recommendation§ of TRAI in a definite time
-
frame in this matter to speed up 
the 
process and achieve the objectives of digitization of Cable TV in Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee also expect the Ministry to address effectively the issues raised in the 
complaints filed by some MSOs and LCOs in Tamil Nadu. The Committee would like to 
be ap
prised of the decision taken in the matter within a period of three months.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
After granting MSO registration to Arasu Cable in April, 2017, they have seeded 
about 14 lakh STBs in the Tamil Nadu State, as per MIS. The complaints received 
against Arasu have been forwarded to Chief Secy. (TN) with the request to   look into 
these comp
laints and to ensure that Arasu Cable does not have monopoly and allows 
the others registered MSOs to continue to provide digital Cable TV services as they are 
already providing the same to meet the cut
-
off date of 31.03.2017. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(P
lease see Para No. 7 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
Digitisation in Rural and Remote Areas 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
 
 
The Ministry have informed 
-
the Committee that Phase IV of cable TV digitisation covers 
all rural areas throughout the country. One of the challenges i
n achieving 100 per cent 
digitisation is the non
-
availability of digital signal in some remote and inaccessible areas 
where there are very few cable operators. In these areas there are no digital signals 
from registered MSOs as they don't find it cost effe
ctive to lay fibre optical cables to 
extend digital signals in these remote areas. The Committee note that for such areas, 
the cable operators have been suggested either to set up their own digital Head End 
after taking MSO registration or take signals fro
m HITS operators for further 

50
 
 
distribution. Nodal Officers have been requested time and again to review the progress 
of digitisation with all the stakeholders and motivate the existing MSOs to extend 
services in such remote areas. Further, the consumer have
 
choice to go for private DTH 
or DD Free Dish connection. DO Free Dish is very popular in such areas as subscribers 
are not required to pay any monthly charge for the service. In view of the above 
submission, the Committee are of the view that options such
 
as allowing infrastructure 
sharing for Cable distributor or providing necessary resources or subsidy to MSOs for 
making investment in rural areas for developing necessary infrastructure may be 
considered as developing infrastructure individually may be a 
costly proposition for 
Cable operators. The Committee recommend that the planned scheme of Doordarshan 
for distribution of DTH Set Top Boxes in remote, tribal, hilly and border areas may be 
continued and effort may be made to popularize OD five Dish in the
 
rural Areas by 
improving its content and rationalizing the costs in a better way. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
DD Free Dish platform has a rich bouquet of channels consisting of Doordarshan 
Channels, Parliamentary channels, General Entertainment, Movie, News, Music, Sports 
etc. making it a very popular and cost effective medium for source of information and 
enterta
inment. As per the industry estimates more than 22 million household are having 
DD Free Dish connection. MIB has recently issued an advisory to Prasar Bharati for 
formulation of policy on filling up of slots on DD Free Dish, which is under 
consideration.Th
e distribution of DD Free Dish receive systems is part of the sanctioned 
Plan scheme. These receive systems are for distribution in remote, tribal, hilly, difficult 
terrain and border areas. STBs are handed over to the nodal officers appointed by the 
respe
ctive State Government for further distribution. So far 66,000 DD Free Dish receive 
systems have been distributed under various previous Plans. Further, a scheme of 

51
 
 
distribution of 30,000 DD Free Dish receive systems has been approved. Out of these, 
distri
bution plan of 11,200 DD Free Dish receive systems has already been approved for 
distribution in border and remote areas through Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). For 
the rest of the DTH sets, Prasar Bharati will finalise its distribution plan and will hand 
over the sets to the respective state governments.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 10, 11 and 12 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 
Advertisement Revenue vs. Subscription Revenue and Regulation of Advertisement  
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11)
 
The Committee note that one of the drawbacks of analog cable TV was its limited 
carrying capacity and transparency which distorted the business model for Broadcasters 
and increased their dependence on advertisement revenue. It was expected that post 
digiti
sation the increased carrying capacity would enable Broadcasters to offer niche 
channels and HD channels. The Committee further note that while TV subscription 
revenue has increased from Rs.329 billion in 2011 to Rs.588.3 billion in 2016, advertising 
reven
ue has also increased from Rs.116 billion in 2011 to Rs.201.2 billion in 2016 and 
therefore the percentage of advertisement revenue of the TV industry as per Industry 
Report has remained static in the range of 33
-
35% of the total revenue of TV industry. 
As
 
such, there is no noticeable shift from advertising revenue to subscription revenue in 
the post digitisation era. Further, no more Ad free channels have been reported by 
Broadcasters after 2012. On the Guidelines for advertisement to be followed by pay 
ch
annels, the Committee note that as per Rule 7 of the Cable Rules, no programme 
telecast in Pay Channel or Free to Air Channel(FTA) shall carry advertisement exceeding 
12 minutes per hour which may include up to 10 minutes for commercial advertising 

52
 
 
and up 
to 2 minutes for self
-
promotional programmes. TRAI has brought out detailed 
Regulations on the issue but the matter is reported to be sub judice at present. The 
Committee are however surprised to find that though the detailed Advertising 
Regulations brough
t out by TRAI stand challenged in the court, both the FTA as well as 
the pay channels are having a free run subjecting consumers to frequent long dose of 
advertisements during a programme. The Committee recommend that steps must be 
taken to regulate the pe
rmissible duration and frequency of advertisements during a 
programme to ensure that in order to maximize their advertisement revenue, 
Broadcasters do not force the viewers to bear repetitive slots of advertisement in quick 
succession without any check wha
tsoever. At the same time, it must be ensured that 
advertisements being run in scroll ticker do not cover more than 10% of the TV screen 
space and also do not spoil the aesthetic sense of the programmes being telecast. It may 
also be ensured that there sho
uld not be any vertical display(running or static) of 
advertisement on TV screen by any TV channel. The Committee hope that the Ministry 
will initiate necessary steps in this direction and apprise the Committee of the action 
taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply 
of the Government
 
 
Rule 7(11) enshrined in The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 stipulates 
that no programme shall carry advertisement exceeding twelve minutes per hour, which 
may include up to ten minutes per hour of commercial advertisements, and up
 
to two 
minutes per hour of a channel’s self
-
promotional programmes.Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) had notified the regulations namely “Standards of Quality of 
Service (Duration of Advertisements in Television Channels) (Amendment) Regulation
s, 
2012 and subsequent amendment dated 22.03.2013. Some of the broadcasters filed an 
appeal in the High Court of Delhi challenging the said regulations.  The Hon’ble High 
Court has passed an interim order on 17.12.2013 restricting TRAI from taking any 

53
 
 
coer
cive measure against the petitioners or their members to make them abide by the 
impugned Regulations. There are about 17 similar matters which have been tagged 
along with the above Writ Petition against TRAI. Ministry of I&B is also a party in the 
tagged c
ase. 
 
 
As such, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting cannot take any coercive 
action against the broadcasters. The matter relating to 12 minutes per hour 
advertisement cap on broadcasting TV channels is unresolved and the Government has 
decided to awai
t the directions of the Hon’ble Court in this regard.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 18 and 19 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
Transparency, Quality of Service and Consumer Grievance Redressal System  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12)
 
The Committee note that at present there is no effective grievance redressal mechanism 
to address the grievances of consumers on issues related to cable TV digitisation. TRAI 
has mandated that every MSO1LCO should have a Toll Free helpline and a website fo
r 
logging of complaints and should nominate a Nodal Officer who can be approached by 
subscribers in case their complaints are not resolved in time. TRAI has also specified a 
timeframe for redressal of the complaints. However, most of the MS0s1LCOs have not
 
set up Toll Free Helpline and website for lodging of complaints and have not notified the 
names and contact numbers of the Nodal Officers. It has also been observed that they 
are not providing computerized bills to consumers and have also not activated th
e 
complaint redressal mechanism. As such, the consumers are left in lurch with no other 
option but to approach Consumer Courts. This option is also rarely resorted to not only 
because of the amount involved being very negligible but also because of the hes
itation 
of the consumers to get involved in the procedural hassles of the legal system. Absence 
of an effective grievance redressal mechanism leaves the consumer helpless and 
sometimes vulnerable to exploitation by DPOs at will. The Committee are pained to
 
find 

54
 
 
that though several grievance redressal avenues are stated to be available to the cable 
TV consumers, yet most of these are either non
-
operational or quite ineffective in 
providing the desired relief. Admittedly, the consumer grievances are not getti
ng 
redressed effectively either at LCO level or at the MSO level or at the higher level of 
Broadcasters. A need is therefore felt to explore the possibility of linking cable network 
through internet to a Centralized Monitoring Mechanism. The Committee are 
given to 
understand that a Centralized Monitoring System is now proposed to be set up which 
will also have access to the Grievance Redressal System of MSOs. Such a system which 
will have information on no. of subscribers, channels being carried by MSO/LCO,
 
subscription charge and GST paid by subscribers, etc. would take action against the 
defaulters in case complaints are not attended to on time. The C
-
DAC and the C
-
DoT 
organizations have been asked to suggest low cost solutions for such a centralized 
monit
oring system to monitor the services provided by the cable operators. The 
Committee recommend that this Centralized Monitoring Mechanism be rolled out and 
put in place in a time bound manner. Regarding Ministry's suggestion on linking 
subscription charges 
to a central account and releasing the same to cable operator 
subject to their resolution of complaints, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should work out on this methodology, in consultation with stake holders, and also 
consider bringing in the ne
cessary amendments in the Cable Rules to make it effectively 
operational.' The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for 
setting up of Centralized Monitoring Mechanism and also on other issues. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
To ensure 
Service Quality and Consumer protection, TRAI has also notified 
Quality of Service and Consumer Protection Regulation dated 3
rd
 
March, 2017 that 
provides norms for service providers to be adhered by them. The said regulation is also 
sub
-
judice before the 
H
on’ble High Court of Delhi. However, the Consumer Complaint 

55
 
 
Redressal Regulation notified by the Authority in 2012 is in force. Any violation of the 
provisions of these regulations is dealt as per the provisions of TRAI Act. 
 
As recommended by the Committe
e regarding Centralized
 
Monitoring System, it 
may be mentioned that, such type of system may require networking and linking of 
existing consumer 
Grievance Redressal System of MSOs to the 
Centralized computerised 
Monitoring System
. For this 
Centralized Moni
toring System will require MSO to provide 
access to their respective consumer 
Grievance Redressal System. This may require 
further discussion with the stakeholders. 
 
However, the Ministry has asked BECIL, a PSU under the Ministry, to take 
necessary action 
for establishment of Central Monitoring System in consultation with C
-
DOT and C
-
DAC to develop a low cost viable solution to address the issue.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 22 and 23 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
Infrastructure Status to Broadcasting Industry 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15)
 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that though the National Telecom Policy way 
back in 1999 had mentioned use of Cable TV networks for broadband penetration and 
subsequently 
-
T
RAI also had recommended for the same, no practical steps were 
apparently taken in this regard. Though the Ministry of l&B had made a proposal in this 
regard which was discussed in the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held on 
10.2.2012, the same was
 
not agreed to. There was no follow up in the matter and it did 
not reach to its logical end. The proposal aimed at grant of fiscal incentives/duty 
concessions to the broadcasting industry to facilitate time
-
bound transition of analog 
Cable TV services to 
Digital, which also included grant of infrastructure status to the 
broadcasting industry, reduction of basic custom duty on digital Head
-
ends and STBs 

56
 
 
and rationalization of Taxes on the Broadcasting & distribution Sector. Ministry of l&B, 
very recently in
 
2017, have again moved a proposal to grant infrastructure status to the 
broadcasting industry to Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), MoF, which was 
discussed on 20 Feb, 2017, in the 12th meeting of the Institutional Mechanism on the 
Harmonized Master Li
st of Infrastructure. Ministry of MB have been asked to submit a 
revised proposal. The Committee are unable to find the reason as to why the Ministry 
took five long years to place a fresh proposal in 2017 on such a pressing issue of grant of 
infrastructure
 
status to the Broadcasting Industry particularly when TRAI had already 
recommended for mandatory introduction of DAS in the Cable TV services in the year 
2010 itself and the Ministry had also notified the schedule for digitisation in the year 
2011. If the
 
issue of granting of infrastructure status had been taken earnestly at that 
time itself, it would have facilitated digitisation in a big way. Nonetheless, considering 
the urgency in
-
the matter, the Committee recommend the Ministry of l&B to submit the 
rev
ised proposal expeditiously to the Department of Economic Affairs in the interest of 
the industry and to make consorted effort for granting infrastructure status to the 
broadcasting industry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by 
th
e Ministry in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
This Ministry forwarded the request of various stakeholders for grant of 
infrastructure status to broadcasting industry to Ministry of Finance on 02.11.2015 for 
consideration during formulation of Budget 2016
-
17. This Ministry on 28.01.2016 
forwarded a com
parative chart of characteristics of infrastructure and justification of 
Broadcasting Industry to Ministry of Finance for grant of infrastructure status. Ministry 
of Finance vide OM dated 26.07.2016 informed this Ministry that the proposal of Indian 
Broadc
asting Foundation (IBF) submitted by the Ministry for grant of Infrastructure 
status to Broadcasting Industry was circulated to Institutional Mechanism (IM) members 

57
 
 
for seeking their comments / views and upon receipt from IM members, the issue will 
be cons
idered. The meeting of the Institutional Mechanism on Harmonized Master List 
of Infrastructure Sub
-
sectors was held on 20.02.2017. The agenda of the meeting 
included “Inclusion of Broadcasting Industry in the Master List of Infrastructure Sub
-
sectors”. The
 
IM recommended that inclusion of “Broadcasting Industry” in Harmonized 
Master List of infrastructure sub
-
sector cannot be considered as presented. M/o 
Information & Broadcasting may submit a revised proposal identifying specific items 
that qualify for inc
lusion as ‘Infrastructure’.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
Quality of Set Top Boxes 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22)
 
The Committee note that TRAI has been emphasizing the use of high quality BIS 
compliant STBs for cable TV ne
tworks and TRAI has taken up the issue with different 
MSOs from time to time where compliances are taken from MSC, certifying the use of 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) compliant STBs only In the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services Standar
ds of Quality of Services and Consumer 
Protection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, 2017, TRAI has mandated that every 
distributor of television channels or local cable operator, as the case may be, shall 
provide set top box confirming to relevant Indian 
Standard set by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. The Committee further note that as per Section 9 of the The Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, it is obligatory for every cable operator to use only BIS 
compliant STBs. Under Section 11 of The Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
Authorised officers have powers to seize the equipment of the operators if supply of 
non
-
BIS compliant STBs are detected and for this, anyone having such information may 
make complaint to the Authorised Officer for nec
essary action. Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY) is the nodal Ministry for all issues relating to 

58
 
 
electronic equipment including Set Top Boxes. MeitY had mandated that all the Set Top 
Boxes should meet the safety standards and had 
also outlined a procedure for 
Testing/Certification of the STBs before import. As such only STBs meeting these 
notified safety standards can be imported into the country. The Committee find that as 
per the prevalent practice, use of good quality Set Top Bo
xes is ensured through self
-
certification by MSOs stating the use of BIS compliant STBs only and feel that this 
mechanism of self
-
certification by MSOs may not be very effective in curbing the use of 
poor quality Set Top Boxes. Zhe Committee observe that a
ctive involvement and 
participation of the customers are required in this regard but the constraints could be 
that the customers in general may not be aware of the quality standard of their set top 
boxes and the whereabouts of the Authorized officers whom 
to report in case of non
-
compliance of STBs provided by their Cable operator. The Committee therefore 
recommend that in order to ensure supply of good quality set top boxes and to 
effectively detect the non
-
BIS compliant STBs, there is a need to adequately
 
inform and 
educate the customers about how to check the BIS
-
compliance of the STBs provided by 
their MSO/LCO/DTH operator along with the details of the Authorized officer whom 
they can report in case the STB is found to be non
-
compliant to BIS standards a
s 
prescribed under Section 9 of the Cable Act. Steps should also taken to make provision 
for some independent laboratories/facilities where the customers can themselves get 
their STBs tested for quality compliance at a nominal fee and thereafter report any
 
lack 
of compliance to the Authorized officers. Such a mechanism will not only empower the 
customers but also instill a sense of fear amongst the operators who provide poor 
quality non
-
BIS compliant STBs to their customers in violation of Section 9 of The 
Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act and. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
 
 

59
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
There is no strong compliance standard/ procedure imposed by BIS to ensure the 
quality of STBs, presently BIS mandates need of only safety testing and certificate. 
Due 
to technology evolution and growth of eco
-
system in the field of STB 
design/manufacturin
g it is desired that specifications for Safety (IS13252), 
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) (IS 6873
-
Part3) and Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) compliance need to be improved 
and many of the requirements 
should be mandated for OEMs of Set Top boxes to 
regulate the quality of devices.
 
Over last one decade, India has made significant growth in this sector in terms of 
indigenous manufacturing, adapting standards, test and measurement labs so it is right 
time 
to impose reasonable certification requirements to manage the quality of boxes 
including the poor quality of huge number of imported boxes. Putting strong compliance 
framework shall boost the local manufacturing of STBs.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please s
ee Para No. 32 of Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 

60
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
 
Vertical Monopolies and Cross Media Holding 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13)
 
 
The Committee note that in order to address 
the issues relating to Media ownership, 
TRAI had sent its recommendations on "Monopoly/Market dominance in cable TV 
services" to Ministry of l&B on 26th November 2013, which dealt with Merger & 
Acquisition rules for cable TV sector and restrictions to be i
mposed on MSOs to prevent 
monopolies/accumulation of interest in a relevant market through Merger & 
Acquisition. On 12th August 2014, TRAI had also sent its recommendations on "Issues 
relating to Media Ownership" to Ministry of l&B which dealt with Cross m
edia 
ownership rules for dominant operators in news segment of television and print 
category, Internal plurality i.e. freedom to editors to express views/news and Rules to 
be applicable to mergers & acquisitions. However, TRAI recommendations on both the 
i
ssues are since pending with Ministry of I&B. While TRAI is of the view that it would be 
desirable to implement these recommendations on priority basis, Ministry of l&B, on 
the other hand, are not in favour of too much control to restrict the areas of oper
ation 
of the entities and feel that the regulations should aim at preventing exploitation by any 
entity and rest should be left to the market forces. However, NBA have strongly pleaded 
that vertical monopoly or vertical integration of DPOs and Broadcasters
 
is not healthy 
for either the cable fraternity or the Broadcasters because it makes room for bias and 
more importantly removes the concept of level playing field. NBA apprehends that 
vertical mergers also foreclose competitors and in turn affects consumer
's choice. NBA 
has further submitted that cross media ownership is not a healthy trend in media 

61
 
 
industry and has the potential of creating serious conflict of interest situation which can 
stifle both the content side and business side of media companies. T
he Ministry of l&B 
also received complaints of existence of such entities in the market/industry. The 
Committee can hardly ignore the concerns expressed by the industry and are of the 
considered view that issues related to Vertical Monopolies and Cross Med
ia Holdings 
have serious implications for the print and electronic media in India and cannot be 
simply left to the market forces and they need suitable intervention of Government 
from time to time. The Committee may be apprised of the status of action take
n by the 
government on both the recommendations made by TRAI, existing provisions in force to 
address the issues of Vertical Monopolies and Cross Media Hidings in the cable sector
-
and to what extent the, recommendations would help in curbing the menace of 
cross 
media holding. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
(
a
)
 
TRAI’s recommendations on “Monopoly / Market dominance in cable TV 
services” dated 26
th
 
November, 2013.
 
 
In order to ensure equity and fair play, and to restrict monopolies in the cable TV 
sector, the Ministry 
had sent a reference to TRAI on 12.12.2012 seeking its 
recommendations as to whether there is a need to bring in certain reasonable 
restrictions on MSOs and LCOs including restricting their area of operation or restricting 
subscriber base to prevent monopo
ly.  TRAI made its recommendations on 26.11.2013.
 
These recommendations were earlier discussed by Inter
-
Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) in its meeting held on 17.01.2014 and 22.01.2014 and the IMC accepted the 
recommendations.  Meanwhile, the Ministry received
 
representation from industry 
arguing that Herfindahl Hirschman (HHI) Index for measuring market concentration is 
not the appropriate tool in media sector. The matter has been examined in this Ministry 

62
 
 
and not found feasible as the recommendations appear t
o be impractical. Views of 
Competition Commission of India are being sought in the matter.
 
 
(
b
)
 
TRAI’s recommendations on “Issues Relating to Media Ownership” dated 
12.8.2014.
 
 
The Ministry on 16.05.2012 sought TRAI’s recommendation on the issue of 
vertical in
tegration in the broadcasting and TV distribution sector and cross media 
holdings across the TV, Print & Radio sector.  TRAI has been asked to suggest measures 
that can be put to address vertical integration in order to ensure fair growth of the 
broadcasti
ng sector.  Further, recommendations of TRAI were also sought with respect 
to cross media ownerships with an objective to ensure plurality of news and views and 
availability of quality services at reasonable prices to the consumers. TRAI furnished its 
reco
mmendations on 12.8.2014.  
 
Two meetings of IMC have been held on 23.02.2018 and 28.03.2018. Presently 
the recommendations of TRAI are under consideration of IMC set up to examine TRAI 
recommendations.
 
 
(
c
)
 
TRAI’s recommendations on “issues related to New DTH 
Licenses” dated 
23.07.2014.
 
 
The IMC constituted for the purpose of examining TRAI recommendations 
deliberated on recommendations of TRAI on “issues related to New DTH Licenses” dated 
23.07.2014. The IMC observed that the matter of cross holding in DTH has
 
to be taken 
into consideration in the larger context of other TRAI recommendations on cross media 
holdings. The IMC recommended that the restrictions in the existing DTH guidelines may 
continue till the matter is holistically resolved. Draft Cabinet Note 
regarding 

63
 
 
amendments to the guidelines for providing DTH services in India, circulated to 
Ministries / Departments concerned on 12.03.2018, contained some provisions of cross 
holdings between broadcasters and Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs). The 
com
ments of all the Ministries / Departments are being examined for a view in the 
matter.
 
Provision of High Speed Broadband through Cable TV Network 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14)
 
 
The Committee note that the existing Cable TV networks, after certain technical 
upgradation, can be used for providing broadband services at high speed. The cable TV 
operators can lay overhead optical fibre access network much faster and economically 
in order to provide broadband services. Many MSOs are already providing broadband 
ser
vices over their cable TV network. TRAI has recommended provision of Right of Way 
(Row) and infrastructure status to MSOs and LCOs so that they can effectively lay their 
network and get financial assistance from banks for up gradation of their network. 
How
ever, the Committee note that many MSOs/LCOs are not very keen on providing 
this facility. The consumers are kept devoid of this facility as the cable operators are not 
ready to pay the 8% Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) as fee to DoT as required to be paid 
t
o the Government on the total collection, including collection from the cable TV 
service. To avoid the payment of 8% of fee, most of the operators have created separate 
entities for providing internet services and are providing separate cables for the Inte
rnet 
service for which a separate Internet modem is also provided. For Internet service, the 
setup of the LCOs should be bi
-
directional whereas it is mainly unidirectional at present. 
If the issue of 8% of AGR fee is resolved, more & more operators would g
o for making 
their system bi
-
directional to provide Internet service on the same cable which is used 
for TV service. To give incentive to the cable operators, TRAI had issued a 
recommendation to DoT for waiving off the revenue from cable TV services from t
he 

64
 
 
AGR for a period of four years. The Ministry of l&B and TRAI had raised this issue and 
Cabinet Secretariat had constituted a Committee to examine the issue and come out 
with recommendations. However, a final view could not be taken on this and now the 
i
ssue is again under consideration of DoT. The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need to have a relock at the issue of payment of 8% of AGR as fee which has held up the 
utilization of the existing vast Cable TV network across the country for providing 
high 
speed and reliable broadband connectivity in India. This step will not only tap the 
already existing Cable TV network for providing high speed broadband but will also 
reduce the burden on NOFN while also providing numerous employment opportunities 
in 
the sector. The Committee recommend the Ministry to impress upon DoT for an early 
decision in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
This matter pertains to Department of Telecommunication. Reply from DOT has 
not been received so far.However, the position is
 
as under: 
-
 
          
Presently, the cable operators have created separate entities for providing 
internet services and are providing separate cables for the internet service for which a 
separate internet modem is also provided to avoid payment of 8% of A
GR as fee on total 
income earned from Cable services or Internet services both. 
 
 
M/o I&B has already taken up this issue and it is under consideration of DoT. Recently, 
Hon’ble Prime Minister chaired a meeting on Digital India on 17.5.2018 wherein the 
iss
ue of broadband through cable network was discussed as one of the agenda. Hon’ble 
PM desired that DoT may take necessary action to provide cable TV services and 
internet services through one cable. The matter is presently under consideration in DoT. 
 
 
 
 

65
 
 
Sh
aring of Infrastructure  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16)
 
 
The Committee note that TRAI has recommended sharing of Head
-
end used for Cable 
TV services and transport streams transmitting signals of TV channels among MSOs on 
voluntary basis. TRAI has also recomm
ended sharing of Conditional Access System (CAS) 
& Subscriber Management System (SMS) by the distributors of TV channels including 
Cable Operators. During consultations, most of the stakeholders have supported the 
idea of infrastructure sharing, on volunta
ry basis, in the Cable TV sector and 
acknowledged the fact that sharing of infrastructure will reduce the transmission and 
other costs of. MSOs. Some MSOs have also opined that decrease in capital cost due to 
sharing of infrastructure will help them to inv
est in better technologies, increased 
competition due to lowering of entry barriers will result in better services and more 
choice to the subscribers and it will help in standardization of the networks thus 
reducing conflicts between service providers. Min
istry of l&B have also emphasized that 
Authorized Officers of the State Governments and their representatives should be able 
to access the systems of NIS0s/ LCOs to ensure that there are no violations of the 
provisions of relevant rules/guidelines and also
 
to crosscheck the reported number of 
subscribers/ total collection from subscribers for the purposes of entertainment taxes 
etc. It was also said that, in shared infrastructure, the accountability of service providers 
will have to be ensured with referenc
e to the SMS, their respective subscribers and to 
the respective State Government and local Administration as well as to the Central 
Government on all the relevant aspects. While appreciating the efforts
-
 
of TRAI to come 
out with the guidelines to implemen
t sharing of infrastructure by different stakeholders, 
the Committeehope that the TRAI recommendations would encourage shared use of 
distribution network and services for delivery of broadcasting services to the subscribers 
and prevent duplication of effor
ts by the stakeholders. 
 

66
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
This Ministry has made reference to TRAI on 29.04.2016 seeking 
recommendations on sharing of infrastructure by MSOs, LCOs and HITS operators for 
providing TV Services. TRAI furnished its recommendations on
 
“Sharing of Infrastructure 
in Television Broadcasting Distribution Sector” on 29.03.2017. Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting chaired a meeting with the representatives of TRAI and 
Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited (BECIL) on
 
13.02.2018. The matter is 
under active examination of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
ANURAG SINGH THAKUR,
 
28 December, 2018
 
 
Chairperson, 
 
07 Pausha,1940 (Saka)
 
 
Standing Committee on
 
Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 

67
 
 
Annexure
-
I
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2018
-
19) HELD ON 28
TH
 
DECEMBER, 2018
 
-----------
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28
th
 
December, 2018 from 1015 hours          
to 1040 hours in Committee Room No. ‘62’, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
–
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
 
2
.
 
Shri L. K. Advani 
 
3
.
 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
 
4
.
 
Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad
 
5
.
 
Shri Virender Kashyap
 
6
.
 
Dr. K. C. Patel 
 
7
.
 
Shri D. K. Suresh
 
8
.
 
Shri Nagendra Pratap Singh 
Patel
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
 
9
.
 
Smt. Kahkashan Perween
 
10
.
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
 
11
.
 
Shri Binoy Viswam
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
2
.
 
Dr. Sagarika Dash
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
3
.
 
Smt. Geeta Parmar
 
 
 
-
 
 
Deputy Secretary
 
4
.
 
Shri Shangreiso Zimik
 
 
-
 
Under Secretar
y
 

68
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following four Draft Action Taken 
Reports:
-
 
 
I
.
 
xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx; 
 
II
.
 
Action Taken Report on the Forty
-
fourth Report on ‘Cable TV Digitization and 
Interoperability of Set Top Boxes’ of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting; 
 
III
.
 
xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx; and
 
IV
.
 
xxxxx…..xxxxx…
..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..xxxx…..xxxxx; 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the above said Reports and 
after due deliberation adopted the same without any modifications.
 
 
4.
 
The Committee, then, authorised the Ch
airperson to finalise and present the Action 
Taken Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament.
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned
 
 
 
*****
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxxx....Matters not related to Report.
 
 
 
 

69
 
 
Annexure
-
II
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY
-
FOURTH REPORT
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
 
 
(i)
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:
-
 
1, 2, 3,6,7, 
8, 9, 10 , 17, 18, 19,21,23 and 24
 
 
 
Total
 
14
 
 
Percentage
 
58.33
 
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.: 20
 
 
 
Total
 
1
 
 
Percentage
 
4.17
 
(iii)
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration
 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:
-
  
4,5,11, 12, 15 and 22
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
06
 
 
Percentage
 
 
 
25.00
 
(iv)
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature
 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:
-
 
13, 14 and 16
 
 
 
Total
 
03
 
 
Percentage
 
12.50
 
 
 
 
 