 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject                                       
‘Business Development and Marketing Strategy in the Department of Post’ 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
  
 
29  


 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject                                        
‘Business Development and Marketing Strategy in the Department of Posts’ 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka)


 
i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
36 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been ac cepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
37 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
39 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the committee held on 8th August, 2016 
 
41 
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Eleventh Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015 -16) 
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur   -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 6. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
  7. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
8. Shri P. Karunakaran 
9. Shri Virender Kashyap 
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
11. Smt. Hema Malini 
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
13. Dr. K.C. Patel 
  14. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20.  Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@ 21. VACANT 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
* 23. Shri Suresh Gopi 
24.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
25. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
**26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
# 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya  
# 31. VACANT 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Director 
3.  Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Abhishek Sharma - Executive Assistant    
*    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 20.05.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 23.05.2016. 
#   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, M.P. and Shri Salim Ansari, M.P. retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 01.07.2016 and 
04.07.2016 respectively. 
@ Ms. Mehbooba Mufti, M.P. resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 05.07.2016.   
 **    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 28.07.2016. 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2015 -16) having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present the Twenty -Ninth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Business Development and Marketing Strategy in the 
Department of Posts’ of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Eleventh Repo rt was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       
13th August, 2015. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes contained on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report on 12th November, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
8th August, 2016. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at      
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
Anurag Singh Thakur, 
New Delhi;                           Chairperson, 
08 August, 2016                                                                                          Standing Committee on 
17 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                                                             Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

 
1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Business 
Development and Marketi ng Strategy ’ in the Department of Posts  relating to the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                      
13th August, 2015. It contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations whi ch have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1 ,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12,13, 14, 16 and 17 
 
15 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- Nil 
 
Nil 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-15 
 
01 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 11 01 
 

 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and f inal action taken replies to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
 
 
A. Rationalization of existing products/services and focus on emerging areas  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
6. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
  
 “The Committee note that the Department of Posts have been able to 
 offer a number of products and services to the clients as a result of the 
 initiatives taken by the Directorate. In this regard, the Committee note 
 that while some of the premium products like Speed Post, Business Post 
 and Express Parcel Post have performed exceptionally well in terms of 
 revenue generation, other premium products like Media Post, Greeting 
 Post and ePost are facing a decline in revenue  generation.  A scrutiny of 
 the data furnished by the Department rev eals that during the year        
 2012- 13, Media Post, Greeting Post, Direct Post and ePost have  
 contributed a meagr e revenue to the Department, i.e. Rs. 4.24 crore,       
 Rs. 0.19 crore, Rs.2.62 crore and Rs.2.67 crore, respectively. As such, the 
 Committee feel that the Department should undertake a comprehensive 
 review of these products and services to decide on the 
 continuation/discontinuation or integration of these services so as to 
 increase their revenue earning potential. The outcome of such a  review 
 would suggest whether investment made on these low performing 
 products/services can be released and utilized elsewhere  in the emerging 
 areas/products/services such as Express Parcel, Business Parcel,Speed 
 Post-Cash on Delivery (SP- CoD) for eCommerce companies, ePayment, 

 
3 
 
 Bill collection on behalf of  third parties, etc. which, in the opinion of the 
 Committee, have tremendous potential for growth and revenue 
 generation for the  Department. The  Committee would like to be 
 apprised of the efforts made in this regard and the outcome thereof. “ 
 
7. The Department of Posts in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 “Department of Posts review its services and products from time to time 
 keeping in view the changing market scenario, changing customer needs, 
 industry benchmarks etc . and takes steps/action to modify the service 
 features accordingly so as to improve the postal services and boost 
 revenue growth.  
ePOST is an unregistered hy brid mail service which provides electronic 
 transmission of the messages which may include text messages, scanned 
 images, pictures etc . and their delivery in hard copies at the destination 
 through the postman/delivery staff.  Presently, ePost  booking facility is 
 available in more than 13000 post offices and physically delivered through 
 a network of more than 1.54 lakh post offices across India. ePost  service is 
 provided for both retail as well as corporate customers. 
 ePost Corporate service enables corporate customers including 
 Government  Departments, PSUs (Public Sector Undertakings), SMEs 
 (Small  and Medium  Enterprises), etc . to draft, design and send messages 
 as per  their business requirements from their office premises by using the 
 internet. The message is  electronically transmitted as a soft copy and at 
 the destination it is delivered to  the addressee, in the form of a hard 
 copy. 
The Department has recently introduced a n online recharge facility of e -
 Post  prepaid account w.e.f. 11.08.2015 enabling the pre -paid users to 
 activate/recharge their e-Post prepaid account online by using credit/debit 
 card.  With this facility the users are not required to visit the post office 
 for activation/recharging of their  e-Post pre -paid account. Positive 
 revenue growth of  ePost in last 3 years is as follows: 
 
 
 
 Greeting Post stands discontinued at the central level. However, the 
 Circles have been empowered to deal with the issue on a case to case 
Name of Product Revenue (` in crores) 
2012- 13 2013- 14 2014-15 
e-Post      2.67       3.47 4.13 

 
4 
 
 basis. Media Post and Direct Post do not contribute substantial revenue. 
 However, as they utilize the services of t he existing network of the 
 Department, the cost incurred on these products is not substantial. 
 Services like ePost have a potential for growth and the Department 
 continues with these services to cater to specific segments of customers.” 
8. The Committee while observing that some of the premium products like Speed 
Post, Business Post and Express Parcel Post have performed exceptionally well in 
terms of revenue generation, as against premium products like Media Post, Greeting 
Post and ePost which faced a decline in revenue generation, had suggested  that the 
Department should undertake a comprehensive review of these products and services 
to decide on the continuation/discontinuation or integration of these services so as to 
increase their revenue earning  potential. The Department, in their Action Taken 
Notes, have stated that they review  their services and products from time to time 
keeping in view the changing market scenario, changing customer needs, industry 
benchmarks etc. and take steps/action to mod ify the service features accordingly so 
as to improve the postal services and boost revenue growth. The Department have 
also informed that with the recent online recharge facility of ePost pre -paid account 
the users are not required to visit Post Office fo r activation/recharge of their ePost 
pre-paid account.  There is some positive revenue growth of ePost from Rs.3.47 crore 
in 2013-14 to Rs.4.13 crore in 2014-15.  The Greeting Post have been discontinued  at 
the Central level .  Media Post and Direct Post do  not contribu te substantially to the 
revenue.  However,  ePost have potential for growth.   Taking note of the above 
submission, the Committee hope that the Department would  continue to review the 
existing/continuing products/services with focus on emerging areas such as ePost to 
ensure that the products/services offered by the Department are in sync with 
changing times and fulfill the n eeds/expectations of the customers while also 
generating the much needed revenue for the Department of Pos ts.  The Committee 
also hope that a holistic view sh ould be taken by the Department about 

 
5 
 
discontinuation/integration of products like Media Post and Direct Post so that they 
do not remain a burden on the Department in their endeavour to increase the 
revenue.  
B. Review of Revenue Performance of Services  and maintenance of Data on 
 Government Business transacted through Post offices  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4 and 12) 
9. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “A review of the revenue performance of individual Products/Services 
 marketed by the Directorate indicates that out of eighteen services, only 
 three services, viz. Competition Postcard, Letter and Insurance generated 
 revenue in excess of the cost incurre d by the Department. To reverse this 
 trend, wherein most of the services are incurring huge losses, the 
 Committee have been given to understand that a proposal for revision of 
 rates of the Services was under consideration of the Department. The 
 Department are increasing their activities and transactions in Post Offices 
 to reduce the cost per transaction for various Services.  The Committee do 
 recognize that progressive IT induction will also result in reduction of 
 operational cost of postal transacti ons. It is, however, disquieting to find 
 that the Department is not maintaining information on comparative cost 
 and revenue for various Value Added Services (VAS) and products 
 marketed by the Directorate.  Taking into consideration the explanation by 
 the Department that development of any new Services or Value Additions 
 on existing Services takes into account the likely cost, potential revenue 
 and the market conditions, the Committee are of the considered view that 
 maintenance of data regarding the c ost of various Value Added Services 
 offered by the Department is an essential pre -requisite to ascertain their 
 financial viability before undertaking any revision of rates for those 
 Services. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Directorate 
 should ensure maintenance of requisite data in respect of all the Value 
 Added Products and Services offered by it and utilize the same in planning 
 Product/Service tariff structure while carrying out periodic revision of 
 rates thereof.  The Committee will like to be apprised of the cost-benefit  
 analysis of the loss making Products/Services and measures taken to 
 minimize the operation cost. “ 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 

 
6 
 
 “The Committee note with concern that the Department of Posts do not 
 maintain any separate information on Government Business and hence 
 could not provide separate figures in respect of traffic and revenue of 
 different products and services for private vis -a-vis Government Business. 
 The Committee are of the view that main tenance of such information in 
 segregated form will help the Department in not only assessing their 
 business potential more realistically but also in formulating their own 
 business strategies more effectively in improving their overall 
 performance. The  Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
 Department should evolve a mechanism to maintain separate data 
 pertaining to the Government Business and private business which will 
 also enable the Department in assessing the reach and performance of 
 Government schemes transacted through the Postal network.” 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
10. The Department of Posts in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 “Specific cost benefit analysis of products and services is not being made 
 as the current costing methodology is based on previous years’ total 
 expenditure that is apportioned to all products/services. 
 The Department is now implementing Activity Based costing under the IT 
 Modernisation Project where product/service wise costin g would be 
 available and cost benefit analysis can be carried out more accurately.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 “As observed by the Committee, currently the Department of Posts does 
 not maintain segregated data pertaining to Government and private 
 business in respect of products and service under the Universal Service 
 Obligations (USO) and premium products. The Department does not offer 
 differential rate structure and ensures that the products and services are 
 available at the same rates to the Government and private customers.  
 However, there are certain services and products which are exclusively 
 provided to Government agencies such as Passenger Railway Reservation 
 Scheme, Pos t Office Savings Scheme, MGNREGA, Kisan Vikas Patras and 
 other agency products for which the data is maintained.  The Department 
 is implementing the IT Modernization Project which would enable Activity 
 Based costing.”   
(Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 

 
7 
 
11. Considering the fact that maintenance of data regarding the cost of various 
Value Added Services offered by the Department is an essential pre -requisite to 
ascertain their financial viability before undertaking any revision of rates for those 
Services, the Committee in their original Report had  recommended that the 
Directorate should ensure maintenance of requisite data in respect of all the Value 
Added Products and Services offered by it and utilize the same in planning 
Product/Service tariff structure while carrying out periodic revision of ra tes thereof.  
The Department in their Action Taken Note, have stated that Specific cost benefit 
analysis of products and services is not being made as the current costing 
methodology is based on previous years’ total expenditure that is apportioned to all 
products/services. However, they are now implementing Activity Based costing under 
the IT Moderni zation Project where product/service wise costing would be available 
and cost benefit analysis can be carried out more accurately. With regard to the 
recommendation of the Committee for maintaining data for Government Business 
and Private Business, the Department have inf ormed that they do not maintain 
segregated data pertaining to Government and Private Business in respect of 
products and services under the Uni versal Service Obligations (USO) and premium 
products.  They do not offer differential rate structure and ensure that s ervices are 
available to Government and Private customers at the same rate.  In respect of some 
services which are exclusively provided t o Government  agencies, such as Passenger 
Railway Reservation Scheme, Post Office Savings Scheme, MGNREGA, etc. data is  
being maintained.  The Committee feel that maintenance of segregated data in 
respect of Government and Private Business would help the De partment in assessing 
how much business they are getting from each sector and the corresponding revenue 
earned.   Taking note of the submission of the Department that IT Modernization 
Project being implemented by the m would enable Activity Based costing  and address 
the concern of the Committee , the Committee desire that the Department should 

 
8 
 
apprise them of the progress of IT Modernization  Project and how far it has been 
helpful in assessment and cost benefit analysis of products and services.  
 
C.  Speed Post – Need for Improvement in Market share, Need for Improving 
 Quality of Service of Speed Post  & Need for Creating Awareness about Value 
 Added Services  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, 6 & 7) 
12. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee recognize that Speed Post has emerged as the most 
successful Product/Service introduced by the Directorate, contributing 
more than half of the revenue from BD products. As per the data furnished 
by the Department, Speed Post has shown signifi cant growth, both in 
terms of revenue and traffic over the years. The Speed Post revenue has 
increased from Rs. 515.27 crore in 2008-09 to Rs. 1261.47 crore in 2012-13 
and the Speed Post traffic has increased from 21.14 crore articles in 2008 -
09 to 44.94 c rore articles in 2012 -13.  In terms of percentage, the revenue 
of Speed Post has grown at an average growth rate of 23 per cent per 
annum during the period 2008 -09 to 2012 -13. Despite the appreciable 
performance of Speed Post in being amongst the foremost revenue 
generating Services for the Department, the Committee feel that issues 
like low market share and improvement in quality of service continue to 
be a cause of concern for the Department.  The market share of Speed 
Post ranged between 17.4 per cent an d 20.2 per cent only during the year 
2012-13. Considering the fact that India Post has presence in approx. 
1,55,000 locations throughout India, the Committee strongly believe that 
Speed Post has tremendous scope for further improvement in its overall 
market share. The Committee, therefore, will like the Department to 
strenuously strive to further increase the market share of their most 
successful premium product by gainfully utilizing the available resources.   
The Committee also feel that after implementat ion of its IT Modernization 
Project, the Department will be in a better position to include the large 
number of rural Post Offices in their Speed Post Network which presently 
are outside the network. The Committee will like to be informed about 
further ach ievements made by Speed Post in terms of market share and 
augmentation of revenue.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee find that even though Speed Post is the most significant 
revenue generating Service of the Department, the quality of service of 

 
9 
 
Speed Post has not been up to the desired level. Non -delivery of articles 
and inordinate delays in delivery of articles booked through Speed Post 
are some of the routine complaints of clients when it comes to judging the 
quality of service of Speed Post. T hough the Department have maintained 
that they have drawn up Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for every 
Speed Post article to ensure time-bound delivery and KPI’s have been fixed 
for various cities, still it is a matter of serious concern that there are 
complaints regarding delays in delivery. The Committee recall that the 
Department submitted before the Committee that in the quarter ending 
March, 2013, they had received as many as 25,876 complaints in respect 
of delay of delivery of articles and 22,672 co mplaints regarding non -
receipt of acknowledgement. Keeping in view the fact that Speed Post is 
the most successful premium Product/Service offered by the Department, 
the Committee feel that it is imperative to monitor its service quality and 
ensure that mi nimum quality benchmarks are maintained in regard to 
timely delivery of Speed Post articles. While the Department are hopeful 
that the roll -out of their two important schemes, i.e. the Mail Network 
Optimization Project (MNOP) and IT adoption and modernizat ion scheme 
will significantly improve the quality of service of Speed Post, the 
Committee feel that quality improvement is a continuous process and 
should be accorded the highest priority, especially since the Department is 
facing stiff competition from Pr ivate Courier Services. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the monitoring mechanism for various stages 
of Speed Post delivery should be further strengthened by raising the 
standards of all performance parameters and ‘Track and Trace’ facility 
should be extended to cover all articles booked through Speed Post. The 
Committee further recommend that the proposed initiative of the 
Department regarding confirmation of the delivery of Speed Post through 
SMS is implemented within the stipulated time frame. Th e Committee are 
of the view that this step will definitely play a key role in the overall 
improvement in the quality of service of the Speed Post. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that Speed Post Service has got various attractive 
features such as availability of Insurance of articles, 24 -hour booking in 
select offices, Speed Post International Service, Internet based Track and 
Trace system and Value Added feature s such as free pick -up facility for 
bulk customers, Book Now Pay Later (BNPL) facility for corporate 
customers, volume based discounts and Premium Delivery Centers. The 
Committee, however, feel that due to lack of awareness about these 
premium features amo ngst the clients, these services are not being 

 
10 
 
utilized to their full potential. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department must take appropriate steps to promote awareness about 
the client -friendly features of Speed Post by giving due publici ty to 
important features such as ‘Track and Trace’ facility, etc. amongst the 
targeted customers. As mentioned in the previous paragraph, the 
Committee desire that wide publicity to the planned facility of SMS 
confirmation of Speed Post must be ensured whi ch can play a decisive role 
in making the Speed Post the best choice amongst the users.”  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
13. The Department of Posts in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“Speed Post is the flagship product of the Department of Posts and a 
major stream of revenue. Several initiatives are being taken not only to 
retain existing customers but also to add new customers in order to 
increase Speed Post revenue and market share. Some of them are -  
(i) Delivery of High Court notices/summons through Speed Post with 
physical as well as electronic Proof of Delivery (PoD) facility was 
introduced in the Delhi High Court with effect from 03.02.2014. The 
service was further extended to th e Odisha High Court, Punjab and 
Haryana High Court  and the subordinate courts in Punjab and Haryana.  
Department is working to extend the delivery of notice/summons through 
Speed Post with other High Courts. 
(ii) Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) Ghaziabad is a Government of India 
PSU under the Ministry of Defence involved in the manufacture and supply 
of various electronic products for the Indian Air Force. A proposal of a tie 
up for sending their consignments though Speed Post from more than 80 
locations across the country under the Single Point Account Management 
scheme is under process. 
(iii)  The Speed Post contract with the Indian Air Force existing since 
1999 is currently under negotiation and renewal. 
 
As per a report published on a study by the Comptroller & Auditor General 
of India (C&AG), Speed Post is faster and more reliable than private 
couriers. C&AG in its study found that Speed Post delivers 99% articles 
within 1 -9 days as compared to private co uriers’ delivery of 92% which 
takes upto 10 days.   
  
 Due to continued efforts, growth in Speed Post revenue for two years is as 
follows: 

 
11 
 
Year Revenue (` in Crores) Percentage Increase in revenue 
over the previous year 
2013-14 1372.21 8.78% 
2014-15 1495.21 8.96% 
2015-16* 764.64 16.25% 
[*Growth of Speed Post revenue as on September, 2015 compared with 
performance as on September, 2014 (` 657.74)].   
  
Speed Post service has also emerged as a key product in terms of the 
eCommerce market. To cater to the huge emerging market Speed Post 
Cash on Delivery (SPCoD) service has been launched, which has generated 
a positive response and increased revenue for the Department. 
   
(Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Track &  Trace facility has been extended for all Speed Post articles, 
including eCommerce articles. To monitor and improve the quality of 
service of Speed Post articles, specially eCommerce articles, the 
Department has developed certain Key Performance Indicators  (KPI) which 
are as follows:  
 
1. Destination wise data on time taken from booking to delivery 
 of bulk Speed Post articles.  
2. Hub-wise delivery status of eCommerce consignments from major 
 customers.   
Efforts are on to provide the facility of confirmation of delivery of Speed 
Post articles through Short Messaging Service (SMS). 
 (Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
Premium Products especially services such as Speed Post, 
Express/Business Parcel etc. face an intense competition in the market.  
India Post recognises that one of the means of increasing revenue and 
market share is by making the public aware of the services offered under 
the Premium Products. One of the ways to create awareness and 
consequent market share is by way of advertisements in the pri nt, audio 
visual and social media platforms.  
 
A number of steps have been taken for marketing and promotion of Speed 
Post services highlighting features such as Track & Trace facility, volume 

 
12 
 
based discount, free pick -up, credit facility etc. Advertisemen ts on Speed 
Post are given in the print and electronic media to spread awareness 
about its features and service. Receipts given for Speed Post articles also 
contains the tracking number & displays the track & trace functionality. 
Further, promotion and pub licity of products/services of the Department 
are also done through Social Media platform i.e. Face book/ Twitter of the 
Department of Posts.  
 
Steps outlined above have resulted in increase in Speed Post revenue. The 
successive revenue figures of Speed Post for the last two years are 
illustrated below.   
            Year Revenue (` in Crores) Percentage Increase in revenue 
over the previous year 
2013-14 1372.21 8.78% 
2014-15 1495.21 8.96% 
2015-16* 764.64 16.25% 
[*Growth of Speed Post revenue as on September, 2015 compared with 
performance as on September, 2014 (` 657.74)].”   
(Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
14. Taking n ote of the fact  that t he market share of Speed Post ranged between 
17.4 per cent and 20.2 per cent only during the year 2012 -13, the Committee had 
recommended the Department to strenuously strive to further increase the market 
share of their most successful premium produ ct by gainfully utilizing the available 
resources. The Committee  had desired that the Department must take appropriate 
steps to promote awareness about the client -friendly features of Speed Post by giving 
due publicity to important features such as ‘Track and Trace’ facility, etc. amongst the 
targeted customers. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that 
several initiatives are being taken not only to retain existing customers but also to add 
new customers in order to increase Speed Post rev enue and market share. To cater to 
the huge emerging eCommerce market, Speed Post Cash on Delivery (SPCoD) service 
has been launched. Track & Trace facility has been extended for all Speed Post 
articles, including eCommerce articles. To monitor and improve  the quality of service 
of Speed Post articles, especially eCommerce articles, the Department ha ve developed 

 
13 
 
various Key Performance Indicators (KPI). A number of steps have also been taken for 
marketing and promotion of Speed Post services highlighting features such as Track & 
Trace facility, volume based discount, free pick -up, credit facility etc. Advertisements 
on Speed Post are given in the print and electronic media to spread awareness about 
its features and services.  The Department have submitted that these initiatives would 
go a long way in improving the market share of Speed Post, improving the quality of 
service of Speed Post and creating awareness about the various Value Added Services 
offered to the customers .  T he Committee desire the Departm ent to implement the 
initiatives in the right earnest so that the market share of Speed Post continues to 
improve. The Committee hope that with implementation of IT modernisation project 
more and more number of rural Post Offices are being brought under th e Speed Post 
Network which so far rem ained outside the network. The Committee may be apprised 
of the number of rural Post Offices which have progressively been moved into the 
Speed Post network. 
 
D. Competition from Private Courier Services 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
15.  The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that unregulated private courier services have 
mushroomed all across the country giving direct competition to the 
Department of Posts and are operatin g without any guidelines or quality 
of service benchmarks. The Department are facing serious competition 
from private couriers/parcel service operators offering services at a very 
low cost. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the local 
courier industry offers very meager wages to their workers and therefore 
operate their services at a very low cost. Further, they do not offer 
medical treatment, Leave Travel Concession, Leave encashment, pension, 
etc. to the employees, which tend to furth er reduce their operational cost. 
Moreover, most of the couriers are providing services in Metros, State 
Capitals and Tier II & III cities only, while the Department of Posts are 

 
14 
 
obligated to provide services throughout the country, including in the 
most difficult and remote areas.  
 
The Committee are concerned to note the prevailing malpractices and 
exploitation of personnel in the local courier industry in the absence of 
any regulatory or monitoring mechanism and any kind of legal 
responsibility. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government 
must consider establishing a postal regulator on the lines of the Telecom 
Regulator, Insurance Regulator, Financial Regulator, etc. to govern the 
Postal Services to ensure fair play, healthy competition and accountability 
of operators, both in private and Government sectors providing courier 
service and similar services. The Committee further desire that the 
practices followed in other countries in this regard may also be studied in 
implementing this suggesti on. The Committee may be apprised of th e 
action taken in this regard.“  
 
16. The Department of Posts in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 
“Postal Regulators are in existence in many countries like South Africa, 
China, Malaysia, Latin American  countries etc. Department of Posts has 
initiated the IT Modernization Project which is presently under 
implementation and is expected to impact various processes and also lead 
to addition/deletion and revision of several existing products and services, 
which may merit amendment of extant Rules, Regulations and Acts etc. 
Along with it, the Department shall firm up its proposal for amending the 
Indian Post Office Act 1898, covering both the pos tal as well as courier 
sectors.” 
 
17. Keeping in view the stiff competition which the Department of Posts are facing  
from the unregulated private courier services operating without any guidelines or 
quality of service benchmarks, the Committee  had desired that the Government must 
consider establishing a postal regulat or on the lines of Telecom Regulator, Insurance 
Regulator, Financial Regulator etc.  to govern the postal services. This would ensure 
fair play , healthy competition and accountability in courier services. The Committee 
had also suggested that  before impleme nting the above suggestion,  the Department 
should study the best practices followed in other countries with regard to existence of 

 
15 
 
a regulator.   On this important issue,  the Department , in their action taken notes,  
have stated that they are implementing IT modernization project which is expected to 
impact processes and amendment of extant rules, regulat ions, etc. The Department 
have further submitted that they would firm up the proposal for amendment of India 
Post Office Act , 1898 covering both postal and courier sec tors. However, the action 
taken note is completely silent on the issue of a regulator for the postal service.  From 
the action taken note, it appears that the amendment of Indian Post Office Act , 1898 
for which action is yet to be initiated  by the Department, would take care of the issue 
of regulator for postal services. However, the Committee are of the view that IT 
modernization is an ongoing activity and  amendment and subsequent change s in 
processes and extant rules will take some time. In order to regulate the private courier 
services which goes unregulated as on date there is an urgent need for putting in place 
a regulator/monitoring mechanism for postal services, especially to regulate the 
private courier services and private parcel services . As submitted by t he Department 
themselves, postal regulators are already in existence in many countries . The issue 
merits urgent attention of the Department, particularly in the light of the potential 
courier services and parcel service s have for revenue  generation.  Therefore, the 
Committee, while expressing their displeasure that the issue has not been taken up  
with due seriousness, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the 
Department to implement the above suggestion of the Committee expedi tiously. The 
Department should firm up their proposal and apprise the Committee of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 The Committee note that with more than one and a half lakh Post Offices and 
4,59,948 employees spread across the length and breadth of the country, India has the 
largest Postal Network in the world. To maintain and support this massive network, it is 
but natural that the Department have to incur huge expenditure. For the year 2012 -13, 
the net expenditure of the Department was Rs.15,481.15 crore which rose to 
Rs.16,796.71 crore in the year 2013 -14. During the same period, the corresponding 
revenue of the Department went up from Rs. 9366.50 crore to Rs.10730.42 crore. In this 
context, the Committee note that the Department are striving to increase internal 
generation of revenues to contain the deficit. Over the years, the Department have 
introduced a number of  business products and services like Retail Post, ePost, 
ePayment, ePost Office, Speed Post, Express Parcel Post, Logistics Post, Business Post, 
etc. to advance their business interests and to generate more revenue. Further, with the 
entry of private couri ers, the Department no longer remain the sole service delivery 
organization and necessarily have to operate in a highly competitive environment.  In 
order to provide a greater impetus to their business activity, the Department set up a 
Business Development Directorate in the year 1996 with a view to designing, developing 
and monitoring Value Added Services to cater to the market needs and formulate 
business development and marketing strategies to generate further revenue. This 
Directorate was reorganized in to the Business Development and Marketing Directorate 
(BD&M) in the year 2004 -05, to provide a sharper focus on marketing.  In 2007, the 
Business Development and Marketing Directorate was given the added responsibility of 
marketing and publicity of all the  services and products of India Post, including Financial 
Services, Money Remittances, Mail Business Development and Value Added Services. 
The Committee note that presently, Business Development (BD) revenue constitutes 
about 60% of the postal revenue of t he Department.  The revenue from Value Added 
Services of the Directorate has grown from Rs. 74 crore in 1996 -97 to Rs. 2724 crore in 
2013-14. The average revenue growth has been about 13 per cent per annum during the 
period 2009 -2014. The major growth cont ributors for the BD revenue have been 
products like Speed Post, Business Post and Express Parcel and Business Parcel which 
have shown an average growth of 84%, 137% and 127%, respectively.  However, despite 
the growth in revenue from BD products, issues su ch as increasing competition from 
private players, identification of new business opportunities and promotion and 
publicity of new Value Added Services continue to remain some of the major challenges 
before the Department. Keeping in view the huge deficit of the Department which stood 

 
17 
 
at a staggering figure of Rs.5473.10 crore in 2013 -14, the Committee recognize that the 
BD&M has to play a vital role to supplement the efforts of the Department of Posts to 
bridge the revenue deficit. In the succeeding paragr aphs, the Committee seek to 
evaluate the achievements made by BD&M and the efficacy of the measures 
undertaken by the Directorate over the years to fulfill its mandate.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Business Development and Marketing Directorate offers a number of 
products/services such as Speed Post, Express Parcel, Business Parcel, Business Post, 
Logistics Post etc for generation of additional revenue to the Department. Working on 
exploring new business areas by way of customizing its existing services/introduction of 
new services and technology integration is also being done in a systematic manner to 
reduce the cost of operation and thereby decrease the revenue deficit. 
 Marketing activities are bei ng carried out to bring awareness among the 
members of the public about the products and services like Speed Post, Business Post, 
Express/ Business Parcels and other products and services. India Post recognizes that 
one of the means of increasing revenue a nd market share  is by making the customers 
aware of the services and products offered under the premium products/services.   
  A number of steps have been taken for marketing and promotion of Speed Post 
service highlighting the features such as track & tra ce facility, volume based discount, 
free pick -up, credit facility etc. Advertisements on Speed Post service are given in the 
print, electronic and social media to spread awareness about the Speed Post service and 
its features. In addition to this the track  & trace facility has also been given on the home 
page of the India Post website (http://www.indiapost.gov.in) and all information about 
the service is also available on the website. The receipt given for Speed Pos t articles also 
contains the tracking number & displays the track & trace functionality.  
 Business Development & Marketing Directorate has formulated a Plan Scheme 
“Marketing Function of the Department”  with the objective of enhancing the visibility 
and brand value of existing as well as new products and services of the Department.  
The scheme is to support the vision of the Department that India Post’s products and 
services should be the customer’s first choice.  
 Further, product features and offerings are regularly reviewed so as to offer a 
better quality of service in an efficient manner preferably at a lower cost to curtail the 
deficit and increase the revenue.  Following new business opportunities ha ve also been 
initiated to generate revenue for the Department:-  
a) Department is offering its services to  major e -commerce companies for 
delivering their articles such as M/s Amazon.com, Flipkart,Snapdeal.com, Naptol 
etc.  

 
18 
 
b) Cash on Delivery (CoD) facility as  a value addition has been made available on 
Speed Post, Express & Business Parcel which allows electronic transmission of 
remittance data for payment. 
c) The Department has a focused approach on Corporate entities like Banks, 
Corporations, Financial Institut ions, Universities in order to increase the revenue 
and volumes of Speed Post, Business Post and other products and services.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
Rationalization of existing products/services and focus on emerging areas  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts have been able to offer a 
number of products and services to the clients as a result of the initiatives taken by the 
Directorate. In this regard, the Committee note that while some of the premium 
products like Speed Post, Business Post and Express Parcel Post have performed 
exceptionally well in terms of revenue generation, other premium products like Media 
Post, Greeting Post and ePost are facing a decline in revenue generation.  A  scrutiny of 
the data furnished by the Department reveals that during the year 2012 -13,  Media 
Post, Greeting Post, Direct Post and ePost have contributed a meager revenue to the 
Department, i.e. Rs. 4.24 crore, Rs. 0.19 crore, Rs. 2.62 crore and Rs. 2.67 crore, 
respectively. As such, the Committee feel that the Department should undertake a 
comprehensive review of these products and services to decide on the 
continuation/discontinuation or integration of these services so as to increase their 
revenue earning potential. The outcome of such a review would suggest whether 
investment made on these low performing products/services can be released and 
utilized elsewhere in the emerging a reas/products/services such as Express Parcel, 
Business Parcel, Speed Post - Cash on Delivery (SP -CoD) for eCommerce companies, 
ePayment, Bill collection on behalf of third parties, etc. which, in the opinion of the 
Committee, have tremendous potential for  growth and revenue generation for the 
Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts made in this regard 
and the outcome thereof.  
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Posts reviews its services and products from time to time keeping 
in view the changing market scenario, changing customer needs, industry benchmarks 
etc and takes steps/action to modify the service features accordingly so as to improve 
the postal services and boost revenue growth.  

 
19 
 
ePOST is an unregistered hybrid mail service which provides electronic 
transmission of the messages which may include text messages, scanned images, 
pictures etc and their delivery in hard copies at the destination through the 
postman/delivery staff. Presently, ePost booking facility is available in more than 13000 
post offices and physically delivered through a network of more than 1.54 lakh post 
offices across India. ePost service is provided for both retail as wel l as corporate 
customers. 
 ePost Corporate service enables corporate customers including government 
departments, PSUs (Public Sector Undertakings), SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises), 
etc to draft, design and send messages as per their business requiremen ts from their 
office premises by using the internet. The message is electronically transmitted as a soft 
copy and at the destination it is delivered to the addressee, in the form of a hard copy.  
The Department has recently introduced a n online recharge fac ility of e -Post 
prepaid account w.e.f. 11.08.2015 enabling the pre -paid users to activate/recharge their 
e-Post prepaid account online by using credit/debit card. With this facility the users are 
not required to visit the post office for activation/recharg ing of their e -Post pre -paid 
account. Positive revenue growth of ePost in last 3 years is as follows: 
 
 
 
Greeting Post stands discontinued at the central level. However, the Circles have been 
empowered to deal with the issue on a case to case basis. Media Post and Direct Post do 
not contribute substantial revenue. However, as they utilize the services of the existing 
network of the Department, the cost incurred on these products is not substantial. 
Services like ePost have a potential for growth and the Department continues with 
these services to cater to specific segments of customers. 
(Ministry of Communicat ions & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Budgetary Support & Fund Utilization  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee note that during the 11 th Five Year Plan, against the proposed 
outlay of Rs. 297.78 crore for the Directorate, the actual allocation was only Rs. 68.97 
Name of Product Revenue (Rs.in crores) 
2012- 13 2013- 14 2014-15 
e-Post      2.67       3.47 4.13 

 
20 
 
crore. The actual utilization by the Directorate in the Plan period was Rs. 65.56 crore 
which comes to a commendable achievement of 95 per cent of budget allocation. 
During the 12 th Five Year Plan, out of the proposed outlay of Rs. 156.25 crore, a meagre 
amount of Rs. 0.22 crore  was allotted for the financial year 2012 -13 which was fully 
utilized. For the year 2013 -14, Rs.8.11 cror e has been utilized against an allocation of 
Rs.10 crore, while Rs.17.5 crore was allocated for the year 2014 -15.  Considering that 
major share of revenue of the Department accrue on account of the initiatives taken by 
the Directorate, the Committee are of  the opinion that there is an imperative to 
strengthen the Directorate as its enhanced performance would ultimately help the 
Department in bridging the gap between revenue and expenditure, which would enable 
them to contain the deficit.  The Committee, the refore, recommend to the Department 
to impress upon the Ministry of Finance   to ensure allocation of requisite funds for the 
Directorate in the remaining years of the 12 th Plan period so that its functioning is not 
hampered on account of paucity of funds.   
Reply of the Government 
 An amount of  Rs.468.61 Crores has been provided in 2015 -16 against 
Department of Posts’ requirement/requisition of  Rs.2631.30 Crores. So far as the 
Scheme “Premium Services” (related to Business Development and Marketing Divisio n 
of the Department) is concerned, Rs.11.55 Crores has been allotted against the 
requisition of  Rs.44 Crores. The recommendation of the Committee “to impress upon 
Ministry of Finance for sufficient funds” would be put forth to the Ministry of Finance 
during 2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts  F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
Review of Revenue Performance of Services  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 A review of the revenue performance of individual Products/Services marketed 
by the Directorate indicates that out of eighteen services, only three services, viz. 
Competition Postcard, Letter and Insurance generated revenue in excess of the cost 
incurred b y the Department. To reverse this trend, wherein most of the services are 
incurring huge losses, the Committee have been given to understand that a proposal for 
revision of rates of the Services was under consideration of the Department. The 
Department are increasing their activities and transactions in Post Offices to reduce the 
cost per transaction for various Services.  The Committee do recognize that progressive 
IT induction will also result in reduction of operational cost of postal transactions. It is , 

 
21 
 
however, disquieting to find that the Department is not maintaining information on 
comparative cost and revenue for various Value Added Services (VAS) and products 
marketed by the Directorate.  Taking into consideration the explanation by the 
Department that development of any new Services or Value Additions on existing 
Services takes into account the likely cost, potential revenue and the market conditions, 
the Committee are of the considered view that maintenance of data regarding the cost 
of various Value Added Services offered by the Department is an essential pre -requisite 
to ascertain their financial viability before undertaking any revision of rates for those 
Services. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Directorate should ensure 
maintenance of requisite data in respect of all the Value Added Products and Services 
offered by it and utilize the same in planning Product/Service tariff structure while 
carrying out periodic revision of rates thereof.  The Committee will like to be apprised of 
the cost -benefit analysis of the loss making Products/Services and measures taken t o 
minimize the operation cost. 
Reply of the Government 
 Specific cost benefit analysis of products and services is not being made as the 
current costing methodology is based on previous years’ total expenditure that is 
apportioned to all products/services. 
 
 The Department is now implementing Activity Based costing under the IT 
Modernisation Project where product/service wise costing would be available and cost 
benefit analysis can be carried out more accurately. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Speed Post – Need for Improvement in Market share  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee recognize that Speed Post has emerged as the most successful 
Product/Service introduced by the Directorate, contributing more than half of the 
revenue from BD products. As per the data furnished by the Department, Speed Post 
has shown signifi cant growth, both in terms of revenue and traffic over the years. The 
Speed Post revenue has increased from Rs. 515.27 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs. 1261.47 crore 
in 2012-13 and the Speed Post traffic has increased from 21.14 crore articles in 2008 -09 

 
22 
 
to 44.94 c rore articles in 2012 -13.  In terms of percentage, the revenue of Speed Post 
has grown at an average growth rate of 23 per cent per annum during the period     
2008-09 to 2012 -13. Despite the appreciable performance of Speed Post in being 
amongst the foremost revenue generating Services for the Department, the Committee 
feel that issues like low market share and improvement in quality of service continue to 
be a cause of concern for the Department.  The market share of Speed Post ranged 
between 17.4 per cen t and 20.2 per cent only during the year 2012 -13. Considering the 
fact that India Post has presence in approx. 1,55,000 locations throughout India, the 
Committee strongly believe that Speed Post has tremendous scope for further 
improvement in its overall m arket share. The Committee, therefore, will like the 
Department to strenuously strive to further increase the market share of their most 
successful premium product by gainfully utilizing the available resources.   The 
Committee also feel that after implemen tation of its IT Modernization Project, the 
Department will be in a better position to include the large number of rural Post Offices 
in their Speed Post Network which presently are outside the network. The Committee 
will like to be informed about further achievements made by Speed Post in terms of 
market share and augmentation of revenue.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Speed Post is the flagship product of the Department of Posts and a major stream 
of revenue. Several initiatives are being taken not only to re tain existing customers but 
also to add new customers in order to increase Speed Post revenue and market share. 
Some of them are -  
(i) Delivery of High Court notices/summons through Speed Post with physical as well 
as electronic Proof of Delivery (PoD) fa cility was introduced in the Delhi High Court with 
effect from 03.02.2014. The service was further extended to the Odisha High Court, 
Punjab and Haryana High Court  and the subordinate courts in Punjab and Haryana.  
Department is working to extend the deliv ery of notice/summons through Speed Post 
with other High Courts. 
(ii) Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) Ghaziabad is a Government of India PSU under 
the Ministry of Defence involved in the manufacture and supply of various electronic 
products for the Indian Air Force. A proposal of a tie up for sending their consignments 
though Speed Post from more than 80 locations across the country under the Single 
Point Account Management scheme is under process. 
(iii)  The Speed Post contract with the Indian Air Force existing since 1999 is currently 
under negotiation and renewal. 
 As per  a report published on a study by the Comptroller & Auditor General of 
India (C&AG), Speed Post is faster and more reliable than private couriers. C&AG in its 

 
23 
 
study found that Speed Post delivers 99% articles within 1 -9 days as compared to 
private couriers’ delivery of 92% which takes upto 10 days.    
 Due to continued efforts, growth in Speed Post revenue for two years is as 
follows: 
Year Revenue (` in Crores) Percentage Increase in revenue 
over the previous year 
2013-14 1372.21 8.78% 
2014-15 1495.21 8.96% 
2015-16* 764.64 16.25% 
[*Growth of Speed Post revenue as on September, 2015 compared with 
performance as on September, 2014 (` 657.74)].   
  
Speed Post service has also emerged as a key product in terms of the eCommerce 
market. To cater to the huge  emerging market Speed Post Cash on Delivery (SPCoD) 
service has been launched, which has generated a positive response and increased 
revenue for the Department. 
   
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Need for Improving Quality of Service of Speed Post 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee find that even though Speed Post is the most significant revenue 
generating Service of the Department, the quality of service of Speed Post has not been 
up to the desired level. Non -delivery of articles and inordinate delays in delivery of 
articles booked through Speed Post are some of the routine complaints of clients when 
it comes to judging the quality of service of Speed Post. Though the Department have 
maintained that they have drawn up Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for every Speed 
Post article to ensure time -bound delivery and KPI’s have been fixed for various cities, 
still it is a matter of serious concern that there are complaints regarding delays in 
delivery. The Committee recall that the Department submitted before the Committee 
that in the quarter ending March, 2013, they had received as many as 25,876 complaints 
in respect of delay of delivery of articles and 22,672 complaints regarding non -receipt of 

 
24 
 
acknowledgement. Keeping in view the fact that Speed Post is the most successfu l 
premium Product/Service offered by the Department, the Committee feel that it is 
imperative to monitor its service quality and ensure that minimum quality benchmarks 
are maintained in regard to timely delivery of Speed Post articles. While the Department  
are hopeful that the roll -out of their two important schemes, i.e. the Mail Network 
Optimization Project (MNOP) and IT adoption and modernization scheme will 
significantly improve the quality of service of Speed Post, the Committee feel that 
quality impro vement is a continuous process and should be accorded the highest 
priority, especially since the Department is facing stiff competition from Private Courier 
Services. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the monitoring mechanism for 
various stages of S peed Post delivery should be further strengthened by raising the 
standards of all performance parameters and ‘Track and Trace’ facility should be 
extended to cover all articles booked through Speed Post. The Committee further 
recommend that the proposed in itiative of the Department regarding confirmation of 
the delivery of Speed Post through SMS is implemented within the stipulated time 
frame. The Committee are of the view that this step will definitely play a key role in the 
overall improvement in the quality of service of the Speed Post. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Track &  Trace facility has been extended for all Speed Post articles, including 
eCommerce articles. To monitor and improve the quality of service of Speed Post 
articles, specially eCommerce articles, the Department has developed certain Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI) which are as follows:  
1. Destination wise data on time taken from booking to delivery of bulk Speed Post 
articles.  
2. Hub-wise delivery status of eCommerce consignments from major customers.   
 
Efforts are on to provide the facility of confirmation of delivery of Speed Post articles 
through Short Messaging Service (SMS). 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65-50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
25 
 
Speed Post - Need for Creating Awareness about Value Added Services  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 The Committee note that Speed Post Service has got various attractive features 
such as availability of Insurance of articles, 24 -hour booking in select offices, Speed Post 
International Service, Internet based Track and Trace system and Value Added feature s 
such as free pick -up facility for bulk customers, Book Now Pay Later (BNPL) facility for 
corporate customers, volume based discounts and Premium Delivery Centers. The 
Committee, however, feel that due to lack of awareness about these premium features 
amongst the clients, these services are not being utilized to their full potential. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department must take appropriate steps to 
promote awareness about the client -friendly features of Speed Post by giving due 
publicity to important features such as ‘Track and Trace’ facility, etc. amongst the 
targeted customers. As mentioned in the previous paragraph, the Committee desire 
that wide publicity to the planned facility of SMS confirmation of Speed Post must be 
ensured whi ch can play a decisive role in making the Speed Post the best choice 
amongst the users.  
Reply of the Government 
 Premium Products especially services such as Speed Post, Express/Business 
Parcel etc. face an intense competition in the market.  India Post r ecognises that one of 
the means of increasing revenue and market share is by making the public aware of the 
services offered under the Premium Products. One of the ways to create awareness and 
consequent market share is by way of advertisements in the prin t, audio visual and 
social media platforms.  
 
 A number of steps have been taken for marketing and promotion of Speed Post 
services highlighting features such as Track & Trace facility, volume based discount, free 
pick-up, credit facility etc. Advertisements on Speed Post are given in the print and 
electronic media to spread awareness about its features and service. Receipts given for 
Speed Post articles also contains the tracking number & displays the track & trace 
functionality. Further, promo tion and publicity of products/services of the Department 
are also done through Social Media platform i.e. Face book/ Twitter of the Department 
of Posts.  
 
 
 
 

 
26 
 
            Steps outlined above have resulted in increase in Speed Post revenue. The 
successive revenue figures of Speed Post for the last two years are illustrated below.   
               
Year Revenue (Rs.in Crores) Percentage Increase in revenue 
over the previous year 
2013-14 1372.21 8.78% 
2014-15 1495.21 8.96% 
2015-16* 764.64 16.25% 
[*Growth of Speed Post revenue as on September, 2015 compared with 
performance as on September, 2014 (` 657.74)].   
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
IT Adoption and Modernization  
(Recommendation Sl. No 8) 
 The Committee note that the Department have undertaken an end -to-end IT 
Modernization Project-India Post 2012 to equip the organization with requisite modern 
tools and technologies, aimed at transforming the Department into a “Technology 
Enabled, Self -Reliant Market Leader”. A crucial component of this Project is the Rural 
ICT solution aimed at meeting the objective of financial inclusion of the marginalized 
poor in remote rural areas and help rebuilding the rural postal infrastructure by creating 
institutional last mile connectivity for service delivery of post, IT based services, 
including Banking and Insurance, and Government Social Security Schemes like 
MGNREGS, etc. Moreover, this infrastructure will form the platform for electronic 
delivery of Postal, Financial, Insurance and Government Services to more than 80 crore 
rural population through 1,39,000 Post Offices. To achieve this, the Committee 
understand that the Department intend to provide handheld devices with solar power 
chargeable batteries to 1.35 lakh rural Postmasters. The data regarding transactions and 
delivery of articles will be uploaded straight from the device to the central server 
through data link. Looking at various features of the IT adoption and modernization 
Project, the Committee vi sualize that the Project will tremendously boost the 
implementation of related Projects and roll-out of services such as end-to-end Track and 
Trace facility for Speed Post, Express Parcel for e -Commerce, ATM, eBanking and net 
banking for Post Office Saving s Bank (POSB) accounts, etc. which are very crucial for the 
Department in improving their overall functioning as well as revenue generation. 

 
27 
 
Considering that the implementation of the above schemes is expected to revolutionize 
and improve the performance a nd efficiency of the Department across Services and 
Schemes, the Committee recommend that the Department should take all necessary 
measures to ensure expeditious execution of IT related Projects which are at various 
stages of completion within the stipulated time frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The IT Modernization Project is under implementation through eight different 
silos. The Project Coordination Committee and various Project Implementation 
Committees set up at the Directorate level and Circle Monitor ing Committees at the 
Circle level and Regional Implementation Committees at the Regional level are 
monitoring the day to day progress of the Project to ensure that the implementation is 
completed within the given timelines.   
  Present status of the IT modernization projects is as illustrated below:- 
 
i. Data Centre is operational since April 2013 at Navi Mumbai and the Data 
Recovery Centre (DRC) has been powered on at Mysuru on 15th May 2015. 
 
ii. Under the Financial Services Integrator silo, 7313 Offices have  migrated to 
Core Banking Solution (CBS) and 18084 Offices to Core Insurance Solution 
(CIS). Automated Teller Machine (ATM) facility has been provided at 125 
locations. Circle Processing Centers (CPCs) have also been commissioned in 
all the 22 Circles in the country.  
 
iii. Under Net Work Integrator silo (NI), 27713 locations have been networked 
on a single Wide Area Network (WAN). 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
eCommerce  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 The Committee note that the Department have identified e -Commerce as an 
emerging business opportunity, especially since this industry is growing in India at a very 
fast pace. The Committee have been apprised that the growing online retail industry is 
throwing up new opportunities and the Directorate is striving to avail the same by 

 
28 
 
introducing the service ‘Speed Post -Cash on Delivery (SP -CoD)’ which is specifically 
targeted to address the needs of eCommerce companies as well as setting up of 
dedicated parcel hubs to handle the increasing parcels and eCommerce traffic. Further, 
in order to provide complete supply chain management, the Department are 
formulating a service namely, ‘Business Reply Speed Post Articles’, besides horizontal 
integration in supp ly chain through development of warehousing capacity. For this 
purpose, the Committee note that under the Twelfth Five year Plan Scheme on 
marketing, it is proposed to utilize the services of a professional consultant in which in -
depth studies of e -Commerce market and share of India Post are likely to be part of the 
‘Terms of Reference’ of the consultant. The Committee further note that the 
Department are facing certain operational and technological challenges in offering 
quality services at economical rate s to their customers. The Committee are aware that 
the Department is depending on external agencies such as Railways/ Airlines/ State 
transport buses, etc. for transportation of mail/ parcels, etc. This dependency, naturally, 
creates challenges in operatio ns and maintenance of service delivery standards. 
Moreover, the Department are presently dependent on in -house developed software 
modules which are working in silos and there is no integration amongst them. In order 
to overcome these challenges, the Depart ment are rolling out the major IT Project 
wherein all the software modules will be integrated and they are planning to impart 
training to all staff in change management.  
 The Committee trust that all these steps will enable the Department to be a 
priority choice amongst the e -Commerce companies for delivery of goods ordered 
online. Noting that eCommerce offers tremendous scope for business, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should expeditiously implement their Speed Post Cash 
on Delivery Service,  set up dedicated parcel hubs and enter into proposed tie -ups with 
major e -Retailers/e-Vendors on priority basis in order to take an early lead over their 
competitors for garnering significant market share in t he emerging e -Commerce 
segment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 With the opportunities arising out of eCommerce boom, Department of Posts 
had introduced Cash -on-Delivery (CoD) facility as a value addition on Business Parcel, 
Express Parcel and Speed Post services considering the fact that the CoD option in India 
is very popular and the eRetailers are looking for a fast and reliable remittance solution 
towards the cost of the delivered goods.  
Since the introduction of CoD facility, Department of Posts has collected and remitted 
more than ` 800 crores as CoD amount. Depa rtment has a focused approach to provide 
better delivery solutions to eRetail Companies to get more volumes. As a result, 
Department of Posts has shown a growth of 37% in Express Parcel/ Business Parcel 

 
29 
 
business during 2014 -15 compared to 2013 -14. Revenue growth in respect of Express 
Parcel / Business Parcel in the first half year of the present fiscal is 105%.  
To ensure efficient handling of the eCommerce business, Department of Posts 
has established 48 Parcel Processing Centres in the year 2013 -14 and 20 14-15. This 
includes 2 mechanised parcel processing centres at Mumbai and Delhi. The capacity of 
these Centres is being augmented and it is proposed to establish 12 Integrated 
eCommerce / Parcel Processing Centres during the remaining period of the 12 th Five 
Year Plan. Further, customization of products and services to meet the varied nature of 
requirements of eCommerce companies is a continuous process so as to become a 
market leader in this segment.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
Government Business – MGNREGS  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts have been wholeheartedly 
engaged in fulfilling the social commitments of the Government such as Financial  
Inclusion and disbursement of Social Security Schemes through Post Offices across the 
country, including disbursement of wages under MGNREGS, which was introduced in 
the year 2006. The Committee note that the Department of Posts had handled 4.90 
crore MGN REGS accounts during 2010 -11, 5.38 crore during 2011 -12 and 5.74 crore 
during 2012 -13. With more than 1,39,000 Post Offices in Rural Areas, the Committee 
find that India Post provides critical support in the implementation of MGNREGS. In this 
regard, the C ommittee note that the Department are carrying out the task on behalf of 
the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) and are entitled for a remuneration for 
maintenance of MGNREGS accounts and other administrative expenses. The 
Committee, however, find that t he Department have not received any payment from 
the MoRD for the last six years.  In this regard, the Committee, in their 33 rd Report (15th 
LS) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13), had viewed that disbursement of wages to 
labourers under MGNREGS is an importa nt activity and hence the rate of remuneration 
account with the MoRD should be settled at an early date. Subsequently, in their Action 
taken Report on the subject, the Committee had found that the Department of Posts 
had shared the details of administrativ e expenses incurred year -wise with the MoRD.  
However, the Committee are perturbed to note that dues were not released by MoRD. 
While recognizing that the Department are playing a major role in the implementation 
of MGNREGS, the Committee reiterate their r ecommendation for an early settlement of 

 
30 
 
the matter between the Department of Posts and the MoRD by taking up the issue at 
the highest level in the Government so that the entire dues, as admissible, are paid to 
the Department of Posts without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The matter regarding recovery of outstanding dues/ claims from Ministry of Rural 
Development towards maintenance of MGNREGS accounts and other expenses was 
pursued vigorously by the Department of Posts. Details of settlement of outstanding 
dues / claims du ring the previous years by the Ministry of Rural Development are 
furnished below:  
Financial 
Year 
Number of active 
MGNREGA 
accounts 
Service charges @ ` 
80 per account (Rs . 
in crores) 
Amount released  
2009-10 1,93,61,016 154.89 (i) Rs. 181.00 Crore on 
21.03.2013. 
(ii) Rs.  3.99 Crore on 
29.03.2013. 
(III) Rs.  200.00 Crore 
on 08.11.2013 
(IV) Rs.  162.72 Crore 
on 22.04.2014. 
(v) Rs.  237.28 Crore 
on 16.01.2015. 
2010-11 2,40,48,884 192.39 
2011-12 2,73,98,877 219.19 
2012-13 3,22,67,051 258.14 
  Total Rs. 824.61 Rs.  784.99 Crore 
  Balance to be paid 
to DoP 
 Rs.  39.62 Crore   
  
 The Ministry of Rural Development has settled the  outstanding dues/ claims 
worth Rs.784.99 crores. The balance of Rs.39.62 Crores would be released during the 
current financial year as assured by the concerned Ministry.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts  F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
 

 
31 
 
Data on Government Business transacted through Post Offices 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 The Committee note with concern that the Department of Posts do not maintain 
any separate information on Government Business and hence could not provide 
separate figures in respect of traffic and revenue of different products and services for 
private vis-a-vis Government Business. The Committee are of the view that maintenance 
of such information in segregated form will help the Department in not only assessing 
their business potential more realistically but also in fo rmulating their own business 
strategies more effectively in improving their overall performance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should evolve a mechanism to maintain 
separate data pertaining to the Government Business and private b usiness which will 
also enable the Department in assessing the reach and performance of Government 
schemes transacted through the Postal network. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As observed by the Committee, currently the Department of Posts does not 
maintain segregated data pertaining to Government and private business in respect of 
products and service under the Universal Service Obligations (USO) and premium 
products. The Department does not offer differential rate structure and ensures that the 
products and s ervices are available at the same rates to the Government and private 
customers.  
 However, there are certain services and products which are exclusively provided 
to Government agencies such as Passenger Railway Reservation Scheme, Post Office 
Savings Scheme, MGNREGA, Kisan Vikas Patras and other agency products for which the 
data is maintained.  The Department is implementing the IT Modernization Project 
which would enable Activity Based costing.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
32 
 
Human Resource Management 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 The Committee find that as on 06.12.2014, out of 35 sanctioned posts in the 
BD&M, 6 posts were lying vacant, leading to various operational issues. The Committee 
are unhappy to note that though the Directorate is handling the important task of 
business expansion and launch of new Schemes/Products and is instrumental in 
generating about 60 per c ent of the postal operational revenue of the Department, 
there is at present no proposal to fill up the existing vacancies, leave aside any 
augmentation of its staff strength. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the 
vacant posts in the Directorate  must be filled up at the earliest to facilitate unhindered 
functioning of the Directorate. 
Reply of the Government 
         The vacant posts in the BD & M Directorate have since been filled up.  
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No.  65-50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 The Committee also note that the Officers/staff of the Directorate do not have 
requisite qualifications for Marketing and Business Development. As regards specialized 
training, the Department  have stated that Officers with more experience and 
orientation in Marketing, Business Development and operations are being deputed in 
the Directorate to cater to its functional needs. The Committee feel that in the 
contemporary business environment marked  by stiff competition from the private 
sector, recruiting the right people for the right position is absolutely necessary and it is 
all the more essential to train these officers with requisite skill set, particularly when the 
Directorate is responsible fo r conceptualization and planning of business development 
activities for execution through various Postal Circles of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to the Department to have a planned scheme of job 
specific training with emphasis on bus iness promotion for the staf f of the Business 
Directorate. 
Reply of the Government 
 Specialized training programmes on marketing and business development are 
held regularly in all the training institutes of the Department of Posts. Officers of the 
Business Development & Marketing Directorate and those engaged in marketing, 
business development and postal operations in Circles are deputed for training courses 
held in India and abroad. During the year 2014 -15, 253 officers / officials were imparted 

 
33 
 
training in various institutes for improving their skills in marketing and business 
development.  
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts  F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
Lack of dedicated transport and non-mechanized last mile delivery 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 The Committee find that the lack of dedicated transport for  transmission of mail 
and parcel and non -mechanized last mile delivery are some of the major constraints 
faced by the Directorate.  It is disquieting to note that India Post, which operates the 
largest postal network in the world, is constrained for want o f dedicated transport for 
transmission of mail and parcel. Non -mechanized last mile delivery is another area of 
concern that needs to be addressed on a priority basis. In this regard, the Committee 
feel that it is high time that the Department of Posts foc used on mobilizing requisite 
resources to ensure availability of dedicated transport for transmission of their articles. 
The Committee view that the reliance of the Department on non -mechanized last mile 
delivery acts as a serious hindrance in enabling fas ter delivery of articles and also the 
reliability of their services.  The Committee also record that the maintenance allowance 
of Rs. 60/- being given to the postmen for maintenance of bicycles is grossly inadequate, 
which may be considered for immediate revision. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to ensure safe and secure transmission of Speed Post articles/ parcels, 
particularly eCommerce articles a Plan scheme “Development of Road Transport 
Network” has already been approved for the Department. Under t he Plan scheme 24 
routes have been identified which will cover secure transmission of Speed Post articles 
including eCommerce articles between 44 cities in the country. The Department has also 
directed the Circles to identify alternate/ additional routes w hich may be operationally 
advantageous for transmission of mails.  
 
 Mechanized delivery of parcels has also been introduced by the Department in 
certain cities which is being further extended to other cities.  
 
 Cycle Maintenance Allowance has been revise d @ Rs.90/- per month w.e.f. 
15.09.2015. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 

 
34 
 
Promotion and Publicity 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee note that Premium Products/Services offered by the Department 
of Posts such as Speed Post, Express Parcel Post and Business Post which face 
competition in the market are advertised from time -to-time. The Committee feel that 
the other products  such as Retail Post, Media Post, ePost, ePayment, Bill Mail Service, 
etc. also need visibility in order to gain acceptance amongst the target customers. 
Recognizing the need for creating awareness about various Products and Services on 
offer, the Departme nt have formulated a planned scheme, viz. ‘Marketing Function of 
the Department’ with five sub -components for promotion, publicity and marketing 
activities for different Products/Services. While appreciating the initiative of the 
Department to give due recognition to the Marketing Function in improving the revenue 
and market share in the contemporary business environment, the Committee 
recommend to the Department to implement the scheme in an effective manner to 
promote their Products and Services more aggressively so that the Department will have 
an edge in competing with private players who are offering similar products. The 
Department should also strengthen the existing Feedback Mechanism/Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism to get better feedback/input about th e performance of their 
Products/Services in the market which, in turn, will enable them to market their 
Products/Services in a more client-friendly manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Business Development & Marketing Directorate has formulated a Plan Scheme  
“Marketing Function of the Department” with the objective of enhancing the visibility 
and brand value of existing as well as new products of the Department.   The scheme is 
to support the vision that India Post’s products and services will be the customer’s first 
choice. 
 A well laid down operational and accounting procedure is in place to ensure 
smooth rendering of services offered by it. However, due to the vast territory covered 
by its operations, the number of post offices, mail offices and the  magnitude of the 
workforce operational difficulties at times arise. Reaction of the customers to such 
failures in the form of complaints is an opportunity to identify shortcomings in services 
and to take effective and corrective measures and prevent simil ar instances from re -
occurring. With this end in view, the Department encourages its customers to come 
forward with their feedback and complaints and takes necessary steps to facilitate the 
receipt of grievances from them. Complaint/Suggestion Books are av ailable in all the 
post offices to get the suggestions/feedback from the customers. 

 
35 
 
 The website of India Post (www.indiapost.gov.in) also provides information on 
various premium products and services in addition to provision of the track and trace 
facility. 
 In order to eliminate the causes of grievances of the customers, one of the 
important obligations of public service is the prompt redressal of public grievances and 
identification of grievance pron e areas. In the present scenario of competitive services, 
excellence in customer service is the most important tool for sustained business growth. 
Customer complaints are part of the business life of any organization. A prompt and 
efficient service would a ttract new customers and also retain existing customers. It is 
the aim of the Department to minimize instances of customer complaints and 
grievances through proper service delivery and review mechanism and to ensure 
prompt redressal of customer complaints and grievances. 
  The Department has a well structured Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) 
for the resolution and settlement of public grievances. The Department is strengthening 
its mechanism by appropriate training of Grievance Officers in handling web b ased 
Customer Care software for better monitoring and processing. Regular monitoring and 
analysis of complaints is being done not only to gauge the progress in public grievance 
redressal but also to identify and rectify systemic deficiencies. Officers in t he field are 
being regularly sensitized towards early settlement of public grievances. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
    
 
 
 
  

 
36 
 
Chapter III 
 
Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
37 
 
Chapter IV 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
Competition from Private Courier Services 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee note that unregulated private courier services have mushroomed 
all across the country giving direct competition to the Department of Posts and are 
operating without any guidelines or quality of service benchmarks. The Department are 
facing se rious competition from private couriers/parcel service operators offering 
services at a very low cost. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the 
local courier industry offers very meager wages to their workers and therefore operate 
their services at a very low cost. Further, they do not offer medical treatment, Leave 
Travel Concession, Leave encashment, pension, etc. to the employees, which tend to 
further reduce their operational cost. Moreover, most of the couriers are providing 
services in Metros, State Capitals and Tier II & III cities only, while the Department of 
Posts are obligated to provide services throughout the country, including in the most 
difficult and remote areas.  
 
 The Committee are concerned to note the prevailing malpra ctices and 
exploitation of personnel in the local courier industry in the absence of any regulatory 
or monitoring mechanism and any kind of legal responsibility. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government must consider establishing a postal regul ator on 
the lines of the Telecom Regulator, Insurance Regulator, Financial Regulator, etc. to 
govern the Postal Services to ensure fair play, healthy competition and accountability of 
operators, both in private and Government sectors providing courier serv ice and similar 
services. The Committee further desire that the practices followed in other countries in 
this regard may also be studied in implementing this suggestion. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Postal Regulators are in existence in many countries like South Africa, China, 
Malaysia, Latin American countries etc. Department of Posts has initiated the IT 
Modernization Project which is presently under implementation and is expected to 
impact various processes and also lead to addition/deletion and revision of several 
existing products and services, which may merit amendment of extant Rules, 
Regulations and Acts etc. Along with it, the Department shall firm up its proposal for 

 
38 
 
amending the Indian Post Office Act 1898, covering both the pos tal as well as courier 
sectors. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
39 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM 
IN NATURE 
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 The Committee note that during the year 2012 -13, the Department sold 22 -34 
lakh railway tickets through 237 Post Offices earning a revenue of Rs. 3.33 crore. The 
Committee feel that there is considerable scope for improvement in revenue through 
services like Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and steps need to be taken to increase 
the number of PRS centers and create awareness among the public about availability of 
PRS at Post Offices. The Department have informed that after completion of the 
proposed cost revision of PRS Services at Post Offices, the matter of revision in service 
charges is l ikely to be taken up with the Ministry of Railways. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should focus on increasing the number of PRS Centers 
to cater to the customer needs in different Postal Circles and also adequately publicize 
the existing PRS C entres. The Committee further recommend that the Department 
should expeditiously finalize the internal cost revision for Services and take up the issue 
of revision of Service Charges of PRS Services with the Ministry of Railways. The 
Committee will like to be informed of the progress made in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Revenue from Passenger Reservation System (PRS) was Rs.4.24 Crores during the 
year 2014 -15. The facility is being offered through post offices to generate additional 
revenue for the Department and fulfill social service obligations making the services 
available to customers at an economical cost. Steps have be en taken to increase the 
number of transactions at India Post PRS centres by spreading awareness as well as 
revising the timings of these centres to ensure availability of services during peak hours. 
Action is also being taken to increase the number of PRS  centres which has reached 300. 
Department has also taken up matter with the Ministry of Railways for revision of 
charges.   
  PRS facility has enabled the Department of Posts to generate extra revenue from 
the existing infrastructure which in turn helped the Department to increase its revenue 
contribution without any direct extra expenditure. It has also led to increasing footfalls 

 
40 
 
in the post office and enhanced the role of the post office by ensuring that the customer 
sees it as value addition. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts F. No. 65 -50/2015-BD&MD 
dated 12.11.2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anurag Singh Thakur, 
New Delhi;                           Chairperson, 
08 August, 2016                                                                                          Standing Committee on 
17 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                                                      Information Technology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
41 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 8TH AUGUST, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 8 th August, 2016, from 1600 hours                     
to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
3. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
4. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Dr. K.C. Patel 
10. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
11. Shri D.K. Suresh 
12. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
13. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
14. Shri Suresh Gopi  
15. Shri Meghraj Jain 
16. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
17. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 

 
42 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following three Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…;  
II. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..xxxxx……; and  
III. Action Taken Report on the Eleventh Report on the subject ’Business 
Development and Marketing Strategy in the Department of Posts’. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the above Reports and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report.  

 
43 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR ELEVENTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1 ,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12,13, 14, 16 and 17 
 
 
 Total 15 
 Percentage 88.24 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 15  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.88 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 11  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.88 
 