1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Norms for setting up of telecom 
towers, its harmful effects and setting up of security standards in expansion of telecom facilities’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
13 


2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations Recommendations/ of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Norms for setting up of telecom 
towers, its harmful effects and setting up of security standards in expansion of telecom facilities’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 

3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
48 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee an d require reiteration 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
49 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
52 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
*I. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of the Committee held on 11th August, 2015 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations 
contained in their Fifty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
56 
 
*Not appended with the cyclostyled copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15) 
 
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik Under Secretary 
 
         *    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
 
(ii)

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, St anding Committee on Information Technology (2014 -15) having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present this Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty -
third Report (Fi fteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful 
effects and setting up of security standards in expansion of telecom facilities’  of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Fifty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
12th February, 2014.  The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in  the Fifty -third Report on                
24th October, 2014.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
11th August, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-third Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on  
Information Technology.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deal wit h the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty -third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Norms for setting up of telecom towers, its harmful effects and setting up of security 
standards in expansion of telecom facilities’ relating to the Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Fifty -third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
12th February, 2014. It contained 21 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of 
Telecommunications and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,12, 15, 16, 18, 19 and 20  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 Para Nos.:-  13 and 14  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect o f which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Para Nos.:-  10, 17 and  21  
 
4. In their Fifty -third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee  undertook a 
comprehensive examination of the subject ‘Norms for setting up of telecom towe rs, 
its harmful effects and setting up of security standards in expansion of telecom 
facilities’.  The examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed serious 
shortcomings/lapses on the part of the Department which inter-alia included lack of 
uniform, enforceable guidelines in setting up of towers and mandatory standards for 
structural safety of towers, restriction in setting up of towers in residential areas, 
schools, colleges and hospitals, non -existence of effective Grievance Redressal 

2 
 
Mechanism, need for India specific Research, supply of sub -standard mobile handsets 
by reputed global manufacturers, lack of standards for mobile handsets, lack of 
manpower and equipment in TERM Cells, relying on dubious method of ‘Self -
certification’ of BTS by TSP s, delay in setting up of security lab for testing of telecom 
equipment, etc.  A m ajority of the recommendations of the Committee have been 
accepted  by the Government and are at different stages of implementation.    
 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished b y the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) to each of the 
observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-third 
Report have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee 
trust that utmost importance will be given on implementing the 
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases where it is not 
possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final Action Taken 
Replies to the Observations/Recommen dations contained in Chapter -V of this Report 
should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
6. In their Original Report, the Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
A. Structural Safety for setting up of telecom towers  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 4) 
 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that many of the mobile towers have 
been erected in the country without ensuring safety of the buildings and 
even without taking any permission from the local bodies thereby posing a 
great risk to the buildings as also the residents living nearby. The 
Secretary, Department of Telecommunications, also admitted during 
evidence before the Committee that safety aspects of  telecom 
infrastructure like towers is an area of concern. The Committee are 

3 
 
perturbed to find that such an important issue has been given a very scant 
attention both by the Central as well as State Governments. While strongly 
deprecating this kind of appr oach, the Committee note that the Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) of the Department of Telecommunications has 
developed 12 standards concerning structural safety and design 
parameters of telecom towers using codes/specifications by Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee, however, are dismayed to find that 
these standards have not been made mandatory for Telecom Service 
Providers. The Committee are not at all convinced with the justification 
given by Secretary, DoT, during evidence before the Commi ttee, that since 
structural safety is the domain of State, the Department does not want to 
venture into the area. Instead of ensuring that standards developed by 
TEC are strictly adhered to, the revised guidelines issued by DoT regarding 
States to secure S tructural Stability Certificate from authorized structural 
Engineer of State/Local bodies/Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), 
Roorkee/IIT/NIT or any other agency authorized by local body. The 
Committee recommend that for the purpose of avoiding any  ambiguity in 
this regard, the Central Government may finalise a specific list of institutes 
of excellence and repute belonging to Central Government/State 
Governments and also autonomous organization/Institutes funded by the 
Central/State Governments. The  Committee also recommend that it 
should be made mandatory for all TSPs to scrupulously follow uniform 
norms concerning structural safety of telecom towers across the entire 
country and adequate mechanism must be put into place for ensuing strict 
compliance of the same. Further, all such towers which do not adhere to 
the norms should be removed immediately. The Committee also desire 
that to deter installation of towers not conforming to the safety norms, 
stringent penalty provisions must be imposed on the service providers.” 
 
Replies of the Government 
8. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Notes have stated 
as under:- 
 
“Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) has developed standards concerning 
structural safety and design parameters of teleco m towers using 
codes/specifications by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). The matter is 
under consideration for making TEC standards mandatory for 
implementation by TSPs. 
TEC is also developing Generic Requirements  (GR) for 20/30/40 Meter 
Guyed Masts exclus ively for deployment in hilly areas. TEC is processing 
the case for taking up with Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC), 
Chennai for vetting the structural safety before draft GR can be circulated 
to stakeholders for comments and consideration of Departmental Co -

4 
 
ordination Committee. It is expected that the GR will be ready by 
December 2014. 
Department of Telecom through its advisory to the State Governments has 
already suggested CBRI, IIT Roorkee, Other IITs and NITs, as also 
mentioned in the Recommendation of the Committee. Further, it has been 
mentioned in the same letter that Local bodies may also authorise 
agencies for this purpose. Since regulation of structure of         buildings/ 
installations lies in the domain of Local bodies, designation  of any 
additional institution/agency can be done only by them.” 
 
9. In their O riginal Report, the Committee had observed that safety aspects of 
telecom infrastructure like towers is an area of concern and even though  the Telecom 
Engineering Centre(TEC) of  the Department of Telecommunications has developed 12 
standards concerning structural safety and design parameters of  telecom towers, 
these standards  had not been made mandatory for Telecom Service Providers(TSPs). 
The Committee had, therefore,  recomme nded that it should be made mandatory for 
all TSPs  to scrupulously follow uniform norms concerning structural safety of telecom 
towers and steps be taken for immediate removal of towers which do not adhere to 
the norms and stringent penalty be imposed on those not conforming to safety norms. 
The Committee note from the Action Taken Note that the matter is still under 
consideration for making TEC standards mandatory for implementation by TSPs.  The 
Committee desire that the Department should  expedite  exam ination of  the issue for 
taking a final decision in the matter.  Further, on the issue of securing Structural 
Stability Certificate from authorized structural Engineer , the Committee  had 
recommended that the Central Government may finalise a specific lis t of Institutes of 
excellence and repute belonging to Central Government/State Governments and also 
autonomous organization s/Institutes funded by the Central/State Governments to 
ensure structural safety of towers. The Committee note that the Department ha ve  
issued an advisory  to State Governments to engage professional institutes to oversee  
the structural safety of towers.  The Committee feel that mushrooming of a large  
number of telecom towers without any prescribed norms and procedures concerning 
structural safety needs to be taken seriously, since this has serious implications for 
public safety in case of any disaster.  The Committee , therefore, exmphasize that the 

5 
 
Central Government  should continue  to impress upon the State Governments to take 
the help of professional institutes, as suggested by the Committee so that structural 
safety of telecom towers is adequately taken care of. The Department may keep the 
Committee informed of the progress made in this regard.  
B. Issues related to health hazards from EMF Radiation  and Need for India specific 
long term Research  
 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 6 & 9) 
10. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note with concern that the Government had not adopted 
or prescribed a ny standards relating to safe exposure from 
electromagnetic radiations emitted by the mobile towers as well as the 
mobile handsets and it was only in the year 2008 that the Department of 
Telecommunications adopted the standards prescribed by the 
International Commission for  Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 
although the same were in existence since 1998. These norms are a kind of 
international safety guidelines for RF exposure. Thereafter, based on the 
growing media reports and increasing public co ncern on the possible 
health hazards of EMF emission from antenna(e) of telecom 
towers/networks, an Inter - Ministerial Committee (IMC) was constituted 
by the Government in August, 2010 to examine the effect of EMF 
Radiation from Base Transmission Stations (BTSs) and mobile phones. 
Based on the recommendations of the IMC, in respect of BTSs, exposure 
limit for Base Station Emissions was subsequently reduced to 1/10 th of the 
limits prescribed by ICNIRP with effect from 01.09.2012, which according 
to the vario us memoranda received by the Committee has still failed to 
allay the fear amongst the public who have cited various kinds of health 
hazards to human beings, animals, flora and fauna from the EMF emission 
of telecom towers. 
 
During the course of the examina tion of the subject, the Committee found 
two contradictory views on ill effects of EMF emissions from telecom 
towers and mobile handsets on humans and wildlife. The Committee note 
that on one side, various organizations/ stakeholders, such as, Association 
of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India (AUSPI), Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI), Reliance Communications Limited, Vodafone 
India Limited, European Business Group etc., have denied the harmful 
effects of EMF radiations from mobile towe rs and mobile handsets and 
also contended that sufficient precautionary measures have been put in 
place. On the other side, various studies including Bioinitiative Report of 
2012 have linked several adverse health effects to electromagnetic fields 
from mob ile tower and handsets including effects on wildlife like birds, 

6 
 
bats, honey bees, etc. Some of the health effects reported are effect on 
cell growth, cell differentiation, DNA damage, altered immune system, 
hormonal effects, pervasive impairment of metabo lic and reproductive 
system, effect on fertility, reproduction and health of  off-springs, risk of 
glioma (a malignant brain tumour), sleep disorders, confusion, anxiety and 
depression and appetite disturbance, etc. The Department of 
Telecommunications has cited a World Bank Report of May, 2006 which 
has concluded that considering the very low exposure levels and research 
results collected to date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that the 
weak RF signals from base stations and wireless networks ca used adverse 
health effects. In this regard, the Committee feel that the Department is 
selectively relying on the research findings which have concluded that 
there is no health effects of EMF from telecom towers/networks while 
ignoring host of other reliab le research and concerns made which have 
proved to the contrary. Considering the seriousness of the matter which 
concerns the citizens of the country, the Committee recommend that 
Government should entrust the scientific study on impact of Telecom 
towers and handsets on humans to a reputed Government organization in 
a time bound programme. Till such time Government should strictly 
enforce EMF radiation norms finalized in September, 2012 which are 
reportedly 1/10th of ICNIRP prescribed norms.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that all the standards of radiation limit which the 
government has chosen to follow are based on the researches conducted 
in western countries where conditions are very different from countries 
like India. Some of the specific  differences between western countries and 
India are low population density, cold climatic conditions, low density of 
mobile phone towers etc. The Committee also note that DoT has 
acknowledged that some of the India specific conditions, such as,  multi-
operator scenario, mobile phone usage, higher population density etc., 
have been conveyed to WHO for their considerations in carrying out with 
India specific research. Against this backdrop, the Committee are not 
convinced with contention of DoT that none of t he studies done under the 
aegis of the WHO had proved that the emissions from the mobile phone 
towers/networks are causing harmful effect on human beings as the same 
are not based on India specific research. The Committee find it deplorable 
that some of th e India specific research carried out by eminent scientists 
and other Governmental organisations have not been taken into 
consideration by DoT in forming its guidelines. For instance, a 10 year 
study conducted by Prof. Gandhi of Department of Genetics, Gur u Nanak 
Dev University, Amritsar has found that radiations emitted from the 
towers are degenerating DNA and chromosomes. Similarly, a study 
conducted by Prof. Jitendra Behari in Jawaharlal Nehru has found that the 
exposure to radiation from mobile towers a nd mobile phones could have 

7 
 
an adverse impact on male fertility and deplete the defense mechanism of 
cells. Also the Environment and Forest Ministry study has blamed 
electromagnetic radiation from communication towers for the declining 
number of sparrows a nd bees, etc. The Committee, in view of the above 
findings made by the reputed experts and research institutes, feel that 
there is no room for complacency on the issue by selectively relying only 
on the findings of WHO whose research reports are mainly bas ed on 
developed countries and strongly recommend that the findings of India 
specific studies should also be taken into consideration by DoT in coming 
out with its policy initiative on mobile towers. 
 
The Committee also note that the main challenge involved  in conducting 
studies on radiation hazards from mobile towers and mobile handsets is 
the requirement of very long period of scientific research on targeted 
population and the lack of established standard procedures and protocols 
to study and monitor the E MF impacts on humans and wildlife. The 
Committee are , however, concerned to note that in spite of exponential 
growth of mobile telephony in the country over the last decade, no efforts 
have been made by the Department to undertake a continuous or long 
term research on the issue. It is rather surprising to note that even though 
the Department of Telecommunications is the nodal Department for all 
telecommunication related issues, it is only the Department of Science and 
Technology which on the direction of P rime Minister’s Office has 
constituted a Committee under Dr. N.K. Ganguly, former Director General 
(ICMR) on 1.10.2012 to examine the harmful effects from Mobile towers 
on the population living in the vicinity and for developing the frame of 
reference for calling out Request For Proposals (RFPs) for scientific 
assessment of health hazards and adverse impact on ecology. The 
Committee feel that DoT should be more sensitive and proactive in 
discharging its prime responsibility on such critical matters. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the DoT must 
wholeheartedly associate itself with such long term research works being 
carried out within the country and also make regular budgetary allocation 
under a separate budget head of expenditure for resea rch on health 
hazards from EMF radiation. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
Replies of the Government 
11. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
“As has been brought out in response to recommendation no 1 above, 
extensive research has been carried out on the subject of health effects 
from EMF radiation. WHO has clearly stated that in the area of biological 
effects and medical applications of non -ionizing radiation approximately 
25,000 articles have been published over the past 30 years. Desp ite the 

8 
 
feeling of some people that more research needs to be done, scientific 
knowledge in this area is now more extensive than for most chemicals. 
Based on a recent in -depth review of the scientific literature, the WHO 
concluded that current evidence doe s not confirm the existence of any 
health consequences from exposure to low level electromagnetic fields. 
However, some gaps in knowledge about biological effects exist and need 
further research. 
 
The Committee on Man and Radiation (COMAR) is a technical c ommittee 
of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) of the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), an international standard 
making body. COAMAR is primarily working in the area of biological effects 
of non -ionizing electro magnetic radiation, including radiofrequency (RF) 
energy. With regard to Bio -Initiative report 2007, COMAR submitted a 
statement in 2009 titled - “COMAR Technical Information Statement: 
Expert reviews on potential health effects of radiofrequency 
electromagnetic fields and comments on the Bio Initiative Report”. Extract 
of this statement is as below:  
 
“This report summarizes the conclusions from several major reports and 
comments on the markedly different conclusions in the Bio Initiative Report 
(abbreviated BIR below). Since appearing on the Internet in August 2007, 
the BIR has received much media attention but, more recently, has been 
criticized by several health organizations (see Section titled “Views of 
health agencies about BIR”). COMAR concludes that  the weight of scientific 
evidence in the RF bio effects literature does not support the safety limits 
recommended by the Bio Initiative group. For this reason, COMAR 
recommends that public health officials continue to base their policies on 
RF safety limi ts recommended by established and sanctioned international 
organizations such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
International Committee on Electromagnetic Safety and the International 
Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection, which is formally 
related to the World Health Organization.” 
 
Further, it is also noted that Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), on 
critical examination of the Bio -initiative 2012 Report, has observed that 
the report is not based on multi disciplina ry weight and there is no 
balanced reflection of the current state of scientific knowledge.  However, 
further study is needed to arrive at a conclusion about the potential health 
effects of EMF radiation. 
 
India specific scientific research by Indian Scien tist / Engineers keeping in 
view Indian environment and conditions are being carried out and till the 
time conclusive data from these researches becomes available, we have to 
rely on research done by reputed international agency like WHO, ICNIRP 

9 
 
etc. These  agencies have already carried out extensive research on the 
subject as has been brought out above. However, Department of Science 
& Technology (DST), Government of India, is already working on 
conducting study on possible impact of EMF Radiation exposure from 
mobile tower and handset on life (humans, living organism, flora & fauna 
and environment) and related initiatives. Based on the recommendation 
of the Committee headed by former Director General (ICMR),  
representative  from IIT Chennai, Indian Institu te of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow, Department of Telecom, Ministry of Environment & Forest, 
ICMR and DST,  Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) invited 
R&D proposals in June, 2013 on the possible impact of EMF radiation 
exposure from mobile tower s and handsets on life (humans, living 
organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives from 
Eligible Scientist/Organizations -public or private, individually or in 
collaboration. The SERB has constituted an Expert Committee / Task Force 
on 04 September 2013 to evaluate, R&D proposal to study the possible 
impact of EMF Radiation exposure from mobile tower and handset on life 
(humans, living organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related 
initiatives. SERB has short listed 79 proposal for  carrying out scientific 
studies. Thus, India specific scientific research by Indian Scientist / 
Engineers keeping in view Indian environment and conditions are being 
carried out and conclusive data from these researches will also become 
available in future.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The EMF project of WHO has been conducting research on effects of EMF 
Radiation on human health since 1996.  This project has participation from 
over 50 countries.  It is pertinent to note that many of these studies hav e 
been going on for years as to understand the effect of EMF over the period 
of time.  Thus these studies are not specific to developed countries alone. 
WHO has referred to approximately 25,000 articles published around the 
world over past 30 years, and ba sed on an in -depth review of scientific 
literature, has concluded: “current evidence does not confirm the 
existence of any health consequences from exposure to EMF radiation”. 
Since the effects on human beings are to be studied over a long period of 
time, further studies are going on around the world. 
 
As has been given in Action taken report to recommendation no. 6 above, 
India specific scientific research by Indian Scientist/Engineers keeping in 
view Indian environment and conditions are being carried out  and 
conclusive data from these researches will also become available in future. 
Till the time conclusive data from these researches becomes available, 
research done by reputed international agency like WHO, ICNIRP, etc. are 
to be relied on.   
(Reply to Recommendation No. 9) 

10 
 
 
12. The Committee, in their original  Report, had expressed their concern that while 
prescribing the limits to safe exposure from electromagnetic radiations emitted by 
mobile towers and mobile handsets,  the Department ha d  selectively relied  on 
researches conducted in the western countries which have  conditions very different 
from countries like India, such as low population density, cold climatic conditions, low 
density of mobile phone towers, etc. , ignoring some of the India -specific conditions 
like multi operator scenario, mobile phone usage, higher population density, etc. The 
Committee note that for India -specific studies, the Department of Science and 
Technology (DST) are working on conducting  a study on the possible impact of EM F 
radiation exposure from mobile towers and handsets on life (humans, living organism, 
flora and fauna and environment) and related initiatives. Towards this end, the 
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) has invited proposals on the possible 
impact of EMF radiation exposure from mobile towers and handsets  and shortlisted 
79 proposal for carrying out scientific studies. The Committee are of the view that 
India-specific research on the subject has become very important , mainly because the 
standards of radiation limit which the Government have chosen to follow are based 
on researches conducted in western countries and some of the India -specific research 
carried out by eminent scientists and other Governmental organizations  -  which have 
found adverse impact of EMF - have not been taken into consideration by DoT.  Taking 
into cognizance the initiative taken for carrying out India-specific scientific research by 
Indian scientists/engineers  which will provide valuable feedback  on the impact of 
EMF radiation,  the Committee emphasize  that DoT should  promote  and encourage 
the research works being carried out in the country , including by providing 
appropriate budgetary support.   
 
C. Supply of  sub-standard mobile handsets to India by reputed global 
manufacturers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
13. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note from a memorandum submitted to them by an 
expert of the field that more than 90 per cent of the mobile handsets are 

11 
 
being supplie d in India by reputed global manufacturers like Nokia, 
Samsung, Blackberry etc. While these reputed global manufacturers are 
strictly complying with all the prescribed safety limits when supplying the 
mobile handsets to countries like USA, Japan and Europe an Countries, 
they are resisting the prescribed norms when it comes to supplying mobile 
handsets to India, probably taking the country for granted. From the 
response of DoT, the Committee feel perturbed to find that no standards 
for mobile handsets have so  far been prescribed in the country and the 
same are still under deliberation of a Technical Committee of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee have been informed that even 
the standards which have been finalized by TEC have not been 
implemented. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for 
the delay in formulation of standards for mobile handsets in the country 
which in the opinion of the Committee is an issue of paramount 
importance in ensuring standardization and quality control o f mobile 
handsets being imported or manufactured in the country. The Committee 
while deprecating such sorry state of affairs prevailing in the country, 
strongly recommend that DoT must make all possible efforts in finalizing 
and implementing the standards for mobile handsets without any further 
loss of time and the Committee must be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
14. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“Telecom Engineering Centre has fin alized the standards for mobile 
handsets.  Further an amendment to Indian Telegraph Act, has been 
proposed to give statutory backing to the provisions.” 
 
15. The Committee note that the reply of the Government with regard to 
prescribing standards for mobil e handsets in the country is the same as the  reply 
furnished earlier during the examination of the subject and there is absolutely no 
progress in the matter. It is a matter of serious concern that , so far, no standards for 
mobile handsets have been prescr ibed in the country. The Committee are constrained 
to note that at a time when there is massive expansion of mobile telephony, only an 
amendment to the Indian Telegraph Act to give statutory backing to the standards 
developed for mobile handsets by TEC has  been proposed by the Department. The 
Committee are of the view that the issue of standards for mobile handsets has 
become pressing not only because of the existence of millions of mobile users, but 
also because of the apparent reluctance and resistance of  reputed global 

12 
 
manufacturers to adhere to the prescribed safety limit when it comes to supplying 
mobile handsets to India while scrupulously adhering to all safety standards when 
supplying the same to US, Japan and European countries. While deploring the slow 
progress made in this regard, the Committee urge the Department to take all 
necessary steps in finalizing and implementing the standards for mobile handsets 
without any further delay.  
 
D. Need for effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
16. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note with concern that as the things stand today, the 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism available to the public in respect of EMF 
radiation from mobile towers  located in their immediate vicinity is either 
totally insufficient or non-existent. The public has no means to verify as to 
whether the radiation from towers to which they are being exposed 
continuously is within the prescribed limits and whom to approach  to allay 
their fears as no such details are required to be mentioned at the tower 
site. The Committee note that the only existing Complaint Handling 
System for Electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation from Mobile Towers 
has been launched by DoT in Mumbai on  4th October, 2012 through an 
online facility on DoT website http://www.dot.gov.in and there is a 
proposal to extend this facility to other metros also. The Committee, 
however, note that even after the lapse of more than one year, the facility 
has not been extended to any other metro. Further, no publicity has been 
given with respect to online complaints redressal mechanism. No wonder 
that most of the people are not aware of existence of such a mechanism. 
The Committee strongly feel that above grievance red ressal mechanism of 
the Department is too little, too inadequate and is akin to making a 
deliberate attempt to ring fence the TSP and Infrastructure Providers from 
any public complaints and grievances. Holding the DoT squarely 
responsible for the absence o f any effective mechanism for redressal of 
public grievances, the Committee recommend that urgent efforts should 
be made to extend “Complaint Handling System for Electro Magnetic Field 
(EMF) Radiation’ to other metros of the country along with an aggressiv e 
campaign to make the public aware of the existence of such Complaint 
Handling System. The Committee further recommend that the suggestion 
to display the information regarding name and address of the operators, 
contact person details, address of complaint  redressing authority, level of 
EMF radiation etc. at the entry point of the facility of the tower, which is 

13 
 
being examined by DoT in consultation with telecom service providers and 
infrastructures providers, should be finalized and implemented at the 
earliest. The Committee, at the same time, feel that such consultation 
process would be more meaningful if members of the public forum, 
Resident Welfare Associations, NGOs etc. are also consulted in evolving an 
effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism.”    
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
17. The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 “The online complaint handling system for Mumbai was launched by DoT 
on 04.10.2012. It was envisaged that based on the response received for  
online complaint handling system of Mumbai, the facility may be extended 
to 3 other metros also. However, the total no of monthly complaints 
booked, for which the testing fee has been realized, on the online 
complaint handling system for Mumbai has reduced drastically from 135 in 
October 2012 to 13 in February 2014. Considering the small no of 
complaints being received the facility has not been extended to other 
metros. However, there are other mechanisms also for quick and effective 
redressal of public gr ievances, which include online booking of complaint 
on CPGRAMS web portal which are attended by TERM Cells. TERM Cells 
also carry out testing of EMF radiation acting on the complaints received 
directly by general public. In addition TERM Cells are testing up to 10% of 
the total BTSs annually for compliance to the DoT norms for EMF 
radiation. Apart from this a National EMF portal is also under process of 
development which will facilitate the general public in knowing the 
compliance status of any BTS.” 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 14)  
 
18. Taking note of the absence of any effective mechanism for redressal of public 
grievances, the Committee had recommended to extend the Complaint Handling 
System for Electro Magnetic Field for Radiation to other metros of the  country with 
aggressive campaign for public awareness. The Action Taken reply indicate that no 
serious effort has been made by the Department to set up  an effective Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism which will enable an aggrieved individual or member of gener al 
public to redress his or her grievances relating to EMF radiation from mobile towers. 
Even the only existing online complaint system operational in Mumbai which was to 
be extended to other 3 metros could not be extended due to the declining number of 
complaints. The reply of the Department is totally silent on the recommendations of 

14 
 
the Committee with regard to early finalization of consultation with the TSPs and 
infrastructure providers for displaying of name and address of the operators, contact 
person details, address of complaint redressing authority, level of EMF radiation, etc. 
at the entry point of the facility of tower and to involve members of the public forum, 
RWAs, NGOs, etc . in evolving an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The 
Committee feel that the existing of mechanisms, such as  online booking of complaint 
on CPGRAMS and annual testing of 10 per cent of the total BTS for compliance to the 
DoT norms for EMF radiations are not sufficient to allay the apprehension of the 
general public o f the possible health effects of EMF emission from BTS of telecom 
towers. The Committee note that even the National EMF Portal, under development, 
will only enable the general public in knowing the compliance status of any BTS. As 
such, it will not be a viable substitute to an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism. 
Considering that the general public has genuine concern regarding the real or 
perceived ill effect of EMF emission from BTS of telecom towers, the Committee feel 
that there is a need for widesp read dissemination of information relating to EMF 
being emitted by various BTS and putting in place an effective Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism for redressal of any complaint. Since the reply of the Department is silent 
on this very important issue, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
address these serious grievances of the people.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1  
Introductory 
 
The Committee note  that Telecommunications has become an essential component 
for overall  socio-economic development of the country, empowering the common man 
through access to information,  health-care, education and greater financial inclusion. More 
particularly, the mobile telephony has become an integral part of our lives both in urban as 
well as rural areas. From the low strata to higher echelon of the society everybody today is 
dependent on mobile phones and the exponential growth of this sector over the last 
decade bear s the testimony of the same. As per the information furnished by the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT), there are 864.72 million wireless telephone 
connections (as on December, 2012) and to provide network coverage there are 7,47,917 
Base Transmission  Stations (BTS) in the country. Moreover, the primary objective of the 
recently announced National telecom Policy  (NTP)-2012 is maximizing public good by 
making available reliable and secure telecommunication and broadband services across the 
country. Indi a is one of the countries which has witnessed the fastest growth of mobile 
telephones in the world and to sustain this growth there has also been a tremendous 
growth of infrastructure in the form of mobile phone towers. In this regard, the Committee 
note t hat such tremendous development of mobile telephony in the country has also 
greatly increased the extent and magnitude of the Electromagnetic Radiations (EMR) 
exposure on human beings. Apprehensions have been raised about the harmful effects of 
EMF radiations associated with the mobile towers. It has been brought to the notice of the 
Committee that while some studies have shown that these are harmless radiations, some 
others have pointed out serious repercussions and ill effects of such radiations. The 
Committee find it worrisome that in the absence of any kind of regulatory framework, 
mobile towers have mushroomed across the country in a haphazard manner, more so in the 
urban areas. 
The Committee find it most unfortunate that the Government has failed to ta ke any 
concrete steps to regulate this infrastructure sector as well as to address the public 
apprehensions about impact on their health. The Committee strongly deprecate the 
lackadaisical approach of the Department of Telecommunications which is the nodal  
department for expansion and modernization of mobile telephony. Considering the 
immense importance of the subject, the Committee undertook detailed examination of 
various issues relating to the subject by holding consultations with various stakeholders, v iz. 
public at large, experts, citizen groups, telecom industry organisaitons, etc. The Committee 
also held discussions with the representatives of the nodal Department i.e. the Department 

16 
 
of Telecommunications and sought clarifications on the vital aspects  relating to the subject. 
The examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed several areas of public 
concern which needs to be addressed by the Government at the earliest. These are detailed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The Department of Telecommunication has taken various steps to regulate the 
infrastructure sector and has been taking due precautions and necessary actions since 2008 
to address the public apprehensions about impact on their health by issuing vario us 
guidelines and norms taking into account the international standards/norms prescribed. A 
Brief overview of Telecom Tower infrastructure policy, EMF radiations and steps taken by 
Government in this regard is as follows –  
Regulation of EMF radiations from mobile towers – Statutory position  
Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 describes the privileges and powers of the 
Government in respect of telegraphs and power to grant licenses. Para 4(1) of Section 4 of 
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is reproduced below: 
 
 4(1) – “Within India, the Central Government shall have the exclusive privilege of 
establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs: 
 Provided that the Central Government may grant a license, on such conditions and in 
consideration of such payments a s it thinks fit, to any person to establish, maintain 
or work a telegraph within any part of India.”  
Department of Telecommunications, Government of India, has thus granted licenses, 
under Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, for Cellular Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS) 
and Unified Access Service (UAS) to Indian registered companies to establish, maintain and 
work on telegraph for providing mobile telephone services in the licensed area. Under 
CMTS and UAS license, the telecom service providers are est ablishing towers to provide the 
coverage of mobile services in their service area.  
Further, to support the faster growth of telecom infrastructure including mobile 
tower, Department of Telecommunications has also created a separate registration 
category k nown as Infrastructure Providers Category -I (IP -I). The Infrastructure Provider -I 
registered companies are permitted to create passive infrastructure such as tower, dark 
fibre, duct space etc. and provide the same to licensed telecom service providers.  
As per Clause 41.6 of the terms and conditions of UAS license, the LICENSEE is 
required to ensure that the Telecommunication installation carried out by it should not 
become a safety hazard and is not in contravention of any statute, rule or regulation and 
public policy. As per terms and conditions of the CMTS / UAS license and IP -I registration, 

17 
 
the responsibility of obtaining Permission/Right of Way for establishing towers lies with the 
telecom service providers/IP-I companies.   
For providing the mobile services in the country, the telecom service providers have to 
establish Base Transmitting Stations (BTS), at suitable locations, as per their Radio 
Frequency (RF) Network Planning for proper coverage of the area. Prior to installation of 
mobile towers, the telecom service providers have to obtain Site clearance from Standing 
Advisory Committee on Frequency Allocation (SACFA) of DoT for every site from the point 
of view of interference with other wireless users, aviation hazards and obstruction to any 
other existing microwave links. The telecom service providers have also to obtain necessary 
clearances from concerned local authorities such as municipal corporation, Gram Panchayat 
etc before installation of tower. 
DoT is responsible for giving SACFA clearances and for regulating the EMF radiation from 
BTS installed at the towers. State Government, Municipal Corporation and Local Bodies 
regulate the installation of towers as per their building byelaws. 
Health effect due to EMF Radiations - International Research  
The issue of health hazard from the radiations of mobile phone towers/networks has 
been in lime light for quite some time. In this regard, several studies have been conducted 
in different countries, under the aegis of World Health Organization (WHO). Ther e is no 
conclusive scientific evidence of adverse health effects due to RF emission from mobile 
phone towers. WHO has referred to approximately 25,000 articles published around the 
world over past 30 years, and based on an in -depth review of scientific lit erature, has 
concluded: “current evidence does not confirm the existence of any health consequences 
from exposure to EMF radiation”.  Since the effects on human beings are to be studied over 
a long period of time, further studies are going on around the world. 
With reference to Electromagnetic Radiation emanating from cellular mobile towers, 
World Health Organization (WHO) in its Fact Sheet No. 304, May 2006 on Electromagnetic 
Fields and Public Health (Base Stations and Wireless Technologies) has concluded t hat 
“considering the very low exposure levels and research results collected to date, there is no 
convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF Signals from base stations and wireless 
networks caused adverse health effects.  From all evidence accumulated  so far, no adverse 
short or long term health effects have been shown to occur from the RF Signals produced by 
based stations.”1   
In September 2013, WHO in online question and answers have mentioned that 
"Studies to date provide no indication that environ mental exposure to RF fields, such as 
from base stations, increases the risk of cancer or any other disease."2 
                                                 
1 http://www.who.int/peh-emf/publications/facts/fs304/en/ 
2 WHO Online Q&A September 2013 http://www.who.int/features/qa/30/en/ 

18 
 
In respect of EMF radiations from mobile handsets, WHO in Fact Sheet 193 published 
in June 2011 has concluded that “ A large number of studies hav e been performed over the 
last two decades to assess whether mobile phones pose a potential  health risk. To date, no 
adverse health effects have been established as being caused by mobile phone use”.3  
International EMF Project  
As part of its charter to p rotect public health and in response to public concern over 
health effects of EMF exposure, the World Health Organization (WHO) established the 
International EMF Project 4 in 1996 to assess the scientific evidence of possible health 
effects of EMF in the fr equency range from 0 to 300 GHz. The EMF Project encourages 
focused research to fill important gaps in knowledge and to facilitate the development of 
internationally acceptable standards limiting EMF exposure. 
Since the commencement of the EMF Project, over 50 national authorities have 
been involved.  Apart from the national authorities the project is overseen by 8 
international organizations 5 and independent collaborating institutions 6 and together they 
review scientific information related to public and o ccupational health, and environmental 
management of the EMF issue. It is pertinent to note that many of these studies have been 
going on for years so as to understand the effect of EMF over the period of time and these 
studies are not specific to developed  countries alone. While summarizing the key points on 
health effect of EMF radiation, WHO website7 mentions the following: 
“…..WHO's International EMF Project was launched to provide scientifically sound and 
objective answers to public concerns about possi ble hazards of low level 
electromagnetic fields. 
Despite extensive research, to date there is no evidence to conclude that exposure to 
low level electromagnetic fields is harmful to human health...” 
EMF Radiations – Recommended International safety standards  
WHO recommended that ‘National authorities should adopt international standards 
to protect their citizens against adverse levels of RF fields. They should restrict access to 
areas where exposure limits may be exceeded. 'WHO has recommended adoption of 
                                                 
3 http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs193/en/ 
4 http://www.who.int/peh-emf/project/en/ 
5 International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), International Labour 
Organization (ILO), International Telecommunications Union (ITU), Europea n Commission (EC), 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) 
6 Air Force Research Laboratory USA,  Australian Radiation and Nuclear Safety Agency (ARPANSA), 
 Health Protection Agency - Radiation Protection Division, United Kingdom, Institut für Strahlenhygiene, 
Germany and R. Samuel McLaughlin Centre for Population Health Risk Assessment   
7 Source: WHO website: http://www.who.int/peh-emf/about/WhatisEMF/en/index1.html 

19 
 
international standards, namely ICNIRP/IEEE. The main conclusion from the WHO reviews is 
that EMF exposures below the limits recommended in the ICNIRP international guidelines 
do not appear to have any known consequence on health. The WHO says -  
"All revi ews conducted so far have indicated that exposures below the limits 
recommended in the International Commission for Non Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) 1998 EMF guidelines, covering the full frequency range from 0 -300 GHz, do 
not produce any known a dverse health effect. However, there are gaps in knowledge 
still needing to be filled before better health risk assessments can be made."8  
ICNIRP continually monitors the science to ensure its guidelines on safe exposure 
limits remain up to date. 
Steps taken by Department of Telecommunications 
Department of Telecommunication (DoT), since 2008, has been monitoring global 
developments and has already taken necessary steps and adopted stricter norms for safety 
from EMF radiation that are emitted from mobile towers and mobile handsets. Government 
of India has been taking due precautions and necessary actions in respect of EMF radiation 
emitted from mobile towers and mobile handsets by issuing various guidelines and norms 
taking into account the international st andards/norms prescribed by International 
Commission on Non Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) as recommended by World 
Health Organisation. 
EMF safe exposure Limits from mobile towers adopted in India  – As mentioned above, 
Government of India adopted t he ICNIRP guidelines in the year 2008 for basic restriction 
and limiting reference levels of Electromagnetic radiation from Mobile towers and inserted 
the additional clause in the Access Service Licenses vide its amendment letter dated 
4/11/2008. Based on the recommendations by Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC), these 
norms for exposure limit for the Radio Frequency Field (Base Station Emissions) have been 
further reduced to 1/10 th of the existing limits prescribed by International Commission on 
Non Ionizin g Radiation Protection (ICNIRP).  Directions in this regard have been issued to 
the Mobile Operators on 30.12.2011. These directions have been further revised on 
10.01.2013 and 26.06.2013. As per latest directions of 26.06.2013 - 
“Licensee shall conduct au dit and provide self certificates after every two years as per 
procedure prescribed by Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) /or any other 
agency authorized by Licensor from time to time for confirming to limits/levels for 
antennae (Base Station Emiss ions) for general public exposure as prescribed by 
Licensor from time to time.” 
                                                 
8 Source: WHO EMF Research - http://www.who.int/peh-emf/research/en/ 
 

20 
 
The present limits/level are reproduced as detail below - 
  
                                                                             
 
(f is frequency in MHz) 
Keeping the precautionary EMF safe exposure limits for the Radio Fr equency Field 
(Base Station Emissions) as 1/10th of the safe limits prescribed by ICNIRP for all areas in 
India, eliminates the need for fixing lower limits for specific areas like schools, hospitals, 
residential premises, children playgrounds; a segregati on of which is impractical in densely 
populated localities. 
Recent review of exposure limits by Committee constituted in compliance of direction by 
Hon’ble High Court Allahabad:  
In a Writ Petition filed in Hon’ble High Court Allahabad, Lucknow bench, the Hon’ble 
Court vide its order dated 10.01.2012 constituted a committee including Members from IITs 
Kharagpur, Kanpur, Delhi, Roorkee, Bombay and from other scientific institutions of the 
country including Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and All In dia Institute of 
Medical Science  (AIIMS) Delhi who submitted its Report on 17 -01-2014. After due 
consideration of the human health concerns on account of EMF radiation being raised in 
public and the Report of the Committee, the Government has decided in F ebruary 2014 
that the present prescribed precautionary EMF safe exposure limits are adequate and need 
no further change at this stage. 
 
Ensuring compliance to various safe limits standards:  
Safe limits for emission from Base Transmitting Stations (mobile towers) - DoT on 8th April 
2010 directed all CMTS/UAS licensees for compliance of the reference limits/ levels 
prescribed by ICNIRP by way of self certification of their Base Transmitting Stations (BTS) for 
meeting the EMF radiations norms. As per these di rections, all BTSs should be ICNIRP 
guidelines compliant and all BTSs should be self certified as meeting the radiation norm. 
Self certification is submitted to respective Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring 
(TERM) Cells of DoT. All new BTS sites sta rts radiating only after self certificate has been 
submitted to relevant TERM Cells. In order to ensure compliance to the prescribed stricter 
precautionary norms of EMF radiation from mobile tower, the extensive audit of 
compliance of self-certificates bei ng submitted by telecom service providers and Base 
Transceiver Station (BTS) sites is carried out by Telecom Enforcement Resource & 
Monitoring (TERM) field units of DoT. This is regularly done by TERM units for the purpose 
Frequency 
Range 
E-Field Strength 
( Volt/Meter (V/m)) 
H-Field Strength 
(Amp/Meter 
(A/m)) 
Power Density 
(Watt/Sq.Meter 
(W/Sq.m)) 
400MHz  to 
2000MHz 
0.434f ½ 0.0011f ½ f/2000 
2GHz to 
300GHz 
19.29 0.05 1 

21 
 
of limiting the EMF radiation exp osure and keeping general public areas in the vicinity of 
towers safe. In case, any BTS site is found to violate the prescribed EMF norms, actions are 
taken to put a penalty of Rs. 10 lakh per BTS per incidence including closing of BTS site as 
per the pres cribed procedure. Additionally, the BTS sites against which there are public 
complaints are also tested by TERM Cell. The testing is done as per procedures prescribed 
by Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) from time to time. TEC has published the Test 
Procedure for measurement of EMF from BTSs vide document no. TEC/TP/EMF/001/01 SEP 
2009. TERM units as of 31.07.2014, have audited more than 1,51,000 BTSs for EMF 
emission limits compliance, out of which 184 BTSs were found to be exceeding the radiation 
limit. A penalty of Rs 9,00,00,000 have been levied for such BTSs. 
Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) safe exposure Limits from mobile handsets adopted in 
India - With respect to radiation from Mobile Handsets, also ICNIRP has prescribed values 
for Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) limit as 2 Watt/Kg averaged over 10 gm tissue.  Based 
on the limits provided by ICNIRP, DOT, in the year 2008, notified for compliance of Mobile 
Handsets being manufactured in India as well as the handsets being imported to conform to 
SAR limit of 2 W/kg (averaged over a mass of 10 gm tissue) localised for head and trunk in 
the frequency range of 10 MHz to 10 GHz. Based on the recommendations by IMC, SAR 
level for Mobile Handset has been revised from 2 watt per Kg averaged over a mass of 10 
gram human tissue to 1.6 Watt per Kg averaged over a mass of 01 gram human tissue. 
Directions in this regard including other recommendations related to Mobile Handset have 
been issued to Mobile Handset Manufacturers on 25.01.2012. These directions have now 
become effective since 01.09.2013. From 01.09.2013, the mobile handsets with revised SAR 
value of 1.6 Watt/Kg averaged over a mass of 1 gram human tissue are only permitted to be 
manufactured or imported in India for domestic market. 
SAR value testing Lab  - A laboratory has been set -up in the Telecommunication 
Engineering Centre (TEC) for testing of SAR value of mobile handsets 
imported/manufactured in India.  
Public Awareness 
DoT has issued a ‘Precautionary Guidelines for Mobile User’ advising to take certain 
precautions while using/purchasing the mobile handsets. These guidelines are available at 
DoT website. DoT has also issued an informative guide on ‘Mobile Communications -Radio 
Waves and Safety’ and the same is available on DoT website. The document covers a basic 
introduction to radio waves, various terminologies, Do’s & Don’ts related to mobile phone 
usage, clarification of various myths regarding deployment, use of Radio waves / Safety 
Standards and frequently asked questions relating to Mobile phones & H uman health. 
Advertisement for ensuring safety from radiations of Mobile Towers & handsets has been 
issued by DoT which has been published in National & Regional Newspapers. 
 
 

22 
 
EMF Web portal  
Telecommunication Engineering Center  (TEC), a wing of DoT, is ca rrying out a pilot 
project on EMF web portal for implementation of online database for EMR of BTS towers. 
The pilot trial of web portal is being conducted in three circles Mumbai, Haryana, Karnataka 
and the city of Hyderabad. The portal is envisaged to pro vide a public interface for viewing 
the EMF compliance status of mobile towers, anywhere in India. The portal is meant to 
generate confidence among the public about effectiveness of the EMF compliance process 
in India. 
Guidelines for Installation of Mobile Tower 
Broad guidelines for issue of clearances for installation of Mobile Towers were 
forwarded to all the State Governments on 23.08.2012.The above guidelines have been 
further revised with effect from 01.08.2013 and are available on DOT Website.  These 
address concerns of various stake holders. 
No restriction has been imposed on installation of tower on specific buildings such as 
schools/hospitals/play grounds etc.  Wherever antennae are mounted on the wall of 
building or pole on/along the road, their heig ht should be at least 5 meters above ground 
level/road level. However, such installation will have to comply with the radiation limit.    
India Specific research in the field - Committee Constituted by Department of Science & 
Technology:  
As far as India s pecific studies are concern ed, Department of Science & Technology  (DST), 
Government of India, is working on this issue for conducting  study on possible impact of 
EMF Radiation exposure from mobile tower and handset on life (humans, living organism, 
flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives. Based on the recommendation of 
the Committee consisting of former  Director General(ICMR),  representative  from IIT 
Chennai, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, Department of Telecom, 
Ministry of Environment & Forest, ICMR and DST;  Science and Engineering Research Board 
(SERB) has invited R&D proposals in June, 2013 on the possible impact of EMF radiation 
exposure from mobile towers and handsets on life (humans, living organism, flora & fauna  
and environment) and related initiatives from Eligible Scientist/Organizations -public or 
private, individually or in collaboration. The SERB has constituted an Expert 
Committee/Task Force on 04 September 2013 to evaluate, R&D proposal to study the 
possible impact of EMF Radiation exposure from mobile tower and handset on life (humans, 
living organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives. SERB has short 
listed 79 proposal for carrying out scientific studies. Thus, India specific scientifi c research 
by Indian Scientist/Engineers keeping in view Indian environment and conditions are being 
carried out and conclusive data from these researches will also become available in future. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Departme nt of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 

23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
Need for clear defined role for setting up of telecom towers 
 
The Committee note that Entry No. 31 of the List I (Union Government) of the 
7th Schedule to the Constitut ion provides for posts and telegraphs; telephones; wireless; 
broadcasting and other forms of communications. Resultantly the matters relating to 
telephones; wireless; etc. comes within the domain of the Central Government. In terms of 
section 10 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 Act, for installation of towers on a property i.e. 
the Right of Way (RoW), the TSPs have to obtain the permission of local authorities such as 
Municipal Corporations, Gram Panchayats etc. of the concerned State Governments/ Union 
Territory Administrations. Thus, as per the existing legal framework, the role of DoT is 
confined only to issuing site clearance for installation of mobile towers for each and every 
site from the point of view of interference with other wireless users, aviat ion hazards and 
obstruction to any other existing microwave links only, whereas the physical aspects like 
permission for use of property for erecting the tower, rent, structural safety etc. comes 
within the domain of local authorities. The Committee find t hat in the absence of any 
uniform national policy, different local civic authorities/ State Governments have evolved 
their own criteria which vary widely across the length and breadth of the country. Thus, 
each State and city to city have different terms a nd conditions with regard to taxes, levies, 
safety aspects, restrictions on installation of towers in certain areas and time frames for 
granting permission for installation of mobile towers etc. even though all telecom services 
are governed under the same Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. This, besides having an adverse 
impact on the smooth growth of telecom sector has also resulted in disputes between the 
TSPs and the local authorities leading to filing of petitions in various courts across the 
country. The TSPs associations like Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), Association of Unified Service Providers of India (AUSPI), Cellular Operator’s 
Association of India (COAI), Towers and Infrastructures Providers Association of India 
(TAIPA), etc. in their memoranda submitted to the Committee, have strongly advocated 
that Telecommunication being a Central subject, the Central government should have 
exclusive jurisdiction to legislate therein as it is completely beyond the jurisdiction of an y 
State Authority. The Committee also find that the existing framework does not provide any 
say to the public in addressing their concerns / apprehensions when a tower is installed in 
their vicinity. 
The Committee find the existing system undesirable and u nhealthy for the conducive 
development of telecom infrastructure in the country and are of the view that DoT has 
failed to address such a critical and important issue concerning the entire nation. The 
Committee, while observing that ‘Addressing the Right o f Way’ issue in setting up of 
telecom infrastructure is also one of the objectives enumerated in the  NTP-2012, strongly 
recommend that the entire issue of jurisdiction of DoT  vis-à-vis State Government/Local 

24 
 
Bodies in respect of setting up of mobile towers  be re-examined in depth by the Central 
Government and a national policy be evolved to streamline these procedural issues for 
ensuring faster and smooth growth of telecom services in the country while taking note of 
health concern of the people. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
For providing the mobile services in the country, the telecom service providers have 
to establish Base Transmitting Stations (BTS), at suitable locations, as per their Radio 
Frequency (RF) Network Planning for proper coverage of the a rea. Prior to installation of 
mobile towers, the telecom service providers have to obtain Site clearance from Standing 
Advisory Committee on Frequency Allocation (SACFA) of DoT for every site from the point 
of view of interference with other wireless users , aviation hazards and obstruction to any 
other existing microwave links. The telecom service providers have also to obtain necessary 
clearances from concerned local authorities such as municipal corporation, Gram Panchayat 
etc before installation of tower . DoT is responsible for giving SACFA clearances and for 
regulating the EMF radiation from BTS installed at the towers. While State Government, 
Municipal Corporation, Local Bodies regulate the installation of towers as per their building 
byelaws including the structural safety. 
A broad guideline has already been issued for clearance of installation of Mobile 
Towers as formulated by DoT and forwarded to the Chief Secretaries of all States on 
23.08.2012. The said guideline issued by DoT was advisory in nature  to have uniformity 
across all the States in respect of grant of permission for installation of mobile tower by 
telecom service provider. The revised guideline for grant of clearances for installation of 
mobile towers has been issued on 01.08.2013.  
As per  the revised guideline, fixation of standards for exposure limits of radio 
frequency field emissions from mobile base stations, monitoring their compliance, all 
radiation related technical issues, and issues of Access Service Licence / Infrastructure 
Provider registration and SACFA clearance for frequency allocation at any location are dealt 
by DoT. The documents to be submitted by telecom service providers to the local bodies, 
while applying for permission for installation of tower, has been clearly brough t out in the 
said revised guideline. 
Regarding installation of towers different states/local bodies have their own 
policies/laws which vary from one state to another. A national policy defining uniform Right 
of Way would be a more appropriate solution.  Ho wever, as brought out earlier, the 
building byelaws of State Government/Municipal Corporations/ Local Bodies regulate the 
installation of towers.  This is a subject matter pertaining to State List in the Constitution.  
Keeping this in mind, DoT has issued broad guidelines for clearance of installation of mobile 

25 
 
towers to Chief Secretaries of all the states. These guidelines will help in formulation of 
uniform-like policies across various states.  These guidelines have been issued recently and, 
in future, will be able to achieve their desired objective. 
Department of Telecom has taken various steps to address health concerns related 
to EMF radiations. Stricter precautionary limits for EMF radiation from mobile tower as well 
as from mobile handset/phones have been prescribed. In order to ensure compliance to the 
prescribed stricter precautionary norms of EMF from BTS tower and keeping general public 
areas in the vicinity of towers safe, the extensive audit of comprehensive self -certificates 
and sites is being c arried out by TERM Cells of DoT. In order to make the deterrence 
stronger, the penalty for violation of prescribed stricter EMF norms from BTS tower by 
telecom service providers has been increased from Rs. 5 Lakhs to Rs. 10 Lakhs per BTS, per 
incidence per operator w.e.f. 20th November, 2013. Concerned departments of Government 
have been asked to step up efforts to spread public awareness on EMF and precautions 
regarding mobile phones (Handsets) to allay undue apprehensions in regard to possible 
health effects of EMF radiation.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Need for an enforceable national guidelines for setting up of telecom towers 
 
The Committee note that mobile telephony which was introduced in the country 
more than one and a half decade back underwent high pace of growth and already more 
than 7 lakh Base Transmission Stations (BTSs) have been installed in the country to cater to 
the need of more than 860 million mobile connections. The Committee, however, are 
unhappy to note that even after the lapse of such a long period, no uniform telecom 
infrastructure policy has been framed by the Government for setting up of the mobile 
towers in the country. This has resulted in a haphazard growth of this sector with varying 
parameters from State to State in setting up of mobile towers besides mushrooming of a 
large number of illegal towers all over the country. It was only in the year 2012 that DoT 
came out with some guidelines on grant of clearances for installation of mobile towers 
which too were just advisory in nature. The Committee note that these guidelines were 
sent to the Chief Secretaries of all States and UTs and were also placed on the  website of 
the Department for inviting comments/ suggestions and based on the comments/ 
suggestions so received, the DoT issued revised guidelines on 1 st August, 2013 which again 
are advisory in nature and none of the provisions contained therein have any  kind of 
statutory backing. The Committee express their strong displeasure that even though the 
DoT has formulated revised guidelines, the Department is not aware of the practices 
followed in advanced countries like UK/ USA with respect to setting up of mo bile towers. 

26 
 
The Committee are of the strong opinion that before formulating and issuing revised 
guidelines for setting up of mobile towers, the DoT ought to have studied and adopted the 
best practices prevalent in the advance countries in this regard. Fur ther, the scrutiny of 
these revised guidelines has revealed various loopholes and ambiguities which in the 
opinion of the Committee render the guidelines ineffective and deficient on a number of 
crucial aspects. The Committee find that the revised guidelin es have not addressed the 
important issue of removal of already existing illegal mobile towers or making it mandatory 
for the existing more than 7 lakh towers to comply with the guidelines. Moreover, no road 
map has been prescribed as to how the revised gu idelines are supposed to be implemented 
within a specific timeframe. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that until or unless the deficiencies in the 
guidelines are fully addressed, these are hardly expected to serve any meaningful purpose 
in streamlinin g the process of mobile tower installations and relocation of the already 
existing towers, wherever necessary, in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that efforts should be made by the Department to come out with fresh 
guidelines in c onsultation with State Governments taking into consideration the above 
concerns of the Committee. The Committee further recommend that the implementation of 
guidelines should be made mandatory across the entire country by giving them a statutory 
backing. Apart from this, the Committee also strongly recommend for issuing of directives 
to all State Governments/Local Municipal bodies for immediate removal of all such illegal 
towers which have been set up without permission or which have failed to obtain the 
required ‘No Objection Certificate’ for structural safety or otherwise pose any kind of risk or 
health hazard to the public or to the residents living in the vicinity of mobile towers. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As has been detailed earlier, the revised  guidelines for grant of clearances for 
installation of mobile towers have been issued on 01.08.2013. These broad guidelines 
already stipulate the requirements for Telecom Service Providers/ Infrastructure Providers 
for obtaining clearance from local bodie s / state governments for installation of mobile 
towers. These broad guidelines issued by DoT for clearance of installation of mobile towers 
to Chief Secretaries of all the states, should help in formulation of uniform -like policies 
across various states.  These guidelines have been issued recently and in future will be able 
to achieve their desired objective.  In the meanwhile, keeping the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee in mind, DoT has taken steps to study best practices being followed in 
advance countries and information on the same is being collected. 
For towers installed without permissions required under byelaws of local bodies, 
State Governments are taking actions based on the letter/advisory guidelines issued by DoT 
to states. For towers t hat pose any risk of health hazard to the public due to EMF radiation, 

27 
 
extensive audit of comprehensive self -certificates and sites for compliance to EMF 
radiations safe limits being submitted by telecom service providers is being carried out by 
TERM Cells of DoT. These audits have the purpose of limiting the EMF radiation exposure 
and keeping general public areas in the vicinity of towers safe, and are carried out as per 
the procedure prescribed from time to time in their respective License Service Areas. TERM 
Cell of DoT levy penalty on those towers which violates the prescribed norms.  In order to 
make the deterrence stronger, the penalty for violation of prescribed stricter EMF norms 
from BTS tower by telecom service providers has been increased from Rs.  5 Lakhs to Rs. 10 
Lakhs per BTS, per incidence per operator w.e.f. 20 th November, 2013.  Provision has also 
been made to shut down the sites which do not meet the prescribed norms. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Structural Safety for setting up of telecom towers 
 
The Committee have been informed that many of the mobile towers have been 
erected in the country without ensuring safety of the build ings and even without taking any 
permission from the local bodies thereby posing a great risk to the buildings as also the 
residents living nearby. The Secretary, Department of Telecommunications, also admitted 
during evidence before the Committee that saf ety aspects of telecom infrastructure like 
towers is an area of concern. The Committee are perturbed to find that such an important 
issue has been given a very scant attention both by the Central as well as State 
Governments. While strongly deprecating thi s kind of approach, the Committee note that 
the Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) of the Department of Telecommunications has 
developed 12 standards concerning structural safety and design parameters of telecom 
towers using codes/specifications by Bureau of  Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee, 
however, are dismayed to find that these standards have not been made mandatory for 
Telecom Service Providers. The Committee are not at all convinced with the justification 
given by Secretary, DoT, during evidence be fore the Committee, that since structural safety 
is the domain of State, the Department does not want to venture into the area. Instead of 
ensuring that standards developed by TEC are strictly adhered to, the revised guidelines 
issued by DoT regarding Stat es to secure Structural Stability Certificate from authorized 
structural Engineer of State/Local bodies/Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), 
Roorkee/IIT/NIT or any other agency authorized by local body. The Committee recommend 
that for the purpose o f avoiding any ambiguity in this regard, the Central Government may 
finalise a specific list of institutes of excellence and repute belonging to Central 
Government/State Governments and also autonomous organization/Institutes funded by 
the Central/State Go vernments. The Committee also recommend that it should be made 
mandatory for all TSPs to scrupulously follow uniform norms concerning structural safety of 

28 
 
telecom towers across the entire country and adequate mechanism must be put into place 
for ensuing st rict compliance of the same. Further, all such towers which do not adhere to 
the norms should be removed immediately. The Committee also desire that to deter 
installation of towers not conforming to the safety norms, stringent penalty provisions must 
be imposed on the service providers. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) has developed standards concerning structural 
safety and design parameters of telecom towers using codes/specifications by Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS). Th e matter is under consideration for making TEC standards 
mandatory for implementation by TSPs. 
TEC is also developing Generic Requirements  (GR) for 20/30/40 Meter Guyed Masts 
exclusively for deployment in hilly areas. TEC is processing the case for taking up with 
Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC), Chennai for vetting the structural safety 
before draft GR can be circulated to stakeholders for comments and consideration of 
Departmental Co -ordination Committee. It is expected that the GR will be re ady by 
December 2014. 
Department of Telecom through its advisory to the State Governments has already 
suggested CBRI, IIT Roorkee, Other IITs and NITs, as also mentioned in the Recommendation 
of the Committee. Further, it has been mentioned in the same let ter that Local bodies may 
also authorise agencies for this purpose. Since regulation of structure of  buildings/ 
installations lies in the domain of Local bodies, designation of any additional 
institution/agency can be done only by them. 
 
(Ministry of Commu nications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Sharing of Telecom Towers 
The Committee note that more tha n 7,00,000 telecom towers are already in 
existence all over the country and taking into consideration the rapid growth of mobile 
sector, more and more mobile towers are likely to come up during the coming years. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the strong opinion that some urgent action needs to be taken 
to curb the ever growing number of the mobile towers as already serious apprehensions are 

29 
 
being expressed about the cascading effects of the radiations emitted by the mobile towers 
both on human health and the environment. Taking into consideration the views/concerns 
expressed before the Committee by various stakeholders, Committee strongly feel that 
tower sharing can prove to be a very effective tool in restricting the number of towers. 
Further, sharing of towers would be cost advantageous to Telecom Service Providers in 
terms of capital and operating expenditure. The Committee also feel that by sharing of 
tower infrastructure, telecom coverage can be achieved more efficiently and effectively due 
to reduced need of infrastructure facilities as well as electricity. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government must bring clear guidelines in this regard and 
encourage the service providers for tower sharing. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As brought out in response to recommendation no 1 above, there are no conclusive 
evidence/studies by either national or international organisation to establish the health 
hazard from the EMF radiation so far. However, DoT has already taken necessary steps and  
adopted stricter norms for safety from EMF radiation that are emitted from mobile towers. 
The radiation exposure depends on the EMF radiation level at a particular place rather than 
on number of towers. If the EMF radiation level at a place is within the prescribed limit, 
there should not be any concern about number of mobile towers.  
Sharing of "passive" infrastructure viz., buildings, towers, dark fibers etc. is 
permitted under the existing licensing regime. Under USO funded scheme Government has 
taken steps for encouraging sharing. At present the towers built under this scheme are to 
be shared by 3 operators. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Issues relating to health hazards from EMF emission 
The Committee note with concern that the Government had not adopted or 
prescribed any standards relating to safe exposure from electromagnetic radiations emitted 
by the mobile towers as well as the mobile handsets and it was only in the year 2008 that 
the Department of Telecommunications adopted the standards prescribed by the 
International Commission for Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) although the same 
were in existence since 1998. These norms are a kind of international safety guidelines for 
RF exposure. Thereafter, based on the growing media reports and increasing public concern 
on the possible health hazards of EMF emission from antenna(e) of telecom 
towers/networks, an Inter - Ministerial Com mittee (IMC) was constituted by the 
Government in August, 2010 to examine the effect of EMF Radiation from Base 

30 
 
Transmission Stations (BTSs) and mobile phones. Based on the recommendations of the 
IMC, in respect of BTSs, exposure limit for Base Station Emissions was subsequently reduced 
to 1/10th of the limits prescribed by ICNIRP with effect from 01.09.2012, which according to 
the various memoranda received by the Committee has still failed to allay the fear amongst 
the public who have cited various kinds of health hazards to human beings, animals, flora 
and fauna from the EMF emission of telecom towers. 
During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee found two 
contradictory views on ill effects of EMF emissions from telecom towers and mo bile 
handsets on humans and wildlife. The Committee note that on one side, various 
organizations/ stakeholders, such as, Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of 
India (AUSPI), Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), Reliance Communicati ons 
Limited, Vodafone India Limited, European Business Group etc., have denied the harmful 
effects of EMF radiations from mobile towers and mobile handsets and also contended that 
sufficient precautionary measures have been put in place. On the other side, various studies 
including Bioinitiative Report of 2012 have linked several adverse health effects to 
electromagnetic fields from mobile tower and handsets including effects on wildlife like 
birds, bats, honey bees, etc. Some of the health effects reported  are effect on cell growth, 
cell differentiation, DNA damage, altered immune system, hormonal effects, pervasive 
impairment of metabolic and reproductive system, effect on fertility, reproduction and 
health of off-springs, risk of glioma (a malignant brain  tumour), sleep disorders, confusion, 
anxiety and depression and appetite disturbance, etc. The Department of 
Telecommunications has cited a World Bank Report of May, 2006 which has concluded that 
considering the very low exposure levels and research resul ts collected to date, there is no 
convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF signals from base stations and wireless 
networks caused adverse health effects. In this regard, the Committee feel that the 
Department is selectively relying on the research findings which have concluded that there 
is no health effects of EMF from telecom towers/networks while ignoring host of other 
reliable research and concerns made which have proved to the contrary. Considering the 
seriousness of the matter which concerns t he citizens of the country, the Committee 
recommend that Government should entrust the scientific study on impact of Telecom 
towers and handsets on humans to a reputed Government organization in a time bound 
programme. Till such time Government should stri ctly enforce EMF radiation norms 
finalized in September, 2012 which are reportedly 1/10th of ICNIRP prescribed norms. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As has been brought out in response to recommendation no 1 above, extensive 
research has been carried out on the subject of health effects from EMF radiation. WHO has 
clearly stated that in the area of biological effects and medical applications of non -ionizing 
radiation approximately 25,000 articles have been published over the past 30 years. Despite 

31 
 
the feel ing of some people that more research needs to be done, scientific knowledge in 
this area is now more extensive than for most chemicals. Based on a recent in -depth review 
of the scientific literature, the WHO concluded that current evidence does not confir m the 
existence of any health consequences from exposure to low level electromagnetic fields. 
However, some gaps in knowledge about biological effects exist and need further research. 
The Committee on Man and Radiation (COMAR) is a technical committee of t he 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) of the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE), an international standard making body. COAMAR is primarily 
working in the area of biological effects of non -ionizing electromagnetic radiation, including 
radiofrequency (RF) energy. With regard to Bio -Initiative report 2007, COMAR submitted a 
statement in 2009 titled - “COMAR Technical Information Statement: Expert reviews on 
potential health effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic fields  and comments on the Bio 
Initiative Report”. Extract of this statement is as below:  
“This report summarizes the conclusions from several major reports and 
comments on the markedly different conclusions in the Bio Initiative Report 
(abbreviated BIR below).  Since appearing on the Internet in August 2007, the 
BIR has received much media attention but, more recently, has been criticized 
by several health organizations (see Section titled “Views of health agencies 
about BIR”). COMAR concludes that the weight of  scientific evidence in the RF 
bio effects literature does not support the safety limits recommended by the 
Bio Initiative group. For this reason, COMAR recommends that public health 
officials continue to base their policies on RF safety limits recommended  by 
established and sanctioned international organizations such as the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers International Committee on 
Electromagnetic Safety and the International Commission on Non -Ionizing 
Radiation Protection, which is forma lly related to the World Health 
Organization.” 
Further, it is also noted that Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), on critical 
examination of the Bio -initiative 2012 Report, has observed that the report is not based on 
multi disciplinary weight and there is no balanced reflection of the current state of scientific 
knowledge.  However, further study is needed to arrive at a conclusion about the potential 
health effects of EMF radiation. 
India specific scientific research by Indian Scientist / Engineers keeping in view Indian 
environment and conditions are being carried out and till the time conclusive data from 
these researches becomes available, we have to rely on research done by reputed 
international agency like WHO, ICNIRP etc. These agencies have a lready carried out 
extensive research on the subject as has been brought out above. However, Department of 

32 
 
Science & Technology (DST), Government of India, is already working on conducting study 
on possible impact of EMF Radiation exposure from mobile towe r and handset on life 
(humans, living organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives. Based on 
the recommendation of the Committee headed by former Director General (ICMR),  
representative  from IIT Chennai, Indian Institute of Toxicology  Research, Lucknow, 
Department of Telecom, Ministry of Environment & Forest, ICMR and DST,  Science and 
Engineering Research Board (SERB) invited R&D proposals in June, 2013 on the possible 
impact of EMF radiation exposure from mobile towers and handsets o n life (humans, living 
organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related initiatives from Eligible 
Scientist/Organizations-public or private, individually or in collaboration. The SERB has 
constituted an Expert Committee / Task Force on 04 September 201 3 to evaluate, R&D 
proposal to study the possible impact of EMF Radiation exposure from mobile tower and 
handset on life (humans, living organism, flora & fauna and environment) and related 
initiatives. SERB has short listed 79 proposal for carrying out sc ientific studies. Thus, India 
specific scientific research by Indian Scientist / Engineers keeping in view Indian 
environment and conditions are being carried out and conclusive data from these 
researches will also become available in future. 
 
(Ministry of  Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Restrictions on setting up of mobile towers in residential areas 
 
The Committee note that in the existing scenario, the setting up of a mobile tower 
generally involve a commercial agreement between the Telecom Service Provider (TSP) and 
the property owner who has rented out his property, thereby serving the inter ests of both. 
However, no right is available to the people living nearby although they have to face risks 
associated with the mobile towers, be it the EMF radiation or other kind of mishappenings 
associated with the high rise telecom towers in the resident ial areas. The Committee have 
received various complaints from individuals and housing societies about the undesired 
setting up of mobile towers in residential areas and have sought their removal and 
relocation at a specified distance from the residential areas. The main reasons for the 
complaints are that people living near the towers are suffering from brain tumors, cancer, 
headache, nausea amongst other problems due to continuous exposure to electro -
magnetic radiation from the mobile tower. The Committee  note that as per the existing 
practice there is no bar on installation of mobile towers in residential areas as well as taking 
consent of the nearby residents is not mandatory. Only the consent of the building owner in 

33 
 
case of roof based towers and land o wner in case of ground based towers is required to be 
taken. As a result, more and more mobile towers are being installed by the TSPs in 
residential areas after paying huge monthly rental to property owners without the 
requirement of getting any kind of ap proval from the people residing nearby or civic bodies 
or Residential Welfare Associations. The Committee feel perturbed to find that no efforts 
have been made by the Department, TSPs and local bodies to involve the general public in 
the setting up of mobi le towers. The Committee are of the view that the attitude of the 
Department in turning a blind eye to the concerns of the public highly deplorable and 
tantamount to shirking of responsibility towards the public safety. The Committee are of 
the strong view  that general public are the greatest stakeholders and therefore without 
their involvement in the issue, any decision would be incomplete and unjust. While the 
Committee agree that the purpose of setting up mobile towers is to provide better 
connectivity t o the public and not alone the profit generation by the telecom companies, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Government must frame a comprehensive 
policy on setting up of telecom towers in residential areas in densely populated cities taking 
into consideration the public health concerns, mandatory involvement of public/ Resident 
Welfare Association/ NGOs/ Public Forums/ residents of the nearby buildings or areas 
before installing telecom towers in their area as well as emulating the safest internati onal 
practices followed in this regard. The Committee further recommend that such policy 
framework should be made uniformly applicable all across the country irrespective of the 
prevailing local laws of the concerned States/UTs/local municipal bodies. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The main conclusion from the WHO reviews is that EMF exposures below the limits 
recommended in the ICNIRP international guidelines do not appear to have any known 
consequence on health. The WHO says - "All reviews conducted so f ar have indicated that 
exposures below the limits recommended in the International Commission for Non Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 1998 EMF guidelines, covering the full frequency range from 
0-300 GHz, do not produce any known adverse health effe ct. However, there are gaps in 
knowledge still needing to be filled before better health risk assessments can be made ."9 
ICNIRP continually monitors the science to ensure its guidelines on safe exposure limits 
remain up to date. Therefore, if the EMF radia tions from mobile tower(s) are below the 
prescribed limits, such mobile towers do not pose any health risk.   
It would also be pertinent to mention that in a petition (CWP No. 12047 of 2013 filed 
by Sh. Dhup Singh Vs. Union of India), Hon’ble High Court of  Punjab & Haryana dismissed 
the petition stating – 
 
                                                 
9 Source: WHO EMF Research - http://www.who.int/peh-emf/research/en/ 

34 
 
“ In view of the fact that Union of India had taken steps as mentioned in their 
detailed reply, no ground is made out for restraining the official respondent from 
installing mobile tower in residential area.” 
A Division bench of the Kerala High Court in the case of Reliance Infocom Ltd. Vs. 
Chemanchery Grama Panchayat and ors., reported in AIR 2007 Kerala 33 has observed that 
the surveys conducted in proximity to the base stations indicated that the public  was 
exposed to extremely low intensity RF fields in the environment and all the evidences 
indicated that they were unlikely to pose the risk to health. Some of the observations of 
Division bench of the Kerala High Court, as contained in para 5 of the judg ement are quoted 
below – 
“ We have already found that RF exposures from Mobile Base Stations are much less 
than from radio, Fm radio and television transmissions and that the consensus of 
scientific community is that the radiation from Mobile Phone Base St ations is far too 
low to produce health hazards if people are kept away from direct access to the 
antenna and the overall evidence indicates that they are unlikely to pose a risk to 
health. The strength of radio frequency fields in front of the antennae va ries with the 
distance. Persons standing directly in front of the antennae in these high density 
zones will get higher exposures. We have also found that the height of Mobile Base 
Station antennae is normally 36 metres and the effect of radio waves depends  on the 
distance from the base stations since the antennae are directed horizontally with a 5 
degree downwards tilt. Human studies pertaining to base stations conducted by 
Santini R et al (2002), Bortkiewicz et al (2004) & Hutter & Kundi et al (2006) do no t 
report any quantitative parameters related to health hazards. Therefore, it can safely 
be concluded that the permission granted for installation of Mobile Base Station by 
the Panchayat would not cause as such any health hazards nor will it affect the 
fundamental rights guaranteed to citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution.    
Right to life enshrined under Art.21 includes all those aspects of life which make life 
meaningful, complex and worth living. Development of technology has its own ill -
effects on human beings, but, at times people will have to put up with that at the 
cost of their advantages. Petitioner and others for installing towers will have 
necessarily to comply with the statutory provisions contained in Chapter XIX of the 
Kerala Municipal Building Rules, 1999 which permits construction of 
telecommunication towers over buildings. Petitioner has submitted that it has 
already satisfied all those conditions and in such circumstance, Panchayat has 
granted the licence." 
 
Hon’ble High Court of Guj arat at Ahmadabad has also rejected petitions which were 
also similar to this case.   
The EMF safe exposure limits for the Radio Frequency Field (Base Station Emissions) 
as prescribed by DoT are already one tenth (1/10th) of the limits prescribed by International 
Commission on Non Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). Keeping the precautionary EMF 
safe exposure limits for the Base Station Emissions as 1/10th of the safe limits prescribed by 

35 
 
ICNIRP for all areas in India, eliminates the need for fixing low er limits for specific areas like 
schools, hospitals, residential premises and children playgrounds; a segregation of which is 
impractical in densely populated localities. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Restrictions on setting up towers in schools, colleges and hospitals 
The Committee note that there are few countries like Switzerland which have 
adopted ICNIRP norms but implemented lower ICNIRP  limits as a precautionary approach 
for areas like apartments, schools, hospitals, workplace and children playgrounds. However, 
the DoT has not made any efforts or collected information about the countries which have 
imposed such restrictions. Moreover, th e recommendations made by the  Inter-
Ministerial Committee in their Report to impose restrictions on installations of mobile 
towers within the premises of schools, hospitals etc. housing vulnerable sections of the 
society, were rejected by the Department on  the ground that these are not based on 
scientific study or facts and imposing restrictions on installation of towers in schools and 
colleges etc. may lead to increased public resistance against installation of towers. The 
Committee at the same time note f rom the information furnished by DoT that some States 
like Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have imposed restrictions on setting up of telecom 
towers in schools, colleges, etc. and have issued their own guidelines and Gazette 
Notifications in this regard. The Committee also cannot ignore the information placed 
before them by various experts/ organizations about the growing scientific evidence 
regarding biological effect of radiations from telecom tower radiations especially on the 
more vulnerable sections of th e society like elderly people, pregnant women and children. 
Also taking note of the reports about a number of ongoing litigations in various parts of the 
country on this account, the Committee strongly feel that as a precautionary approach 
there is an impe rative need to fix stringent norms with regard to radiation for areas like 
schools, hospitals, residential premises, children playgrounds etc. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As has been detailed in para 7.1.1 above, the main conclusion from the WHO 
reviews is that EMF exposures below the limits recommended in the ICNIRP international 
guidelines do not appear to have any known consequence on health. If the EMF radiations 
from mobile tower(s) are below the prescribed limits, such mobile towers do not pose an y 
health risk.  In India norms for exposure limit for the Radio Frequency Field (Base Station 
Emissions) are already 1/10th of the safe limits prescribed by International Commission on 
Non Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). Keeping the precautionary E MF safe exposure 

36 
 
limits for the Radio Frequency Field (Base Station Emissions) as 1/10th of the safe limits 
prescribed by International Commission on Non Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) for 
all areas in India, eliminates the need for fixing lower li mits for specific areas like schools, 
hospitals, residential premises and children playgrounds; a segregation of which is 
impractical in densely populated localities. 
Further, the issue is under consideration of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
UOI V/S Justice (Retd.) Israni. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Need for India Specific long term Research 
The Committee note that all the standard s of radiation limit which the government 
has chosen to follow are based on the researches conducted in western countries where 
conditions are very different from countries like India. Some of the specific differences 
between western countries and India ar e low population density, cold climatic conditions, 
low density of mobile phone towers etc. The Committee also note that DoT has 
acknowledged that some of the India specific conditions, such as,  multi-operator scenario, 
mobile phone usage, higher populatio n density etc., have been conveyed to WHO for their 
considerations in carrying out with India specific research. Against this backdrop, the 
Committee are not convinced with contention of DoT that none of the studies done under 
the aegis of the WHO had prov ed that the emissions from the mobile phone 
towers/networks are causing harmful effect on human beings as the same are not based on 
India specific research. The Committee find it deplorable that some of the India specific 
research carried out by eminent sc ientists and other Governmental organisations have not 
been taken into consideration by DoT in forming its guidelines. For instance, a 10 year study 
conducted by Prof. Gandhi of Department of Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar 
has found that rad iations emitted from the towers are degenerating DNA and 
chromosomes. Similarly, a study conducted by Prof. Jitendra Behari in Jawaharlal Nehru has 
found that the exposure to radiation from mobile towers and mobile phones could have an 
adverse impact on ma le fertility and deplete the defense mechanism of cells. Also the 
Environment and Forest Ministry study has blamed electromagnetic radiation from 
communication towers for the declining number of sparrows and bees, etc. The Committee, 
in view of the above f indings made by the reputed experts and research institutes, feel that 
there is no room for complacency on the issue by selectively relying only on the findings of 
WHO whose research reports are mainly based on developed countries and strongly 
recommend th at the findings of India specific studies should also be taken into 
consideration by DoT in coming out with its policy initiative on mobile towers. 

37 
 
The Committee also note that the main challenge involved in conducting studies on 
radiation hazards from mob ile towers and mobile handsets is the requirement of very long 
period of scientific research on targeted population and the lack of established standard 
procedures and protocols to study and monitor the EMF impacts on humans and wildlife. 
The Committee are  , however, concerned to note that in spite of exponential growth of 
mobile telephony in the country over the last decade, no efforts have been made by the 
Department to undertake a continuous or long term research on the issue. It is rather 
surprising to note that even though the Department of Telecommunications is the nodal 
Department for all telecommunication related issues, it is only the Department of Science 
and Technology which on the direction of Prime Minister’s Office has constituted a 
Committee u nder Dr. N.K. Ganguly, former Director General (ICMR) on 1.10.2012 to 
examine the harmful effects from Mobile towers on the population living in the vicinity and 
for developing the frame of reference for calling out Request For Proposals (RFPs) for 
scientific assessment of health hazards and adverse impact on ecology. The Committee feel 
that DoT should be more sensitive and proactive in discharging its prime responsibility on 
such critical matters. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the DoT m ust 
wholeheartedly associate itself with such long term research works being carried out within 
the country and also make regular budgetary allocation under a separate budget head of 
expenditure for research on health hazards from EMF radiation. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
The EMF project of WHO has been conducting research on effects of EMF Radiation 
on human health since 1996.  This project has participation from over 50 countries.  It is 
pertinent to note that many of these studies have been going o n for years as to understand 
the effect of EMF over the period of time.  Thus these studies are not specific to developed 
countries alone. WHO has referred to approximately 25,000 articles published around the 
world over past 30 years, and based on an in -depth review of scientific literature, has 
concluded: “current evidence does not confirm the existence of any health consequences 
from exposure to EMF radiation”.  Since the effects on human beings are to be studied over 
a long period of time, further studies are going on around the world. 
As has been given in Action taken report to recommendation no. 6 above, India 
specific scientific research by Indian Scientist/Engineers keeping in view Indian environment 
and conditions are being carried out and conclusive  data from these researches will also 
become available in future. Till the time conclusive data from these researches becomes 
available, research done by reputed international agency like WHO, ICNIRP, etc. are to be 
relied on.   
 
(Ministry of Communication s & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 

38 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
Need for exploring new technological Innovations 
Introduction of low power radiating antennae like Micro, Pico and Femto 
 
During the examination of the subject, the Committee were informed by one of the 
experts of the field that high power radiating antennae could be avoided in high density 
populated areas by deploying lo w power radiating BTSs such as Micro, Pico and Femto 
which would be more advantageous in terms of elimination of fear of health hazards due to 
high radiation from mobile towers and safety of the buildings. These BTSs could be 
powered by solar or hybrid systems thus saving precious fuel and reducing carbon emission, 
saving huge quantities of steel and clearing the skyline of cities and towns. The Committee 
were also informed that these technologies have been adopted in developed countries. The 
Department, in  its response has informed the Committee that these technologies are 
meant for very small/confined areas and would not be suitable to provide the coverage that 
can be sustained through outdoor BTSs. In the case of Femto, however, the Department has 
stated that it is expected to be used by the Telecom Service Providers in due course. In this 
regard, the Committee would like the Department to seriously explore the option of 
utilising such technologies in our country especially in highly populated urban cities  by 
implementing some pilot projects in selected areas to ascertain its feasibility. The 
Committee may be apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 In-building solutions already exist in some urban areas, provisione d by the service 
providers as per the coverage considerations and feasibility.  The provisions for promoting 
In-Building Solutions (IBS) have also been made in National Telecom Policy (NTP) -2012. 
However, these technologies are meant for coverage in a very  small/confined area. These 
may reduce the emission in that confined area but will not be able to provide the coverage 
that is sustained through outdoor BTS for providing seamless mobile connectivity. For street 
coverage, BTS is the only desirable option. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Installation of LED based EMR meters 
 
The Committee take note of a suggestion contained in one of the memorand um 
received by them that in every mobile tower there should be an indicator that shows the 
radiation level and if that level crosses a  pre-determined limit, the device should 
automatically shut down the tower till the problem is rectified. It has also been  suggested 
that such meter should display green signal if EMR are below prescribed limits and must 
turn red through yellow in case some unauthorized increase in tower capacity is introduced 

39 
 
by operators and all mobile towers must be equipped with sending G PRS based EMR data 
to some Central Control Room where the competent authority can monitor errant/ 
malfunctioning tower with exceeding EMR limits. The Committee, however, feel highly 
disappointed at the lukewarm response of the DoT to such innovative ideas/  suggestions as 
the same is reflected in its stubborn response that there is no need for continuous 
monitoring of radiation pattern from telecom towers and there is no such low cost meter 
that can make precision measurement and declare non - compliance. The DoT has gone on 
to say that such meter is not a solution and moreover, no manufacturer has approached 
TEC for testing such product. 
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for the Department to explore new 
scientific innovations to address the gro wing public apprehensions about the  ill-effects of 
mobile tower radiations in view of the near total absence of any information to the public 
regarding the level of EMF radiation being emitted by towers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the DoT mus t play a proactive role in exploring new technological ideas 
and innovations and ,if necessary, also involve premium scientific institutes across the 
country for development of such products like the suggested LED based EMR meters and 
setting up of centralized monitoring system which would strengthen the existing monitoring 
mechanism and will go a long way in allaying the public fear on the issue. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The LED based EMR meters available in the market are not based on acceptable 
standards for measurement of electromagnetic field exposure. As the device does not 
follow any standard, wrong flashing of LEDs on these devices will cause misgivings among 
the public. Therefore, it may not be desirable to encourage such devices. The measuri ng 
instruments used by TERM Cells for EMF audit are designed and manufactured to follow 
standards and provide accurate EMF compliance status. Even the EMF measuring test sets 
that are being procured by TEC are required to conform to the technical specifica tions 
contained in TEC GR No. TEC/TX/GR/EMI.001/02.SEP 2011 on “EMF Strength Measuring 
Instrument in the frequency range of 30 MHz to 3/6 GHz”. 
The main concern raised by the Standing Committee is regarding information to the 
public regarding the level of EMF radiation being emitted by towers. While a meter like the 
LED based EMR meters can only measure the EMF radiation, it does not solve the basic 
issue of providing information to public at large. 
DoT is already in process of designing and implementing an  EMF portal which is 
envisaged to provide a public interface for viewing the EMF compliance status of mobile 
towers, anywhere in India. The portal is meant to generate confidence among the public 
about effectiveness of the EMF compliance process in India. The portal will also provide a 

40 
 
common database based framework for TERM Cells, Operators, and Infrastructure 
Providers to manage RF technical parameter for handling EMF compliance workflows.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Departmen t of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
Setting up of State/District Level Telecom Committees 
The Committee note that the guidelines issued by DoT in 2012 and revised guidelines 
in 2013 inter-alia stipulates setting up of State and District Level Committees in each State 
consisting of officers from TERM Cells, State Administration, representatives of concerned 
Telecom Service Provider(s) and eminent public person etc. to effectively address public 
grievances relating to installation of towers and issues related to telecom infrastructure by 
holding regular interactions. The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that so far only 
two States viz. the States of Uttarakhand and West Bengal have formed such State L evel 
Committees although their formation has been  re-emphasized in the revised guidelines 
issued by DoT on 1 August, 2013. The Committee would like to attribute such Luke warm 
response of the State Governments towards formation of such important Committees , to 
the casual approach of the DoT as well as advisory nature of guidelines issued by them 
making their constitution by various States just discretionary. The Committee feel that 
formation of State/District Level Committees can prove to be a very effectiv e tool in 
addressing public grievances and until and unless the Department pursue vigorously with 
the State Governments/UT Administrations, the formation of such important Committees 
would remain a pipedream only. The Committee, therefore, recommend that D oT must 
make all out efforts to expedite the formation of such Committees. The Committee also feel 
that to make the functioning of State/District level telecom Committees more effective, 
DoT may consider inclusion of elected representatives of local bodies /State 
Assemblies/Member of Parliament in the composition of these Committees. Alternatively, 
the work can be assigned to District/State Monitoring and Vigilance Committees 
constituted by Ministry of Rural Development. These Committee are monitoring the 
Schemes/programmes relating to Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking Water, 
Panchayati Raj and Power (Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojna). 
Action Taken by the Government 
The guidelines issued are advisory in nature and it is up to the concerned Sta te 
Governments to decide on formation of such committees. However, the State Governments 
have been apprised of the recommendations of the Standing Committee in this regard and 
they have been requested to expedite the formation of State and District Level C ommittees 
in each State.  
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 

41 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
TERM Cells: Issues relating to shortage of manpower and equipment 
 
The Committee note that the Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring (TERM) 
Cells of the DoT have been assigned with an important task of cross checking the 
compliance of EMF radiation norms as prescribed by the Government for mobile towers. 
Apart from this, TERM Ce lls have been mandated to ensure compliance of licensing 
conditions by TSPs, interface between security agencies and TSPs, curbing of grey market 
activities, redressal of grievance of telecom subscribers in respect of deficiencies by TSP etc. 
and carrying out test audit of 10 per cent of the BTS sites on random basis. The Committee 
are, however, constrained to find out that the TERM Cells have been severely handicapped 
by shortage of manpower in effectively carrying out its mandate, especially annual testin g 
of 10 per cent of total BTS sites (including existing and new ones) which has also been 
acknowledged by the Department. As per the information provided by the Department, the 
Committee note that during the period from November, 2010 to March 2011 and Apr il, 
2012 to March, 2013 only 3.5 and 4 per cent of the BTS were tested respectively against the 
mandate of randomly testing upto 10 per cent of the BTS sites. The Committee, therefore, 
have strong reasons to conclude that the other important activities of the TERM Cells are 
also being underperformed due to acute shortage of manpower. The Committee feel that 
not filling the existing vacancies of the TERM Cells amounts to conveniently ignoring the 
concerns of the public across the country over the possible he alth hazards from EMF 
radiations being emitted by telecom towers. Taking a very serious note of this sorry state of 
affairs, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take all necessary 
steps to strengthen the TERM Cells by filling up all  the existing vacancies so that the Cells 
could effectively carry out their mandate. In the opinion of the Committee any further delay 
in filling up the existing vacancies would be only at the cost of ignoring the public concerns 
and defeating the very purpose of constitution of the TERM Cells. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
To ensure adequate Manpower in TERM Cells, ITS officers were deployed as per the 
decision of Cabinet. The present working strength of ITS Group ‘A’ officers in TERM Cell 
including DoT Head Quarters are as under : 
 Higher Administrative Grade (HAG)=1 
 Senior Administrative Grade (SAG) = 69 
 Junior Administrative Grade (JAG) =98 
 Senior Time Scale (STS) = 37 
 Junior Time Scale (JTS) =37 

42 
 
The cadre review of ITS Group ‘A’ services is also under  process and adequate 
augmentation of number of ITS officers in TERM Cells has been proposed in the 
exercise. 
In addition to above ITS officers, 177 numbers of additional support officers & staffs 
are attached in different TERM Cell which include 37 Junior  Telecom Officers (JTOs), 55 Sub 
Divisional Engineer (SDEs), 3 Sr. SDE, 32 Assistant Director (AD), 8 Divisional Engineer (DE) 
and 42 others i.e. Sr Telecom Office Assistant (Sr. TOA), Private Secretary (PS), Steno, 
Personal Assistant (PA), etc. 
Further to  meet the urgent requirement of TERM Cells, it was decided with the 
approval of Hon’ble MOC&IT to depute 7 Group ’B’ officers of BSNL purely on loan basis in 
each TERM Cell of DOT. Accordingly, the order was issued on 26.10.2010.  The said 
arrangement of Gr’B’ officers of BSNL was made initially for a period of two years. In view of 
constitutional requirement, with the approval of Secretary (T), BSNL has been requested to 
continue the arrangement of deputing seven (7) Gr.B Officers(Sr.SDE/SDE/JTO) on purely  
temporary and stopgap arrangement basis in each TERM Cell for a further period of two 
years vide order dated 09.01.2013. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
Issues relating to ‘Self Certificate’ 
 
The Committee note that based on the recommendation of an Inter - Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) report, norms for exposure limit for EMF Radiation emitted by BTS towers 
have been reduced to 1/10th of the existing limits prescribed by ICNIRP w.e.f. 1 September, 
2012. The Committee are, however, not at all satisfied with the existing mechanism which 
has been adopted by DoT for ensuring compliance of the prescribed limits. In this regard, 
the Committee observe t hat instead of conducting verification departmentally or getting 
the same done by some independent agency, the Department is relying only on the  ‘self-
certificates’furnished by the Telecom Service Providers themselves. The only safeguard 
evolved by the DoT is the requirement of carrying out inspection of 10 per cent of randomly 
selected BTS sites by the TERM Cells of the DoT which are woefully lagging behind in 
carrying out their task due to the acute shortage of both the manpower as well as the 
equipment. The Committee also note that the method of ‘Self -Certification’ has been 
adopted by the Department just by consulting the stakeholders who are mainly Telecom 
Service Providers without studying the detailed implementation procedure/method 
followed in other countries. The other deterrent which has been put into place is that in 
case of violation of prescribed limits, a provision for imposing penalty of Rs. 5 lakh per BTS 
per Telecom Service Providers has been prescribed. The Committee strongly deprecate that 
the Department is not even clear on the periodicity of furnishing of  ‘self-certification’of 

43 
 
BTSs by the concerned TSPs. While the Department has informed the Committee in the 
Background Note that licensees should conduct audit and provide self - certificate annually 
as per the procedure prescribed by Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC), the DoT in their 
subsequent written reply has stated that the periodicity of submission of  ‘self-
certification’ by TSPs was once in two years because radiation parameters of the  BTS 
remain constant, unless changed by TSPs. Considering the fact that radiation parameters of 
the BTS are totally in the hands of the TSPs and can be  re-set by the TSPs at any point of 
time in the absence of any kind of constant monitoring mechanism, the  Committee are of 
the strong view that no purpose is being served by requiring submission of  ‘Self-
Certificate’ by TSPs only once in two years which otherwise also is too long a period. The 
Committee are of the view that  ‘Self-Certification’ method provide  a freehand to TSPs to 
indulge inmis-information. The Committee also feel that considering lack of manpower and 
testing equipment of TERM Cells, the majority of the TSPs are enjoying a kind of complete 
immunity from detection of any violation on their part when it comes to complying with the 
radiation norms of BTSs towers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to make the 
monitoring mechanism more stringent, the Department should explore other options, such 
as evolving a constant monitoring mechanism of EMF radiation from all BTSs on real time 
basis or conducting surprise tests, conducting an independent ‘Third Party Audit’ of BTS 
towers etc. besides finding out the practices followed in other countries in coming out with 
its own effective procedure.”    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The concerns raised by the standing committee regarding auditing of self certificates 
have already been addressed in the TEC Test Procedure (OCT.2012 issue) in section 18(a) by 
providing a changed procedure as follows:  
"Before undertaking measurement, the Tx Power of the Carriers (BCCH's for GSM and 
Total Channel Power RMS 86 Pilot Power for CDMA / 3G) will be verified using a BTS 
Site Master / Spectrum Analyzer (with option for Power measurement) with 
appropriate couplers /  Attenuators, if feasible without causing disruption of service. 
Further, NMS/EMS snapshot shall be provided to ascertain the normal BTS power in 
the recent past." 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Effective implementation of prescribed Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) Value for mobile 
handsets 
The Committee while observing that  Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) is a measure of 
the rate at which energ y is absorbed by the human body when exposed to a radio 
frequency electromagnetic field, find that  DoT, in the year 2008, notified for compliance of 
Mobile Handsets being manufactured in India to conform to ICNIRP prescribed SAR limit of 

44 
 
2 W/kg in the freq uency range of 10 MHz to 10 GHz and subsequently revised the same to 
1.6 watt/kg averaged over a mass of 1 gram tissue w.e.f. 1 September, 2013 for all mobile 
handsets manufactured or imported in India. The Committee also note that to ensure 
effective implementation of SAR norms so prescribed, DoT has issued instructions that all 
mobile handsets manufacturers, both indigenous and imported, shall provide a self 
declaration in respect of SAR value based on certificate issued from Internationally 
Accredited Labs (ILAC) or accredited by TEC, India to TEC with a copy to DoT for compliance 
and necessary action. It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that as per 
Indian Cellular Association (ICA) all the new design mobile phones being manufactured f or 
domestic market are compliant to new norms and Mobile Manufacturers Forum have made 
a provision for display of SAR value by dialing *#07# in new mobile handsets in order to 
verify their compliance. The Committee, however, are concerned to note that as r egards 
penalty provisions in the cases of detection of  non-compliance with the prescribed SAR 
norms, the reply of DoT is vague and evasive according to which the quantum of penalty 
will be as per the provisions in the applicable Acts/Rules. The reply gives  an impression that 
that there is no clarity in the DoT on the quantum of penalty to be imposed on the 
defaulter. The DoT has failed to furnish any information in respect of number of violations 
detected so far. The Committee, therefore, feel that the prov ision of penalty in case of any 
violation is still unclear and hence more specific provisions for penalty are required to be 
laid down at the earliest for ensuring meaningful compliance with SAR norms. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government must prescribe precise 
and specific provisions on penalty in such cases and may be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. The Committee also desire that efforts should also be made by the Department 
for greater dissemination of information  relating to Do’s and Don’ts of mobile phones users 
and revised SAR value by bringing out a handbook in Hindi, English and regional languages 
and making the same available to mobile handset customers at the point of sales/retail 
shops. 
As regards availabil ity of adequate infrastructure for verifying compliance of Mobile 
handsets with the prescribed SAR norms, the Committee would like to refer to the 
recommendation made by them in their 43 rd Report (15 th Lok Sabha) wherein the 
Committee had expressed concern at the scarcity of the available infrastructure for meeting 
the requirement of verification of SAR values of mobile handsets of a vast variety involving 
a large number of manufacturers, while observing that only one SAR lab has been set up by 
the DoT at n ew Delhi and another being set up at Mumbai. The Committee have strongly 
recommended that DoT must undertake a thorough review of the number of SAR Labs 
required to be set up in the country for carrying out this task as well as making the 
verification of a ll models of mobile handsets by SAR Labs a mandatory provision. 
Subsequently, the Committee in their 51 st Report on action taken by the Government on 
the said recommendation, had expressed their unhappiness at the reply of the Government 
that all handset m anufacturers of both indigenous as well as imported are only required to 
provide a  self-declaration in respect of SAR value subject to TEC audit as and when 

45 
 
required. While strongly feeling that the DoT should be equipped with sufficient number of 
SAR Labs so as to keep a strict vigil on the manufacturers with regard to adhering to SAR 
norms, the Committee had reiterated their recommendation and desired that DoT should 
undertake thorough review of SAR Labs required in the country and take expeditious steps 
to set up the Labs. The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
Action Taken by the Government 
DoT has issued instructions that all the mobile handset manufacturers, both 
indigenous and imported, shall provide a self declaration in respect of SAR value based on 
certificate issued from internationally accredited labs i.e. labs accredited by ILAC 
(International Laboratory Accreditation  Corporation) or Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC), 
India. Such self declared SAR limits  shall be subjected to TEC audit as and when required.  
Instructions have been issued to Indigenous Mobile Manufacturers to provide SAR value 
information of the mobile handsets, which shall be available on the manufacturer's website 
and in the handset's ma nual. The information on SAR values shall be made available to the 
consumer at the point of sale. Further, manufacturer's mobile handset booklet shall contain 
certain safety precautions. 
Telecom Engineering Centre has finalized the standards for mobile han dsets.  
Further an amendment to Indian Telegraph Act has been proposed to give statutory backing 
to the provisions.  
The Department is making effort to evolve a suitable strategy to disseminate 
information about SAR limits in different Indian languages in consultation with Telecom 
Equipment Manufacturers’ Association (TEMA)/Indian Cellular Association (ICA). 
TEC is planning another SAR laboratory at Mumbai for which funds are being sought. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of  
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
Need for Introduction of Green energy in Telecom Sector 
The Committee feel concerned to note that there is an average fuel consumption of 
8760 liters of diesel every year per to wer, assuming 8 hours of operation of DG sets and on 
this assumptions, billions of liters of this fossil fuel is consumed in the country every year. In 
this regard, the Committee note that based on the recommendations of TRAI dated 12 
April, 2011 on ‘Appro ach towards Green Telecommunication’ for gradual introduction of 
green energy in telecom sector, the DoT on 23 January, 2012, has issued directions to 

46 
 
Telecom Service Providers which envisaged that alteast 50 per cent of rural towers and 20 
per cent of urb an towers are to be powered by hybrid power (RET + Grid Power) by 2015, 
while 75 per cent of rural towers and 33 per cent of urban towers to be powered with (RET 
+ Grid Power) by 2020. The Committee have been informed that based on continuous 
interactions by TRAI with the TSPs, their associations, i.e., ISPAI, ACTO, COAI & AUSPI have 
submitted ‘Voluntary Code of Practice’ to reduce the carbon footprint of their network 
operations. It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that DoT has 
constituted a committee to prepare a roadmap to facilitate - increased use of Renewable 
Energy Technologies (RETs), development of sector specific schemes and analyzing the 
viability gap funding for deployment of RETs in Telecom. 
While appreciating the various init iatives being undertaken by TRAI and DoT, the 
Committee are of the view that the issue of fossil fuel consumption to power telecom 
towers and its polluting nature deserves serious attention. Moreover, the Government has 
to spend huge amount of money on die sel subsidy and it may not be desirable to consume 
billions of liters of diesel in powering the telecom towers. 
The Committee also feel that the ‘Voluntary Code of Conduct’ adopted by various 
telecom associations would be too weak unless backed by some reg ulation or some kind of 
mandatory provision. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
take all necessary steps to effectively implement the targets as envisaged to be 
implemented by 2015 and 2020 for powering the urban and rural telec om towers by hybrid 
power i.e. using more and more energy from renewable energy sources like wind and solar 
energy. The Committee while taking into consideration the objectives of the  NTP-
2012 which inter-alia include enhanced and continued adoption of gre en policy in telecom 
and incentivize use of renewable resources for sustainability, desire that to promote 
voluntary introduction of green energy by Telecom Service Providers, Government may 
explore the possibility of giving them some kind of incentives/ r ebates on license fee or 
reduction in levy rates. In this regard, the Committee feel that the Department may also 
consult the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy who are currently implementing the 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Power Mission besides ensu ring that the Committee 
constituted by DoT completes its task of preparing the roadmap to facilitate increased use 
of Renewable Energy with due promptitude. 
Action Taken by the Government 
DoT’s vide its Letter dated 23.01.2012 on implementation of Green Te chnologies in 
Telecom Sector has issued following directions to all CMTS /UASL/Basic Service Licensees – 
“At least 50% of all rural towers and 20% of the urban towers are to be powered by hybrid 
power (Renewable Energy Technologies (RET) + Grid power) by 2 015, while 75% of rural 
towers and 33% of urban towers are to be powered by hybrid power by 2020. ” In order to 
ensure implementation of these instructions, All CMTS/UASL/Basic Service Licensees are 
directed to submit service area wise quarterly report to respective TERM Cells of DoT. 

47 
 
DoT has also taken necessary steps in this regard by constituting a committee 
comprising of representatives of DOT/ Ministry of new & renewable Energy (MNRE) and 
other stakeholders to prepare a roadmap to facilitate increased u se of Renewable Energy 
Technologies (RETs), development of sector specific schemes and analyzing the viability gap 
funding for deployment of RETs in telecom. Further, an interaction meet for moving further 
was also held on powering the telecom towers throu gh Renewable Energy in MNRE on 
13/01/2014 under the chairmanship of Secretary, MNRE with DoT & MNRE officers, 
representatives of Telecom industry associations, RESCOs and other stakeholders. 
The Renewable Energy Technologies (RET) Committee, comprising of officers of DoT, 
MNRE and representatives of other stakeholders, has submitted its report to DoT on 
01.08.2014. Apart from other recommendations, the Committee has also recommended to 
incentivize the use of renewable resources. This and other recommendatio ns of the 
committee are under examination in DoT. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Supply of sub-standard mobile handsets to India by reputed global manufacturers 
The Committee note from a memorandum submitted to them by an expert of the 
field that more than 90 per cent of the mobile handsets are being supplied in India by 
reputed global manu facturers like Nokia, Samsung, Blackberry etc. While these reputed 
global manufacturers are strictly complying with all the prescribed safety limits when 
supplying the mobile handsets to countries like USA, Japan and European Countries, they 
are resisting the prescribed norms when it comes to supplying mobile handsets to India, 
probably taking the country for granted. From the response of DoT, the Committee feel 
perturbed to find that no standards for mobile handsets have so far been prescribed in the 
country and the same are still under deliberation of a Technical Committee of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee have been informed that even the standards which 
have been finalized by TEC have not been implemented. The Committee are unable to 
understand the reasons for the delay in formulation of standards for mobile handsets in the 
country which in the opinion of the Committee is an issue of paramount importance in 
ensuring standardization and quality control of mobile handsets being imported or 
manufactured in the country. The Committee while deprecating such sorry state of affairs 
prevailing in the country, strongly recommend that DoT must make all possible efforts in 
finalizing and implementing the standards for mobile handsets without any f urther loss of 
time and the Committee must be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Telecom Engineering Centre has finalized the standards for mobile handsets.  
Further an amendment to Indian Telegraph Act, has been proposed to give statutory 
backing to the provisions. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Need for Effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
The Committee note with concern that as the things stand today, the Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism available to the public in respect of EMF radiation from mobile 
towers located in their immediate v icinity is either totally insufficient or  non-existent. The 

50 
 
public has no means to verify as to whether the radiation from towers to which they are 
being exposed continuously is within the prescribed limits and whom to approach to allay 
their fears as no s uch details are required to be mentioned at the tower site. The 
Committee note that the only existing Complaint Handling System for Electro Magnetic 
Field (EMF) Radiation from Mobile Towers has been launched by DoT in Mumbai on 
4th October, 2012 through an  online facility on DoT website http://www.dot.gov.in and 
there is a proposal to extend this facility to other metros also. The Committee, however, 
note that even after the lapse of more than one year, the facility has not been extended to 
any other metro.  Further, no publicity has been given with respect to online complaints 
redressal mechanism. No wonder that most of the people are not aware of existence of 
such a mechanism. The Committee strongly feel that above grievance redressal mechanism 
of the Department is too little, too inadequate and is akin to making a deliberate attempt to 
ring fence the TSP and Infrastructure Providers from any public complaints and grievances. 
Holding the DoT squarely responsible for the absence of any effective mechanism for  
redressal of public grievances, the Committee recommend that urgent efforts should be 
made to extend “Complaint Handling System for Electro Magnetic Field (EMF) Radiation’ to 
other metros of the country along with an aggressive campaign to make the public  aware of 
the existence of such Complaint Handling System. The Committee further recommend that 
the suggestion to display the information regarding name and address of the operators, 
contact person details, address of complaint redressing authority, level of EMF radiation 
etc. at the entry point of the facility of the tower, which is being examined by DoT in 
consultation with telecom service providers and infrastructures providers, should be 
finalized and implemented at the earliest. The Committee, at the s ame time, feel that such 
consultation process would be more meaningful if members of the public forum, Resident 
Welfare Associations, NGOs etc. are also consulted in evolving an effective Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism. 
Action Taken by the Government 
The on line complaint handling system for Mumbai was launched by DoT on 
04.10.2012. It was envisaged that based on the response received for online complaint 
handling system of Mumbai, the facility may be extended to 3 other metros also. However, 
the total no of monthly complaints booked, for which the testing fee has been realized, on 
the online complaint handling system for Mumbai has reduced drastically from 135 in 
October 2012 to 13 in February 2014. Considering the small no of complaints being received 
the facility has not been extended to other metros. However, there are other mechanisms 
also for quick and effective redressal of public grievances, which include online booking of 
complaint on CPGRAMS web portal which are attended by TERM Cells. TERM Cells also  
carry out testing of EMF radiation acting on the complaints received directly by general 
public. In addition TERM Cells are testing up to 10% of the total BTSs annually for 
compliance to the DoT norms for EMF radiation. Apart from this a National EMF port al is 

51 
 
also under process of development which will facilitate the general public in knowing the 
compliance status of any BTS. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN 
NATURE 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
International practices and countries having lower emission standards 
 
From the  information provided by DoT, the Committee note that countries like 
China, Russia, Italy, Poland etc. are having more stricter norms on radiation exposure than 
India. On the contention raised in one of the memorandum received by the Committee that 
towers in China are emitting 100 times less radiation even though there are more mobile 
users in China than in India, the DoT in its written reply submitted that the complete 
information about lower radiation norms in China is not available including pros and con s of 
such norms. The Committee deplore such callousness on the part of DoT in not keeping 
itself abreast with the practices followed in other countries including China that have 
adopted lower emission norms than in India. The Committee feel that merely kee ping a 
watch on various reports of WHO and ITU without knowing their bases, as is being done by 
DoT is uncalled for as such an approach would result in formulating lopsided opinion and 
norms. The Committee strongly recommend that DoT should always keep its elf updated 
with the best practices followed in the world and take concerted steps to implement them 
as suitable to India. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
All efforts are being made by DoT to get the latest information on the subject from 
other countries.   The regulatory bodies and the departments dealing with the subject in 
other countries have been contacted to get the information about the latest developments 
in other countries. However, DoT will keep in view the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee regarding keeping itself updated with the best practices followed in the world 
and taking concerted steps to implement them as suitable to India. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
Shortage of equipment in Term Cells 
 
The Committee find it surprising to note that the TERM Cells are carrying out the 
testing of the BTSs by using the test instruments provided by Telecom Service Providers 
instead of using their own equipment which unfortunately has not so far been procured by 
the Department. In this regard, while seriously questioning the credibility of using the 

53 
 
equipment provided by TSPs, the Committee in their 43 rd Report on Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 th April, 2013 had highlighted the 
lack of testing equipment and had strongly recommended that serious efforts must be 
made by DoT to procure the requisite number of test equipment at the earliest to 
become self-sufficient in EMF testing besides promoting domestic production of the same 
instead of relying only on import. Again in their 51 st Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in their 43 rd Report presented to Lok 
Sabha on 16 th December, 2013, the Committee had expressed their serious displeasure at 
the lack of any urgency being shown by the Department in procuring the EMF testing 
equipment and had reiterated their earlier recommendation. In this background, the 
Committee view that any further delay in procurement is bound to give an impression that 
there is a tacit understanding between DoT and TSPs in taking any concrete steps for 
measuring compliance with EMF exposure limits. The Committee, therefore, once again 
strongly recommend that all out efforts must be made by the Department to procure such 
test equipment at the earliest. Further, domestic production of these equipment should be 
promoted to save precious foreign exchange and to ensure that these equipment do not 
remain as an exclusive monopoly of few TSPs, but are also available to the concerned 
individuals/public organizations so that they may also freely use such testing equipment 
themselves and effectively work as a watchdog in ensuring compliance of prescribed safety  
norms on radiation exposure. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Tender for procurement of 69 set of Test Equipment for the TERM Cells was floated 
& opened by Telecommunication Engineering Center (TEC) on 12.04.2013.  However the 
tender had been cancelled la ter due to non -responsive bids. TEC has floated a fresh tender 
for procurement of Test Equipment for the TERM Cells again and it is expected that 
requisite equipment will be available to the department very soon. All out efforts are being 
made by the Department to procure such test equipment at the earliest. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
Security related concerns due to imported telecom equipments 
 
The Committee note that the Indian Telecom Sector is heavily dependent on 
imported equipment and such telecom equipment if not tested properly could cause 
security concerns due to vulnerabilities embedded and malware in them. In this regard, the 
Committee note that for securing the telecom network, DoT has issued an amendment on 
31 May, 2011 making the licensee completely and totally responsible for security of their 
networks and mandating that licensee should induct only those network elements which  

54 
 
have been got tested as per relevant contemporary Indian or international security 
standards. Further, the licensees shall audit their networks or get the network audited from 
security point of view once a year from a network audit and certification agenc y. The 
Committee also note that a penal provision of upto Rs. 50 crore has been prescribed for 
breach of security by vendor or supplier who supplied the hardware/software that caused 
the security breach could be blacklisted or their license cancelled besid es initiation of 
criminal proceedings under the relevant Acts. 
To the surprise of the Committee, the DoT knowing fully well that telecom 
equipment, if not tested properly could cause security concerns, has not so far conducted 
any study to ascertain the se curity implications and risks involved due to dependence on 
imported equipment. What is even more dismaying to the Committee is that not a single 
authorized and certified agencies/labs for testing telecom equipment has been set up in the 
country. The Depar tment has taken the plea that understanding the test standards and 
developing the test processes and testing tools thereto, is a complex phenomenon and it is 
taking some time to come out with requisite indigenous security standards. The Committee 
also note that setting up of telecom equipment testing lab at the Indian Institute of Science 
(IISc), Bangalore, has run into rough weather due to refusal of foreign vendors to share their 
design details with the premier academic institute as it could hurt their bu siness interests 
and as a via media, the Government is considering establishment of a Telecom Testing and 
Security Certification Centre under it. The Committee find the reluctance of the industry to 
comply with the indigenous standards and testing within I ndia unacceptable as the 
committee feel that national security should not be compromised and sacrificed at an altar 
of commercial profit. The Committee strongly recommend the Department to take all 
necessary steps for the early establishment of Telecom Tes ting and security certification 
centre in the country at the earliest. 
It is also apparent to the Committee that in the absence of any authorized and 
certified agencies/labs for testing telecom equipments, no security audit of telecom 
networks is presently  possible to be conducted in the country and the officers posted for 
security audit as an  ad-hoc arrangement are still studying the subject matter before 
initiating any security audit work to verify the compliance by the Telecom Service Providers. 
Feeling extremely concerned that the Department has done precious little for the security 
of telecom networks in the country, the Committee strongly recommend that urgent 
measures should be taken by the Department for the establishment of the proposed 
Telecom secu rity Directorate to ensure compliance of security conditions by the Telecom 
Service Providers instead of relying on ad-hoc arrangement. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
For the early establishment of the Telecom Testing and Security Certification (TTSC) 
centre in the country a draft 'Scheme of Things for Security Testing of Telecom Equipment' 

55 
 
was prepared and consultations were held with National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) 
and Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). As an outcome of the consultations, it ha s been 
decided that eligibility criteria and the evaluation criteria for accrediting of Telecom 
Security Testing labs may be decided by a Committee consisting of representatives from 
DoT, DeitY, MHA, NTRO and DRDO and IISc, Bangalore. Further, the test sui te for each 
telecom network element may also be discussed and got vetted from this Committee. In 
addition, another Committee has also been formed to decide on financial issues like charges 
for registration of the lab, evaluation fees to be charged by the l ab, initial accreditation fee, 
and annual accreditation fees to be paid by the lab, etc. Once the recommendations/ 
reports of these committees are received, the 'Scheme of the Things' will be finalized. 
Based on the approved 'Scheme of Things' an Expressio n of Interest (EOI) for establishment 
of Security Testing labs, is proposed to be floated. 
To ensure compliance of security conditions by the Telecom service providers, the 
department has prepared a detailed proposal for establishment of Telecom Security 
Directorate, which is under financial vetting. Telecom Security Directorate has inter alia 
provision for Telecom Testing and Security Certification (TTSC) centre and Security Audit. 
Officers for the same have been provided and have conducted study of releva nt test 
standards, test processes and test tools and have developed test suites for a few network 
elements. They have also been coordinating and interacting with identified agencies for the 
finalization of the Scheme of Things. A draft 'Security Audit Fram ework Document' has also 
been formulated for security audit of telecom networks. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology /Department of 
Telecommunications O.M. No. 12-25/2010-CS-III(Pt. II) 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11 August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  

56 
 
Annexure-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-THIRD REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5, 6,7,8,9, 11,12,15,16,18,19 and 20  
 Total 16 
 Percentage 72.72 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  13 and 14  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 9.09 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  10,17 and 21  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 13.63 
 
 