STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘IT Induction and Modernization in the 
Department of Posts’] 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
28 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘IT Induction and Modernization in the 
Department of Post’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka)


 
i 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..……. 
 
18 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
19 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
22 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the committee held on 8th  August, 2016 
 
25 
II.  Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Tenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  (2015-16) 
      Shri Anurag Singh Thakur   -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 6. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
  7. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
8. Shri P. Karunakaran 
9. Shri Virender Kashyap 
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
11. Smt. Hema Malini 
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
13. Dr. K.C. Patel 
  14. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20.  Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@ 21. VACANT 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
* 23. Shri Suresh Gopi 
24.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
25. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
**26. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
# 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya  
# 31. VACANT 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Director 
3.  Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Abhishek Sharma - Executive Assistant    
*    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 20.05.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 23.05.2016. 
#   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, M.P. and Shri Salim Ansari, M.P. retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 01.07.2016 and 
04.07.2016 respectively. 
@ Ms. Mehbooba Mufti, M.P. resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 05.07.2016.   
 **    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 28.07.2016. 

 
iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2015 -16) having 
been authorized by the Committee, do present the Twenty -eighth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘IT Induction and Modernization in the Department of 
Posts’ of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to  Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       
7th August, 2015. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes contained on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report on 9th November, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was conside red and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
8th August, 2016. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
Anurag Singh Thakur, 
New Delhi;                           Chairperson, 
 08 August, 2016                                                                                          Standing Committee on 
 17 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                                                      Information Technology                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Reco mmendations of the 
Committee contained in their Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on IT Induction and 
Modernization in the Department of Posts  relating to the Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                      
7th August, 2015. It contained 13 Observations/Recommendations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been receiv ed from the Department of Posts and are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 13 
 
09 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Sl. Nos.:- Nil 
 
Nil 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
 Sl. Nos.:- 7 
 
01 
(iv) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim nature 
 
 Sl. Nos.:- 4, 5 and 10 03 
 

 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
6. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the implementation of the eight components of 
 the IT Modernization Project is planned to be completed between 2015 
 and 2017.  As estimated by the Department, the entire operation and 
 maintenance of these units is to be completed between 2020 and 2025.  A 
 review of implementation of the plan schemes indicates that achievement 
 in the year 2012-13 was nil.  The year 2013-14 witnessed fair progress with 
 the commissioning of the Data Centre, networking of 2795 locations, 
 development and deployment of CBS in 124 POs and PLI in 220 post 
 offices, etc.  It is disquieting to note that milestones could not be achieved 
 in respect of some important schemes, namely, Supply of Mail Office 
 Hardware and Rural Hardware and development and dep loyment of Rural 
 ICT solution in the year 2013 -14.  The Committee observe that the IT 
 Modernization Scheme of the Department of Posts got the maximum 
 outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all the schemes for the Twelfth Five 
 Year Plan.  A scrutiny of the  financial performance of the Department 
 during the past four years indicates that there has been significant 
 shortfall in utilization of funds against the allocation at the BE stage.  The 
 shortfall in utilization is attributed to reasons like complex a nd time -
 consuming nature of finalization of RFPs, interdependence amongst the 
 eight RFPs, need for re -tendering in RH and MOH due to the vendors 
 opting-out after being selected, delay in RFP meetings, queries and 
 clarifications sought by bidders leadin g to extension of last date of 
 submission of bid documents, delay in evaluation of RFPs, resolution of 
 complaints regarding certain aspects of the Project, etc.  The Committee 
 do understand that some of these factors may have hindered the timely 

 
3 
 
 utilization of funds but would like to point out that such challenges are 
 often encountered in implementation of mega projects of this nature. It is 
 for the Department to have anticipated such problems and factor them in 
 the implementation mechanism. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend 
 that greater efforts should be made by the Department to ensure that the 
 problem areas are addressed in an expeditious manner for the smooth 
 execution of the plan schemes with better utilization of funds.  The 
 Committee also  emphasize that the monitoring mechanism in place be 
 appropriately strengthened to ensure that various components of the 
 Project are rolled out in a time -bound manner.  The Committee would like 
 to be apprised of the progress of achievement of all the co mponents of 
 the IT Modernization Project.” 
 
 7. The Department of Posts, in their action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 “All the eight stream of the IT Modernization Project including Rural ICT 
 Solutions have entered into the implementation phase. The monitoring 
 mechanism has been put in place and various committees meet regularly 
 to address the challenges both for execution of the Project and utilization 
 of funds. The progress of the achievem ent of all the components of the IT 
 Modernization Project as on 26-10-2015 is furnished hereunder.  
PROJECT DETAILS AND POSITION 
Sl. Name of the segment & its scope.          Position as on 26-10-2015 
1 Change Management ( CM ): 
Preparing the workforce for the 
complete change in Departments’ 
working after implementation of IT 
Project. 
Implementation started on 15 -10-12. 
Training activities are in progress. It is an 
ongoing exercise in tandem with the 
implementation of various other streams 
of the Project.  
2 Data Centre Facility ( DCF): 
Hosting Primary Data centre and 
building Disaster Recovery centre for 
the DoP 
Data Centre is operational w.e.f. 3 rd April 
2013 at Navi Mumbai. 
 Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC): DRC has been powered on at Mysore on 
15th May, 2015.  
3 Financial Services Integrator (FSI): 
Implementation of solutions for Core 
Banking and Core Insurance in all 
Post Offices. 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. 
6629 POs for CBS and 17285 Post offices 
for CIS (PLI) have been migrated. ATM 
Services- installed at 125 locations.  

 
4 
 
Providing multiple delivery channels- 
internet banking, mobile banking, 
ATM and Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) and SMS etc. 
Circle Processing Centers (CPC) have 
been commissioned in all the 22 Circles.  
4 Network Integrator (NI): 
Providing connectivity for each 
departmental post office location in 
order to ensure uninterrupted 
network connectivity through one 
single WAN 
Implementation started on 28 -09-12. So 
far 27713 locations have been net 
worked on a single Wide  Area Net work 
(WAN). 
5 Core System Integrator (CSI): 
Implementation of the solutions for 
Mail Operation, Retail, logistic Post, 
Philately, Finance and Accounts & 
Human Resources and integration 
with other SIs. 
Implementation started on 15 -04-13. E -
mail roll out for all staff and officers is 
completed. Anti-virus has been deployed 
in 19389 offices and active directory has 
been deployed in 16828 offices. Pilot roll 
out has  started in Mysore Division of 
Karnataka circle on 30-09-15/1-10-15 
6 Rural Hardware (RH): 
Providing connectivity, hardware & 
solar power panels to Branch Post 
Offices in rural areas. 
Implementation phase started on 19 -06-
15. It has dependency on Rural System 
Integrator (RSI). The RH devices have 
been submitted for STQC audit and once 
software is ready, deployment of 
hardware will start.  
7 Rural System Integrator  (RSI): 
Implementation of the solution for 
integrating all the FSI/CSI 
applications to the Branch Post 
Offices. 
Implementation phase started on 05 -05-
15. Development of the pro posed 
application software is under way.  
8 Mail Operation Hardware  (MOH): 
Providing hardware to Mail Offices 
and handheld devices to Postmen. 
Action is underway for procurement of 
Mail Operations Hardware through 
DGS&D RC. 
 
8. While noting that during the past four years, there has been significant shortfall 
in utilization of funds against the allocation at the BE stage in IT Induction and 
Modernization Scheme, the Committee had recommended that greater efforts should 
be made by  the Department to ensure that the problem areas are addressed in an 
expeditious manner for the smooth execution of the Plan schemes with better 

 
5 
 
utilization of funds.  The Committee had also emphasized that the monitoring 
mechanism put in place be appropriately strengthened to ensure that various 
components of the Project are rolled out in a time -bound manner. The Department of 
Posts, in their Action Taken Note, have stated that a ll the eight stream s of the IT 
Modernization Project , including Rural ICT Solutions , have entered the 
implementation phase. The monitoring mechanism has been put in place and various 
committees are meeting regularly to address the challenges , both for execution of the 
Project and utilization of funds , and have furnished the updated progress in all the 
components of the IT Modernization Project.  The Committee stress that IT Induction 
and Modernization is an important Scheme with a comprehensive IT roadmap aimed 
at improving the performance and efficiency of the Department acro ss multiple 
functional areas. The Committee, therefore, stress that su stained efforts should be 
made by the Department to ensure execution of various components of the scheme as 
per the revised timelines. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
9. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee also note that the Task Force on leveraging India's Post 
 Office network has envisaged a new role for the Department in the realm 
 of banking, insurance and e -commerce.  The new set -up will require a 
 technologically augmented environment which will be created by 
 implementation of the IT Modernization Project. The Committee 
 understand that as part of the IT Project, India Post plan to implement 
 core banking in all Departmental Post Offices (more than 25,000) and 
 install 1000 ATMs in major Post Offices.   The project will bring in facilities 
 of ATM banking, Internet Banking and Mobile Banking to the Post Office 
 Savings Bank customers. Implementation of IT induction will also facilitate 
 insurance customers to pay premium or get policy update through any 
 Post Office or online, apply for loan against policy as well as submit final 
 claim at any Post Office. The settlement of claims w ill also be easier and 
 smoother as all documents shall be available in a digitized and easily 

 
6 
 
 retrievable format. The Departmental processing of investments will be 
 more efficient as the corpus at the disposal of the Department will be 
 known and made a vailable to the Investment Desk on a real time basis. 
 The Committee stress that e -Commerce is a technology driven business 
 involving seamless data transmission, visibility of articles across mail flow 
 pipeline and smooth and transparent remittance of co llected amount. 
 With the implementation of the IT project in the Department, eCommerce 
 transmission and delivery services can be provided through an integrated 
 IT system. The Department shall thus be able to bring the benefits of e -
 Commerce to the rura l and semi -urban areas, both as a market as well as 
 supplier of goods.   
       The Committee fully recognize the critical role of the IT Induction and 
 Modernization Project in the realm of banking, insurance and e -
 commerce. The successful roll -out of the IT Project is a necessary pre -
 requisite for the Department to make any significant foray into the 
 banking, insurance and e -Commerce domain. The Committee, therefore, 
 recommend that the utmost emphasis should be accorded to the 
 implementation of the  Project so that the future expansion of 
 products/services in these areas is not hampered for want of requisite IT 
 infrastructure.” 
10. The Department of Posts in their action taken note have stated as under:- 
 “The Core Banking Solution and Core Insuran ce Solution programmes 
 under the Financial Services Integrator segment of the IT Modernization 
 Project has entered into the implementation phase in full swing. These 
 Services, after complete implementation, will enable the customer to get 
 the facility of internet banking, mobile banking, SMS alerts, ATM, 
 insurance through internet and mobile etc. Now, 6629 Post offices are 
 providing Core Banking Service and 17285 Post Offices are providing 
 insurance solutions. ATM facility is available in 125 locations. 
 The Department has witnessed considerable growth in e -Commerce 
 business. Keeping in view the growth of the e -Commerce market, 
 Department has done Application Programme Interface (API) integration 
 with a  few e -Commerce customers and al so developed ‘Single Account’ 
 facility. Further Department has developed a ‘Circle Business Package’ 
 where Circles have been authorized to have an association with e -tailers 

 
7 
 
 to provide online sale platform to rural artisans to extend the 
 benefit of e-Commerce in rural areas also 
 The recommendation of the Standing Com mittee will be considered while 
 taking further decisions in this regard.” 
11. The Task Force on leveraging India's Post Office network ha d envisaged a new 
role for the Department in the realm of banking, insurance and e -commerce.  While 
recognizing the critical role of the IT Induction and Modernization Project in the realm 
of banking, insurance and e-commerce wherein the successful roll-out of the IT Project 
is a necessary pre -requisite for the Department to make any significant foray into the 
banking, insurance and e -Commerce domain, the Committee  had recommended that 
utmost emphasis should be accorded to the implementation of the Project s o that the 
future expansion of products/services in these areas is not hampered for want of 
requisite IT infrastructure.  The Department of Posts, in their Action Taken Note , have 
stated that they have witnessed considerable growth in e -Commerce business  and 
keeping in view the growth of the e -Commerce market, the Department have also 
done Application Programme Interface (API) integration with a few e -Commerce 
customers and developed ‘Single Account’ facility. Further, the Department have 
developed a ‘Circle Business Package’ wherein Circles have been authorized to have an 
association with e -tailers to provide online sale platform to rural artisans to extend 
the benefit of e -Commerce in rural areas . The Department have also stated that 
recommendation of the Standing Committee will be considered while taking further 
decisions in this regard.  While recognizing that the Department have done API 
integration with a few  e-Commerce customers and have also developed ‘Single 
Account’ facility, the Committee reiterate that utmost emphasis should be accorded 
to implementation of IT Induction and Modernization Project facilitat ing future 
expansion of products/services in the emerging banking, insurance and e -Commerce 
domain. 

 
8 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee note that during the early 1990s, with the advent of technology 
that led to electronic substitution of postal mail, introduction of core banking solutions 
and easy accessibilit y to mobile and internet based services, the Department of Posts 
(DoP) had started inducting technology by way of supplying hardware to Post Offices 
and implementing standalone software solutions for various operations in a Local Area 
Network (LAN) based e nvironment. A Software Development Centre was also set up at 
Mysore to cater to the needs of the Post Offices. To improve the quality of its services in 
line with the public expectations and to meet the increasing competition, technology 
upgradation in Pos t Offices was identified as a necessary prerequisite and to achieve 
this objective, the Department decided to improve and augment their IT infrastructure 
and introduce a new integrated software platform for its operations through an end -to-
end IT Project. The India Post IT Project was designed to realize this vision. The Project 
was approved by the Government with a total outlay of Rs. 4909 crore in November 
2012. The earlier programmes of induction of technology and computerization of Post 
Offices and introduction of core banking for office savings bank operations were merged 
in this new Project. The Committee recognize that IT Induction and Modernization is a 
very important Project of the Department with a comprehensive IT roadmap to develop 
network archit ecture, integrated software and effective data management, including 
the establishment of National Data Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery Centre. The 
Committee observe that there are eight segments/activities under the IT Induction and 
Modernization Project which are the Data Center Facility (DCF), Network Integrator (NI), 
Financial Services Integrator (FSI), Core System Integrator (CSI), Change Management 
(CM) structure, Rural Hardware (RH), Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Mail Operation 
Hardware (MOH). 
 The Committee note that the IT Induction & Modernization Project envisages 
improvement in the working of the Department across all functional areas, viz. faster 
and more reliable services in postal, logistics, banking, insurance and retail operations, 
equipping all Wide Area Network (WAN) locations with primary and  secondary 
bandwidth connectivity for seamless connectivity, simplification of processes resulting 
in immediate transfer of accounts and certificates, “Anytime Anywhere Banking” 
through multiple channels such as Internet, ATM and mobile, interoperability with other 
banks/Financial Institutions, efficient controls through improved Management 
Information System (MIS), centralised and accurate employee information resulting in 

 
9 
 
improved and timely admi nistrative services, efficient procurement and inventory 
management and reduction in operational times and costs. 
 The Committee further observe that by setting up an IT infrastructure spanning 
across all post offices, including branch post offices in rura l areas, the Department will 
be able to harness the benefits of consolidated real time information and capabilities 
across various functional silos as well as geographical reach. The transformation of the 
physical network to a digital network will also pro vide a national asset for all users, 
apart from post offices, including various Government Departments, business houses 
and citizens to use the IT enabled countrywide network for communication, banking, 
insurance and service delivery needs with transaction  data. This mega IT driven 
transformation would be unparalleled in its size and scope and will create a national 
asset of over 1, 55,000 networked post offices. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The IT Modernization Project of the Department of Po sts is in implementation 
phase. The statement is an observation made by the  Committee based on facts.   
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated   
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee also note that multiple types of access have been provisioned in 
the IT Modernization Project which will be available to the customers for getting 
information, availing services and for redressal of grievances. The multiple channels 
include the Customer Interaction Management Portal (CIM), Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR), Call Centre, ATM, e -Banking, Mobile phones, Post Office counters, Payment 
Gateway, etc. Further, the implementation of Rural ICT Solution (RH & RSI) and Core 
Banking Solutio n (CBS) will enable the Department of Posts to roll -out Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) through a network of 1.55 Lakh Post Offices in rural as well as urban Post 
Offices. Rural Post Offices will be enabled with a Hand Held device with biometric 
identification and Micro ATM enablement, wireless network, thermal printer to provide 
immediate receipts to customer and solar powered battery to charge and operate the 
Micro ATM. The Rural Information Communication & Technology (RICT) involves 
computerization and dig ital connectivity of all the Gramin Dak Sewak Post Offices 
including those in rural areas. The objective is to provide a technology solution (ICT 
Device) to each Branch Postmaster (BPM) which will enable each of approximately 
1,30,000 Branch Post Offices t o improve the quality of services being offered to rural 
customers. It will increase the rural reach of the Department and enable Branch Post 
Offices to increase traffic of all financial remittances, savings accounts, cash certificates 
and Rural Postal Lif e Insurance (RPLI). This is being enabled through the Rural System 

 
10 
 
Integrator (RSI) and Rural Hardware (RH) solutions. The ease of transactions will 
encourage rural citizens to avail the services of Post Offices, thereby having a positive 
impact on the rural economy, besides improving financial inclusion. 
 
 The Department of Posts have a vast network of approximately 1,55,000 Post 
Offices out of which 1,30,000 are rural Branch Post Offices. The Committee recognizes 
that transformation of the physical networ k to a digital network will also enable the 
Government to use the postal network to reach out to the rural population for efficient 
delivery of financial services such as banking and insurance, besides improving 
communications, mails and other service deli very needs of the citizens. The IT 
Modernization Project, particularly the rural ICT solutions, will rebuild the rural postal 
network to create an institutional infrastructure for last mile delivery of financial 
services to the citizens. The Project will m ake the Post Office the focal point for delivery 
of financial services and further the cause of financial inclusion by providing the rural 
population across the country with access to formal banking and insurance services. 
Reply of the Government 
 The IT M odernization Project of  the Department of Posts is in implementation 
phase. The statement is an observation made by the  Committee based on facts.   
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-  PMU dated 
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee acknowledges that the lT enabled Post Offices will lead to 
transparent delivery of social security schemes, including Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). 
The disbursement of Social Security Scheme shall be done through biometric 
identification using the mobile hand held devices that will not only lead to transparency 
but also reduce the number of complaints of wrong payment and fraudulent 
transactions, besides eliminating the middlemen in the system. Online monitoring sh all 
also be faster and shall be without scope for any manipulation. The Committee observe 
that the Department of Posts, with a network of approximately 1,55,000 Post Offices 
making transition to a digital network, will enable the Government to use the post al 
network to reach out to the citizens for efficient delivery of social service schemes, apart 
from improving the communications, mails and other service delivery needs of the 
citizens. The IT Modernization Project, particularly the rural ICT solutions, w ill thus 
rebuild the rural postal network to create an institutional infrastructure for last mile 
delivery of all Government services to the citizens. The project will make the Post Office 
the focal point of delivery for social security and employment guar antee schemes of the 
Union and the State Governments, including disbursement of wages under MNREGS, 

 
11 
 
Pension and scholarship, etc. through Direct Benefit Transfer employing Biometric 
authentication of financial transactions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The IT  Modernization Project of t he Department of Posts is in implementation 
phase. The statement is an observation made by the  Committee based on facts.   
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated    
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the major challenges faced by the Department in the 
roll-out of the lT Induction and Modernization Project include, inter-alia, the time 
consuming nature of public procurement process, selected vendors no t taking up the 
allocated work leading to major delays, telecom network connectivity issues in areas like 
North East, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Ladakh and Island territories, pan -India scope of 
operations, large number of Post -Offices (approx. 1,55,000 co mprising of 25,000 
Departmental Post Offices and 1,30,000 Branch Post -Offices), migration from almost 56 
stand-alone applications presently being used in the Department to an integrated IT 
platform, and managing a workforce of almost 4.66 lakh employees ha ving no prior 
experience of working in an IT -enabled environment.  In their endeavour to meet these 
challenges, the Department have developed a focused and time -bound plan which 
includes roping in Change Management vendor for creation of a new work culture , 
imparting training to employees at all levels, simplification of procedure to ensure that 
manual processes are not replicated in an IT environment, large scale simplification of 
Rules and Procedures to bring them in synchronization  with the new IT -enabled 
working environment and setting up Project Monitoring Units up to the Divisional levels 
(district level) in order to implement the Project in a synchronized manner. While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Department to ensure a smooth transition from  a 
manual work environment to an IT -enabled environment, the Committee recommend 
to the Department to remain focused through structural monitoring of the remedial 
measures taken for addressing the operational impediments.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation made by Standing Committee is being followed and 
Department of Posts will remain focussed, in future also. 
  
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated    
09-11-2015) 

 
12 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committ ee note that the Department’s software development centre at 
Mysore (Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology) had developed most of the 
application software that are still being used by the Post Offices. In addition, CEPT 
Mysore also housed the first in -house Data Centre of the Department. The Committee 
have been apprised that the software developed by CEPT is working in the post offices 
of many friendly countries. In addition, data sanitization work required for roll -out of 
Core Banking Services (CBS) a nd Core PLI is also being done throughout the country 
under the overall supervision of CEPT Mysore. Insofar as the IT Induction and 
Modernization Project is concerned, the CEPT, Mysore, is involved in Knowledge 
Transfer of existing Applications, assistance  in roll-out and Data migration, Acceptance 
Testing of respective solutions of all RFPs, and Operation and Maintenance.  While 
appreciating the role of CEPT, Mysore, in developing the application software to cater to 
the specific requirements of post offic es, the Committee feel that the Software 
Development Center at Mysore, with its unique experience in developing stand -alone 
software applications for Post Offices, can play a vital role in areas such as knowledge 
transfer of existing applications, data migration, acceptance testing of different modules 
of the IT Project as well as operation and maintenance matters. The Committee 
recommend that the accumulated experience of CEPT, Mysore, in software 
development for DoP may be optimally utilized in ensuring a  seamless transition from 
stand-alone applications to a fully networked architecture served by a common data 
center. 
Reply of the Government 
 The assistance of CEPT, Mysore is already being taken in implementation of the IT 
Modernization Project. Further, accumulated experience of CEPT Mysore would be 
optimally utilized as recommended by the Committee.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.10 - 1/2010-PMU dated     
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 The Committee have been informed that Task Force on leveraging the Post Office 
network had given wide -ranging recommendations concerning IT Induction and 
Modernization in the Department.  Some of the key recommendations include adoption 
of non-proprietary and open standards for hardware and software products, leveraging 
the inherent strengths of the India Post network to garner business in upcoming 
segments such as e -commerce and e -retailing, integration of information systems with 
those of major e -commerce companies, de -linking parcel service from normal postal 
services, introduction of same day delivery, providing end -to-end track and trace facility, 
implementation of measures for cyber security and payment security, GPS tracking and 

 
13 
 
containerized movement  of parcels. The Task Force had also stressed the need to use 
post offices as Common Service Centers (CSCs) offering a variety of public services, 
diversification into other range of products/services such as Card Based Money 
Transfers, Mobile Banking, Col lection of EMIs and bill payments, collaboration with the 
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) to develop new financial products based 
on the RuPay Indian domestic card scheme, treatment of Commercially Important 
Clients (CICs) as a special catego ry and availability of Postal Services to citizens 
electronically through the i n t r o d u c t i o n  o f  d i g i t a l  stamping and f r a n k i n g 
machines at po stal counters, internet postage and electronic mail bo xes.  The 
Committee are given to understand that a Group of Senior Officers has been constituted 
to chalk out a strategy for implementing specific recommendations of the Task Force 
along with timelines, in synergy with the other two reports of the Internal Task Forces 
set up to ‘Scale up PLI Business’ and ‘Capture e-Commerce Market’. The Committee 
recommend that the Group of Officers should complete the exercise in a time -bound 
manner and evolve an effective strategy to implement the recommendations of the 
Task Force so that the vision of leveraging the Post Office network of the country can be 
realized.  The Committee would like to be informed of the outcome in this regard. 
 
         Reply of the Government 
 With the approval of Hon’ble Minister of Communications and IT, a Group of 
Senior Officers was constituted in  the Department to examine each recommendation of 
the Task Force; to obtain relevant inputs from the Divisions concerned within the Postal 
Directorate, Field Units as well as Staff Unions and Officers’ Union; and to chalk out a 
strategy for implementing sp ecific recommendation of the Task Force along with 
timelines, in synergy with the other two reports of Internal Task Forces set up to ‘Scale 
up Postal Life Insurance Business’ and ‘Capturing e -Commerce Market’. Based on the 
report of the Group of Senior Of ficers, the present status of implementation of the 
recommendations of Task Force is summarized as under:- 
 
1. The Task Force has envisaged new role for the Department in the realm of 
banking, insurance and e -commerce. As such, in order to generate additional business 
and augment revenue receipt through Parcel and e-Commerce Services, the Department 
has already entered into partnerships with Amazon, Flipkart, Shopclues, Snapdeal and e -
Bay. Regarding Banking business, subsequent to the RBI approval in  September, 2015, 
Department is preparing for setting up of the Payments Bank. 
 
2. The recommendation of the Task Force to examine the best practices being 
followed in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for replication in other states is in alignment 
with the activities being pursued by the Department of Posts such as disbursement of 
MNREGS wa ge payment using Aadhaar enabled hand held devices, Collection of 

 
14 
 
recruitment fee, admission fee etc. of various universities/departments under various 
State Governments under e -payment application, Collection of utility bills, Electricity 
Bills, property tax, water bill, at Post Offices etc. Further, the Department has also 
addressed all the Union Ministries/ Departments, State Governments and PSU’s asking 
them to utilize the Postal network. Responses have been received from Election 
Commission of India, M inistry of External Affairs, Labour Commission of Gujarat and 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research . Initial discussions have been initiated with them 
to utilize the network of Post Offices.  The Department has signed an agreement with 
Common Service Centre (CSC), Department of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Government of India for setting up of Common Service Centres in rural Post Offices.  
3. Global Positioning System (GPS) is being installed in outsourced/depar tmental 
vehicles and for tracking consignments such as Express Parcels, Business Parcels, 
Registered Parcels, etc.  
4. As regards delinking Parcel services, a pilot project for setting up parcel booking 
and delivery kiosks is being developed and can be ups caled based on results. 
Introduction of same day delivery service, return logistics, standard and secure 
packaging at the booking point are other aspects where systems are being put in place.  
5. The Department already provides the e -Post service for e-transmission of written 
communication with printing and delivery at the other end. E -post card can thus be sent 
using the existing e-Post service.  
6. For a strong security system, 
a) Secured plastic seals are introduced in processing hubs of 20 cities and shall  be 
 extended to all hubs. 
b) CCTVs are installed at 20 major processing centres and depending on the 
 availability of funds they will installed in remaining centres as well. 
c) Containerized movements of mail will be taken on 40 identified long - haul routes 
 for enhanced security. 
d) Fund requirement for provision of X -ray machines at 6 Metro Centres is being 
 assessed, and 
e) Outsourced security system with defined Service Level Agreements (SLAs) for 
 identified processing centres and transportation routes will be ex amined at 
 appropriate stage. 
7. The Department has already started taking action to scale up Postal Life Insurance 
and Rural Postal Life Insurance business. The maximum sum assured limit has been 
enhanced from Rs 20 lakh to Rs 50 lakh in case of PLI and f urther Rs 5 lakh to Rs 10 lakh 
for RPLI. Introduction of a new girl child policy is also under examination. The 

 
15 
 
completion of IT roll out in PLI/RPLI will significantly enhance the quality of service and 
also enable the Department to offer new facilities as well as products. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated     
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 The Committee note that the DCF located at Navi Mumbai has been functional 
since April 2013. Presently, DCF is handling CBS and Core PLI transactions in 9174 Post 
Offices. The daily average number of transactions handled at DCF is 8.52 lakh. The 
Department plans to scale up the DCF as more Post Offices are being connected through 
Wide Area Network.  The Committee are given to understand that all the technical 
solutions and infrastructure being created under the IT Project, including the Data 
Centre Facility, are scalable and modular in nature, i.e. they are designed to take care of 
additional load by scaling up commensurate to the requirement; besides, the Data 
Centre facility is designed to handle transactions emanating from the entire postal 
network. Insofar as the requirement of bandwidth is concerned, the RFP and contracts 
have provisions relating to increasing the bandwidth as per actual requirements. The 
DRC facility at CEPT, Mysore, has been installed followed by the user acceptance test 
which has been  completed and accepted on 19.03.2015. The Committee have been 
apprised that the DRC is expected to be operationalized shortly. 
 
 With the Data Center Facility (DCF) already in operation since April 2013 and the 
Data Recovery Center (DRC) expected to be op erationalized shortly, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should expedite the networking of the remaining Post 
Offices so that more and more Post Offices can move their data to DCF and make 
optimum use of the networked architecture as envisaged in the IT Project.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Data Centre is operational at Navi Mumbai since April, 2013. Data Recovery 
Centre is powered on from 15-05-2015 at CEPT, Mysore. 
 Department has networked 27713 locations out of ~28800 locations. The 
locations which have not been networked till now are either due to some technical 
challenges or due to some geographical challenges. These locations are mostly located 
in hilly or remote areas. Though BSNL has declared these places technically non feasible, 
the Department is looking at other alternatives. 
 
 

 
16 
 
 Department has also taken action to increase the bandwidth at Data Centre level 
from 600 Mbps to 1024 Mbps to smoothen day to day operation. Action has also been 
initiated to enhance the bandwidth capacity at post office level.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated      
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 The Committee note that Change Management is a vital component of the IT 
Modernization Project and Change Management Vendor is conducting surveys for 
different levels of officers/officials which forms the basis of workshops and training 
programmes being conducted for the staff members. The Department’s website, 
newsletter and SMS alerts are also being used to create awareness among the staff 
members. Vendors are conducting training in a phased manner to train the staff in an IT 
enabled environment which is being augmented by training in all Training Centres of the 
Department, including Work Place Training Centr es functioning in all Divisions, Standard 
Training Packages being delivered online, and Divisional level Change Agents. 
 The Committee observe that it is imperative that the Change Management 
vendor should impart requisite training which will go a long way  in improving the 
performance of the Postal employees. Efforts to improve the skills and capabilities of 
employees through training is necessary to equip the workforce with the knowledge of 
various IT tools at their disposal, which will also lead to  optim um utilization of these IT 
tools. The Committee feel that since the Department of Posts are a service oriented 
entity having a large workforce of approximately 4.66 lakh employees who have been 
largely working in a manual environment, special emphasis on I T training requirements 
of such a large workforce should be a priority area. While appreciating the ongoing 
efforts of the Department to meet the training requirement of their employees, the 
Committee stress the need to focus on training requirements of th e large workforce to 
reorient them to work in an IT enabled environment. 
Reply of the Government 
 Regular efforts are being made for managing the changes through various modes 
like Change awareness Programmes, Change Agents networks, Surveys, Workshops, 
News letter etc. The Standard Training Packages for training of the full range of 
employees are updated regularly to incorporate the IT Project related changes, and 
training programmes are held frequently based on training needs.  The Department has 
involved its six Postal Training Centres and 410 Work Place Training Centers to impart 
training to all its employees targeting the required changes recommended by the 
Standing Committee.           
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated      
09-11-2015) 

 
17 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 To sum up, though the IT Modernization Project has entered the fourth year of its 
implementation, the pace of execution has been slow resulting in shortfall in 
achievements as against the envisaged physical targets.  It is noteworthy that this mega 
IT driven transformation is the first of its kind undertaken by any postal operator in the 
world.  The benefits of the Project after its successful implementation are expected to 
be immense encompassing th e Government, the Department of Posts and equally 
importantly the customers.  The Department of Posts are poised to play an important 
role in bridging the urban -rural divide and bringing IT -enabled services to all sections of 
society through its 1,55,000 I T-enabled Post Offices.  It needs reiteration that the 
reduction of paper-based processing will enable an environmentally sustainable greener 
Post Office.  The vision can be transformed into reality only in a technologically 
augmented environment of the De partment, which the IT Modernization Project 
intends to create.  Considering that it is a transformational project having far reaching 
impact, the Committee recommend that the Project Governance Structure of the 
Department should take all necessary measure s for the successful execution of this 
mega venture in a time -bound manner which will also support the ambitious 'Digital 
India' Campaign. 
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Posts, through its IT Modernization Project, is making an all out 
effort to tr ansform 1, 55,000 Post Offices across the nation. These transformed post 
offices will play important role in financial inclusion of the marginalized population of 
the country. These transformed post offices will also cater the e -Commerce need of the 
population who are living in semi urban and rural India. These post offices will also work 
as Common Service Centers (CSC) for the programmes of the Government of India 
envisaged for the Rural India.  
 The IT Modernization Project of the Department of Posts, onc e it enters the 
operational phase, shall bridge the Digital Divide of Rural and Urban India and support 
the “Digital India” programme of Government of India. The Project is being monitored at 
the highest level in the Department and it shall be the endeavou r of the Department to 
successfully deliver the project within the shortest possible time frame.  
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts F.No.10 -1/2010-PMU dated      
09-11-2015) 
  
 

 
18 
 
Chapter III 
 
Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19 
 
Chapter IV 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 The Committee note that the implementation of the eight components of the IT 
Modernization Project is planned to be completed between 2015 and 2017.  As 
estimated by the Department, the entire operation and maintenance of these units is to 
be completed between 2020 and 2025.  A review of implementation of the plan 
schemes indicates that achievement in the year 2012 -13 was nil.  The year 2013 -14 
witnessed fair progress with the commissioning of the Data Centre, networking of 2795 
locations, development and deployment of CBS in 124 POs and PLI in 220 post offices, 
etc.  It is disquieting to note that milestones could not be achieved in respect of some 
important schemes, namely, Supply of Mail Office Hardware and Rural Hardware and 
development and deployment of Rural ICT solution in the year 2013 -14.  The Committee 
observe that the IT Modernization Scheme of the Department of Posts got the 
maximum outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all the schemes for the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan.  A s crutiny of the financial performance of the Department during the past four 
years indicates that there has been significant shortfall in utilization of funds against the 
allocation at the BE stage.  The shortfall in utilization is attributed to reasons lik e 
complex and time -consuming nature of finalization of RFPs, interdependence amongst 
the eight RFPs, need for re -tendering in RH and MOH due to the vendors opting -out 
after being selected, delay in RFP meetings, queries and clarifications sought by bidders  
leading to extension of last date of submission of bid documents, delay in evaluation of 
RFPs, resolution of complaints regarding certain aspects of the Project, etc.  The 
Committee do understand that some of these factors may have hindered the timely 
utilization of funds but would like to point out that such challenges are often 
encountered in implementation of mega projects of this nature. It is for the Department 
to have anticipated such problems and factor them in the implementation mechanism. 
The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that greater efforts should be made by the 
Department to ensure that the problem areas are addressed in an expeditious manner 
for the smooth execution of the plan schemes with better utilization of funds.  The 
Committee also emp hasize that the monitoring mechanism in place be appropriately 
strengthened to ensure that various components of the Project are rolled out in a time -
bound manner.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress of 
achievement of all the components of the IT Modernization Project. 
 
 

 
20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 All the eight stream of the IT Modernization Project including Rural ICT Solutions 
have entered into the implementation phase. The monitoring mechanism has been put 
in place and various committe es meet regularly to address the challenges both for 
execution of the Project and utilization of funds. The progress of the achievement of all 
the components of the IT Modernization Project as on 26 -10-2015 is furnished 
hereunder.  
PROJECT DETAILS AND POSITION 
Sl. Name of the segment & its scope.          Position as on 26-10-2015 
1 Change Management ( CM ): 
Preparing the workforce for the 
complete change in Departments’ 
working after implementation of IT 
Project. 
Implementation started on 15 -10-12. 
Training activities are in progress. It is an 
ongoing exercise in tandem with the 
implementation of various other streams 
of the Project.  
2 Data Centre Facility ( DCF): 
Hosting Primary Data centre and 
building Disaster Recovery centre for 
the DoP 
Data Centre is operational w.e.f. 3 rd April 
2013 at Navi Mumbai. 
 Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC): DRC has been powered on at Mysore on 
15th May, 2015.  
3 Financial Services Integrator (FSI): 
Implementation of solutions for Core 
Banking and Core Insurance in all 
Post Offices. 
Providing multiple delivery channels- 
internet banking, mobile banking, 
ATM and Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) and SMS etc. 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. 
6629 POs for CBS and 17285 Post offices 
for CIS (PLI) have been migrated. ATM 
Services- installed at 125 locations.  
Circle Processing Centers (CPC) have 
been commissioned in all the 22 Circles.  
4 Network Integrator (NI): 
Providing connectivity for each 
departmental post office location in 
order to ensure uninterrupted 
network connectivity through one 
single WAN 
Implementation started on 28 -09-12. So 
far 27713 locations have been net 
worked on a single Wide Area Net work 
(WAN). 
5 Core System Integrator (CSI): 
Implementation of the solutions for 
Mail Operation, Retail, logistic Post, 
Philately, Finance and Accounts & 
Human Resources and integration 
Implementation started on 15 -04-13. E-
mail roll out for all staff and officers is 
completed. Anti -virus has been 
deployed in 19389 offices and active 
directory has been deployed in 16828 

 
21 
 
with other SIs. offices. Pilot roll out has  started in 
Mysore Division of Karnataka circle on 
30-09-15/1-10-15 
6 Rural Hardware (RH): 
Providing connectivity, hardware & 
solar power p anels to Branch Post 
Offices in rural areas. 
Implementation phase started on 19 -
06-15. It has dependency on Rural 
System Integrator (RSI). The RH devices 
have been submitted for STQC audit 
and once software is ready, deployment 
of hardware will start.  
7 Rural System Integrator  (RSI): 
Implementation of the solution for 
integrating all the FSI/CSI 
applications to the Branch Post 
Offices. 
Implementation phase started on 05 -
05-15. Development of the proposed 
application software is under way.  
8 Mail Operation Hardware  (MOH): 
Providing hardware to Mail Offices 
and handheld devices to Postmen. 
Action is underway for procurement of 
Mail Operations Hardware through 
DGS&D RC. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated      
09-11-2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
22 
 
Chapter V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM 
IN NATURE 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 The implementation of the IT Modernization Project is likely to improve the 
visibility in day -to-day operations and enable real -time interventions in case of 
operational problems, e.g. mail movements; further,  automatic data updation will 
enable verified data/report availability/generation and ope rational planning and 
decision making will be facilitated by availability of reliable and up -to-date data, 
introduction of efficiencies in Inventory management and Procurement, ease of 
financial monitoring/planning and improvement in Human Resource Managem ent.  The 
Committee is of the view that the IT Induction and Modernization Project will facilitate 
quick decision making by the Department of Posts enabling real -time interventions to 
resolve operational problems.  The Project will also lead to improved pl anning and 
decision making through the use of Management Information System (MIS) facilitated 
by availability of reliable and up -to-date data generated in real -time. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should ensure optimum use of the data generate d in 
real-time in improving decision making, both in the operational and the policy front. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 MIS & Business Intelligence Services module under CSI segment of IT 
Modernization Project, provisions to generate reports out of the data readily available in 
the system.  User Acceptance Testing of these modules has been done and the Pilot roll 
out for the same is already underway. In its operational phase, the recommendation of 
the Committee will be met. 
 
(Ministry of Communic ations & IT/Department of Posts   F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated    
09-11-2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee also take note of the fact that with the roll -out of the IT Induction 
and Modernization Project, the Department shall be in a position to introduce several 
new services in the future, viz. delivery of e -Commerce articles offering seamless tra ck 
and trace facility, including returns, and immediate remittance of collections on 
delivery, e -Commerce (place orders / view commodity rates), Utility Bill payments - 
phone/electricity, etc., Commission/Fee Collection, booking and reservation of train & 
air tickets, data collection for other organizations, distribution of social security benefits 

 
23 
 
and Common Service Centre (CSC) services. Keeping in view the fact that the future roll -
out of various products/services by the Department of Posts is closely ti ed-up to the 
successful roll -out of the IT Induction and Modernization Project, the Committee 
emphasize that efforts should be made for the timely and successful execution of the 
Project to reap the benefits of prospective business.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The CSI segment of the IT Modernization Project which deals with the above 
mentioned services is passing through the pilot roll out phase. The recommendation 
made by the Standing Committee, has been noted down by Department of Posts for 
necessary action. 
 
(Ministry of Communica tions & IT/Department of Posts F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated     
09-11-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee also note that the Task Force on leveraging India's Post Office 
network has envisaged a new role for the Department in the realm of banking, 
insurance and e -commerce.  The new set -up will require a technologically augmented 
environment which will be created by implementation of the IT Modernization Project. 
The Committee understand that as part of the IT Project, India Post plan to implement 
core banking in all Departmental Post Offices (more than 25,000) and install 1000 ATMs 
in major Post Of fices.  The project will bring in facilities of ATM banking, Internet 
Banking and Mobile Banking to the Post Office Savings Bank customers. Implementation 
of IT induction will also facilitate insurance customers to pay premium or get policy 
update through any Post Office or online, apply for loan against policy as well as submit 
final claim at any Post Office. The settlement of claims will also be easier and smoother 
as all documents shall be available in a digitized and easily retrievable format. The 
Departmental processing of investments will be more efficient as the corpus at the 
disposal of the Department will be known and made available to the Investment Desk 
on a real time basis. The Committee stress that e -Commerce is a technology driven 
business invo lving seamless data transmission, visibility of articles across mail flow 
pipeline and smooth and transparent remittance of collected amount. With the 
implementation of the IT project in the Department, eCommerce transmission and 
delivery services can be provided through an integrated IT system. The Department shall 
thus be able to bring the benefits of e -Commerce to the rural and semi -urban areas, 
both as a market as well as supplier of goods.   
       The Committee fully recognize the critical role of the  IT Induction and 
Modernization Project in the realm of banking, insurance and e -commerce. The 

 
24 
 
successful roll -out of the IT Project is a necessary pre -requisite for the Department to 
make any significant foray into the banking, insurance and e -Commerce do main. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the utmost emphasis should be accorded to the 
implementation of the Project so that the future expansion of products/services in these 
areas is not hampered for want of requisite IT infrastructure. 
Reply of the Government 
  The Core Banking Solution and Core Insurance Solution programmes under the 
Financial Services Integrator segment of the IT Modernization Project has entered into 
the implementation phase in full swing. These Services, after complete implemen tation, 
will enable the customer to get the facility of internet banking, mobile banking, SMS 
alerts, ATM, insurance through internet and mobile etc. Now, 6629 Post offices are 
providing Core Banking Service and 17285 Post Offices are providing insurance 
solutions. ATM facility is available in 125 locations. 
 The Department has witnessed considerable growth in e -Commerce business. 
Keeping in view the growth of the e -Commerce market, Department has done 
Application Programme Interface (API) integration with a few e -Commerce customers 
and also developed ‘Single Account’ facility. Further Department has developed a ‘Circle 
Business Package’ where Circles have been authorized to have an association with e -
tailers to provide online sale platform to rural artisans  to extend the benefit of e -
Commerce in rural areas also 
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee will be considered while taking 
further decisions in this regard. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT/Department of Posts  F.No.10-1/2010-PMU dated    
09-11-2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
Anurag Singh Thakur, 
New Delhi;                           Chairperson, 
08 August, 2016                                                                                         Standing Committee on 
17 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                                                           Information Technology     

 
25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 8TH AUGUST, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 8 th August, 2016, from 1600 hours                     
to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
3. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
4. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Dr. K.C. Patel 
10. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
11. Shri D.K. Suresh 
12. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
13. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
14. Shri Suresh Gopi  
15. Shri Meghraj Jain 
16. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
17. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 

 
26 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following three Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…; 
II. Action Taken Report on the Tenth Report on the subject ‘IT Induction and 
Modernization in the Department of Posts’; and 
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….….xxxxx………..  
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the above Reports and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report.  
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                     

 
27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR TENTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1 ,2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 13  
 Total 09 
 Percentage 69.23 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 7  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 7.69 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 4,5 and 10  
 Total 03 
 Percentage 23.08 
 