 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on           
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
 
 
               LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
              NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
  
 
18 


 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on           
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………………………………… 
11 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
35 
CHAPTERIV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
36 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in 
nature………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
39 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on                
18th December, 2015  
 
40 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Second Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
         42   

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2015-16) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
6. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
7. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
8. Shri P. Karunakaran  
9. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
11. Shrimati Hema Malini  
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
13. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Smt.) Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Javed Akhtar  
23. Shri Salim Ansari  
24. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan  
25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
26. Shri Meghraj Jain  
27. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
28. Shri Derek O’Brien  
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
30. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
31. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2015-2016), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the 
Eighteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their  Second 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’ of the Ministry 
of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology). 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 22nd December, 2014.  The Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report on                   
4th June, 2015. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 18th December, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Act ion Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15)‟ rela ting to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 22nd December, 2014. It contained 20 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,13,15,16,17,18 and 19  
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 12 and 20  
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 14  
 
4. The Committee, in their Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), had 
undertaken a comprehensive examination of the Demands for Grants        
(2014-15) of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology ).  While reviewing the 
budget of the Department, the Committee had recommended that sustained 
and consolidated steps be taken to ensure that  performance indicators set for 
the current fiscal are achieved.  Having examined the implementation of the 
schemes of DeitY  in the North Eastern Region, the Committee had also 

2 
 
recommended inclusive growth of NER for holistic  e-development.  The 
Committee had further commented upon the Digital India Programme and 
various components of e -Governance such as  State Wide Area Network 
(SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs), Common Service Centres (CSCs) and 
desired the Ministry to implement these  schemes in specific timeframe  so as 
to achieve the targets . Besides, the Committee reviewed the  status of fund 
utilization, manpower and infrastructure requirements in National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) ,  financial and physical achievements under  the National 
Knowledge Network ( NKN), Cyber Security, schemes relating to Promotion of 
Electronic IT Hardware Manufacturing, C -DAC, s uper computing and 
indigenous tablets/PCs. 
 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology (Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology) on each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Second Report have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this  Report. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be 
given on implementing the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for an y reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final Action 
Taken Replies to the Observations /Recommendations contained in Chapter -V 
of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
A. E-Governance 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The National e -Governance plan was conceived in May, 2006 with a 
vision to make all Government Services accessible to the common citizen 

3 
 
in his/her locality, through an efficient, transparent and reliable 
mechanism. Under the programme, a robust e -infrastructure is being 
created to facilitate deployment of ICT solutions by various Departments 
and State Governments. The Committee note that f or e-Governance, the 
Plan allocation is Rs. 1230 crore for the year 2014 -15 which include         
Rs. 475 crore for Electronic Governance and  Rs. 755 crore for National           
e-Governance Action Plan (NeGAP). The Committee take note of the fact 
that the Department have been able to achieve decent utilization of funds 
under the Electronic Governance Programme during the years 2012 -13 
and 2013 -14.  The Department have referred to implementation hazards 
like lack of interest by domain owners, non -readiness of industry for new 
standards and resistance by industry.  The Department have been 
continuously organizing workshops, trainings, seminars and meetings with 
various stakeholders like Ministries/ Departments of Central and State/UT 
Governments and industry to overcome the difficulties and these 
measures have been found successful.  While appreciating the initiatives 
taken by the Department to overcome the hindrances, the Committee 
desire that they should continue this trend of optimal utilization of funds for 
fruitful implementation of such a significant scheme.  The Committee may 
be apprised of the outcome of the study of the independent third party 
assessment of projects for the year 2014-15 in terms of their impact, utility, 
sustainability, scalability and replicability.”  
 
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
“The Committee note that the scheme for establishment of State Wide 
Area Networks (SWANs) is one of the components under e -Governance 
which had been approved for implementation across the country in 
March 2005 with a total outlay of Rs. 3,334 crore.  In th e year 2014 -15, 
Rs. 196.02 crore has been allocated for this programme.  The Committee 
find that during the first two years of the Plan period, the Department 
have almost fully utilized the funds and in the current year, there is a 
steady progress of utili zation.  As on date, SWAN proposals from 34 
States/UTs have been approved and in 33 States/UTs, SWANs have 

4 
 
been made operational and 29 States/UTs have been integrated using 
the National Knowledge Network (NKN).  However, out of the 29 
States/UTs only 25 S tates/UTs are utilizing more than 60 percent of 
bandwidth of the existing link capacity.  The Committee note that the 
delay in the entire bid process management, delay in engaging 
consultant, State elections, non -availability of lease line connectivity in 
remotely located blocks, etc. continue to act as stumbling blocks for 
implementation of the SWAN scheme in all the States/UTs.  Additionally, 
Third Party Auditors (TPAs) engaged by the Department to review the 
scheme have identified low bandwidth utilizati on by the States/UTs, non -
adherence to the SLAs by the Network Operators, poor presence of 
connectivity by Broadband Service Provider, poor quality and low 
availability of power and improper configuration of some of the 
monitoring devices etc. to be some of the factors contributing to the delay 
in the implementation of the scheme.  The Committee are constrained to 
point out that even after more than a decade, issues confronting the 
establishment of SWANs are yet to be fully resolved. Taking note of 
shortfall in capacity utilisation of SWANs, the Committee recommend that  
concerted efforts should be made  by the Department to complete the 
establishment of SWANs as per the new deadline and ensure that the 
established SWANs function properly, with full broadband utilization.” 
 
8. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in the ir action 
taken note, have stated as under:- 
The DeitY would monitor more vigorously and regularly the performance 
of each SWAN in the State/UT especially w.r.t. uptime of PoPs during 
prime business hours and bandwidth utilisation. In some states, there is 
an acute shortage of power which at times re nders SWAN PoPs non 
functional.  
 
The States are also being impressed upon from time to time for              
e-enablement of their offices and provide them with horizontal 
connectivity under SWAN so that digitization efforts of various 
departments/offices can further push delivery of online services. The 
department is holding meetings regularly with State Governments 
through Video Conferencing to address various challenges in the 
operation and utilisation of SWAN scheme. 
It is relevant to mention here that , at present, 30 States/UTs are utilizing 
more than 60% of bandwidth by connecting horizontal offices under the 

5 
 
SWANs. Network Operators have also been instructed to strictly meet 
the contractual obligations such as SLA compliance etc. 
 
9. In their original R eport, t he Committee  had observed that in spite of  
hazards such as lack of interest by domain owner, non -readiness of industry 
for new standards and resistance by the industry, the  Department ha d been 
able to achieve decent utilization of funds under the e-Governance Programme 
during 2012-13 and 2013-14.  While appreciating this trend, the Committee had 
recommended that the Department should continue with the momentum of 
optimal utilization of funds . The Committee had also desired to be apprised of 
the steps taken/outcome of the study of third party assessment of projects  for 
the year 2014-15 under the e-Governance Programme in terms of their impact, 
utility, sustainability, etc.  However, the Action Taken Note of the Department 
is silent on this aspect.  The Committee call upon the Department to inform the 
Committee about the outcome of the Study of the third party assessment of 
projects undertaken in 2014 -15 and corrective action taken thereon  which 
would throw light on their performance parameters.  Rega rding challenges 
identified by the third party auditors which blocked successful operation of the 
SWAN scheme across the country, the Department have not taken any 
concrete steps to address those issues.  The Committee stress that the 
Department should take long term measures to improve bandwidth utilization, 
enforce contractual obligation of Network Operators towards SLA compliance, 
desired connectivity improvement by Broadband Service Providers, etc.    
Keeping in view the fact that issues confronting the establishment of SWANs 
continue to hamper  the performance of the  scheme, the Department  need to 
take urgent necessary steps to address each of the above challenges and 
complete the establishment of SWANs  as per  the new deadline .  The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.   
B. E-Security 
 
Cyber Security 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
10. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“Cyber security programme aims at building a secure and resilient 
cyberspace for citizens, business and Government. In order to address 

6 
 
the issues of cyber security in a holistic manner, the Government 
announced „National Cyber Security Policy‟ on 2 July, 2013. It is a matter 
of concern that the programme remain under -funded year after year. In 
the year 2014 -15, as against the proposed GBS of Rs. 510 crore, the 
Department have received only Rs. 128 crore for Cyber Security.  
Similarly, in the years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, against the proposed 
allocation of Rs. 206 crore and Rs. 400 crore, allocations at BE stage 
remained at Rs. 51.20 crore and Rs. 60.37 crore, respectively; besides, 
there were further cuts at the RE stage. The reduced allocation has 
obviously caused delay in implementation of the key initiatives. What is 
further disquieting to note is the fact that the Department have failed to 
utilize even the fund allocated at RE stage. It is imperative on the part of 
the Department to improve the utilization of funds with better planning so 
as to secure enhanced allocation under such an important programme. 
Though the Committee have been assured that funds are reallocated to 
ensure that this programme does not suffer, they desire the Department 
to be focused a nd see that the two key initiatives taken in 2014 -15 for 
implementation - National Cyber Coordination Centre and Botnet 
cleaning malware - are implemented, as envisaged.” 
 
11. The Department of Electronics and Information Technol ogy, in the ir action 
taken note, have stated as under:- 
 
“Establishment of National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) and 
Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre are the two key initiatives 
envisaged by the Department for priority implementation. Efforts have 
been made for implementation of these initiatives as envisaged.   
 
The National Cyber Coordination Centre project required extensive 
consultation with all the stake holder entities as well as evaluation of all 
the technological aspects of the project.  This initiative has completed the 
consultation and evaluation process and the project has been approved 
for implementation. Action is initiated with regard to preliminary work for 
implementation of the project. 
 
The Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre also involves close 
coordination with the stake holders such as ISPs and technology 
infrastructure. Following the approval of the project, the project 
implementation has already started.  Procurement of equipment and site 
preparation are in progress.” 

7 
 
12. The Committee had expressed their concern over the issue of  under-
funding of the Cyber Security Programme  and significant variations in the  
proposed allocation and allocations at BE and RE stage.  While taking  a 
serious note of the  underutilization of the funds allocated even at RE stage , 
the Committee had recommended  the Department to ensure  better planning 
and proper fund utilization so that key initiatives like the National Cyber 
Coordination Centre and Botnet Cleaning and Malwar e Analys is are 
implemented as envisaged .  The Committee take note of the steps taken for 
implementation of NCCC and Botnet Cleaning Malware initiatives.  However, 
the Department have not mentioned anything to address the concern of the 
Committee about repe ated underutilization of funds allocated for these 
Programmes.    The Committee would like the Department to apprise them how 
they plan to deal with underfunding and underutilization of funds  in future for 
such an important area as cyber security.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with concern that though the number of cyber fraud 
cases during the last three years has come down, yet financial loss due to e -
fraud has increased from Rs. 38 crore  in 2011-12 to Rs. 67 crore in 2012 -13.  
In fact, the data maintained by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 
also reflects that the number of cyber crime cases registered has increased 
over the years.  Cases registered under the IT Act have increased almost four 
times from 1791 in 2011 to 4356 in 2013.  Despite several initiatives taken by 
the Department to tackle online financial fraud/loss, the Department have 
identified deficiencies, viz. mis -configuration of web server, irregular and 
improper updation of digital certificate leading to poor authentication of online 
banking website, non -following of secure coding practices while developing 
the web applications, hosting environment of web applications not hardened  
properly,  web applications not secur ely connected with databases leading to 
information disclosure vulnerability, etc. which caused increase in cyber 
crime/fraud.  Herein lies the significance role of cyber security experts.   
However, against the growing demand for cyber security experts in  the 
country which is estimated to be 5 lakh by 2016, the Committee find that India 

8 
 
has at present only 44,000 information security professionals out of which 
around 600 are in the Government. Moreover, the cyber security related 
activities are handled by generalist IT professionals and the country lacks 
specialists in the field of cyber security.  Though the Department have taken 
key initiatives for capacity building through formal and informal methods and 
launching of the ISEA project, these measures have  not been adequate 
enough to address the cyber security needs of the country. The Committee 
while taking cognizance of the Department‟s initiative with regard to the non -
formal sector wherein they are working closely with the Ministry of HRD to 
increase th e number of cyber security professionals through the ISEA 
programme, emphasize that more efforts need to be made to create a vast 
pool of resource/ IT/cyber security experts to provide a secure cyber space to 
its users.” 
 
14. The Department of Electronics and Information Technol ogy, in the ir action 
taken note, have stated as under:- 
“In the direction of creating a vast pool of Cyber Security experts, it is 
recognized that although various activities and programs initiated by the 
Government have made positive contribution in creation of work force of 
cyber security professionals, yet the entire demand of cyber security 
professionals in the country may not be met by the Government 
initiatives alone. Keeping this in view, Government has initiated a public -
private partnership program with the active involvement of private sector 
in the form of a Joint Working Group. The Working Group produced its 
report and recommendations outlining the means of engagement with the 
private sector.  The report of Working Group has l aid a road map for 
capacity building to meet the demands of cyber security professionals in 
a mission  mode  through PPP  arrangements.  With these initiatives, 
Govt. intends to expand its reach and increase the scale for meeting the 
demand for cyber security professional work force in the country.” 
 
15. Taking note of the wide gap  in demand and supply of Cyber Security 
experts, more so in the Government sector , t he Committee  had emphasized 
the urgent need for creating a vast pool of Cyber Security expert s. The 
Department have submitted that the entire demand of Cyber Security 
professionals may not be met by Government initiatives alone and hence they 
have engaged private sector in the form of  a Joint Working Group.  The 
Committee are given to understand that the Joint Working Group constituted 
for this purpose has submitted its Report with recommendations outlining the 

9 
 
means of engagement of the private sector.  The Working Group has also laid 
out a roadmap for capacity building to meet the demands of cyber security 
professionals in a m ission mode through PPP  arrangements.  While taking 
cognizance of the above initiative, the Committee desire that the Department 
should take steps for early implement ation of the PPP Project to achieve the 
desired objectives. 
C.  Indigenous tablets/PCs 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
16. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the indigenous low cost Tablet „Aakash‟, now 
named as „Aakash-IV‟, was sanctioned in January, 2009 and was initially 
a project of the Ministry of Human Resource Development initiated under 
the National Mission on Education through I CT (MNEICT) and then 
transferred to IIT Bombay in April 2012. The Committee also note that   
C-DAC was involved in testing of „Aakash‟ Tablet after it was transferred 
to IIT Bombay. In mid-2013, it was decided that DeitY would take forward 
the „Aakash‟ pro ject. The Committee also learnt that the vendor neutral 
technical specifications for „Aakash-IV‟ were finalized by a technical Sub -
Committee in August 2013, after placing it for public comments. 
Thereafter, the tender for „Aakash -IV‟ Tablets was put out by  DGS&D on 
28.01.2014. However, the DGS&D rate contract process could not be 
completed because of inability expressed by the vendors to meet certain 
technical requirements. The Committee have been informed that the 
technical specifications of Aakash -IV tablet are therefore proposed to be   
reviewed and after a decision taken in the matter fresh tender process 
will be taken up with DGS&D.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard.”  
 
17. The Department of Electronics and Informa tion Technol ogy, in the ir action 
taken note, have stated as under:- 
“Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) has been 
developing low cost access device namely “Aakash” under National 
Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT) since September 2010 and 
Aakash was first launched by the then Minister of Human Resource 
Development in October 2011. 

10 
 
Several issues were raised in media  about the quality and performance 
of Aakash and also regarding the vendor M/s. Datawind who was 
supposed to supply Aakash. Re portedly, under the initial project 
assigned by MHRD to IIT Jodhpur, a contract was signed by IIT Jodhpur 
with M/s. Datawind to supply 2 lakh units of Aakash devices. But this 
supply could not be completed due to certain issues. An Inter -Ministerial 
Committee was constituted for continuous R&D and timely delivery of 
Aakash in December, 2011 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DeitY.  
 
Meanwhile, MHRD transferred the project to IIT Bombay in April 2012. 
Reportedly, IIT Bombay worked with the vendor and had an upgraded 
version of Aakash delivered for the contracted devices. These devices 
were distributed among faculty and students across approx. 300 colleges 
and universities across the country. Several applications were developed 
for extensive testing of the upgraded version of Aakash. Meanwhile a 
technical sub -committee was setup to recommend functional and 
technical specifications for the low cost access device. The specifications 
proposed by this committee have been called “Aakash -IV”. These 
specifications were finalised after extensive consultation with industry, 
academia and other Stakeholders. These specifications were formally 
published in August 2013. These specifications have been developed 
with a view to have a device at a low cost. These broad -based and 
generalized specifications were made available to DGS&D for 
competitive bidding from all eligible bidders to bring Aakash tablets on 
their Rate Contract. Thereafter, DGS&D initiated the rate contract 
process. C -DAC was assigned the responsibility of te sting and 
certification of the Aakash -IV Tablet. The tender for making available 
Aakash-IV tablet on DGS&D Rate Contract was issued in January 2014. 
Despite best efforts, no vendor has been able to meet the technical 
specifications. The new technical speci fications have not yet been 
finalized.” 
 
18. The Committee had observed  that the contract process for which the 
tender for Aakash IV was put out by DG S&D on 28.01.2014 could not be 
completed because of  the inability expressed by the vendors to meet certain 
technical requirements.  In this background, the technical specifications were 
proposed to be reviewed.  However, the status as entailed in the action taken 
notes furnished by the Department reveals that there has been no progress in 
the matter as  new technical specifications  have still not been finalized.  The 
Committee, while reiterating the importance of low cost devices like Aakash IV 
which has huge utility and potential for digital inclusion , especial ly in the 
context of   flagship programmes like Digital India, desire the Department to 
follow it up proactively and inform the Committee of the progress made in this 
regard.  
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Budgetary  Analysis 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology (DeitY) had proposed an allocation of Rs. 81,378.45 crore in order to 
achieve the overall targets for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  For the first two years of 
the Plan period ( 2012-13 and 2013 -14), as against the proposed amount of Rs. 
17,418.17 crore, the amount allocated at BE and RE stage were Rs. 6,000 crore and 
Rs. 4,140 crore, respectively. The Department, however, could utilize only Rs. 
3,976.56 crore during these two yea rs, which accounts for only 66% of the Budget 
Estimates.  The shortfall in utilization led to cut in allocation at RE stage against 
which the Department, of course, have been able to spend 96% of allocation. The 
matter of concern is that persistent under u tilization in the first half of the Plan years 
had led to further fund crunch at RE stage, affecting implementation of planned 
schemes. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that the Department should focus 
on achieving optimal utilization of funds at BE sta ge, so that no issue of funds arises 
at the RE stage.  The Committee find that due to reduced allocation against the 
proposal, the Department are forced to rationalize fund release giving priority to 
major ongoing projects to avoid the adverse effects on s cheme implementation. The 
Committee, however, take note of utilization of allocated funds during the first two 
years of the Twelfth Plan and stress that efforts should continue in the direction of 
better utilization of outlay in the year 2014 -15.  The Committee observe that realistic 
projections, coupled with apt utilization of funds, would place the Department on a 
sound platform to claim enhanced allocation to meet the objective of fulfilling the 
Plan targets through effective implementation of schemes.  The Committee desire 
that the momentum gained in the first two years of the Plan period be sustained and 
consolidated steps be taken to ensure that performance indicators set for the current 
fiscal are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. DeitY 
has been prioritizing release of funds for major ongoing projects to avoid any 
adverse effect on scheme implementation as well as to sustain the momentum 

12 
 
gained in the first two years of the 12 th Plan period. It is noteworthy that the 
expenditure incurred by DeitY during FY 2014 -15 is ` 3471.71 crore which is 96% of 
RE allocation (` 3600 crore) and 91% of BE allocation (` 3815 crore).  
(Recommendation No. 2)  
 
Budgetary Provision for the North-East Region (NER) and Sikkim 
 
The Committee note that Rs. 300 crore allocated at BE stage for the year 
2013-14  for the North -East Region has been reduced to Rs. 214 crore at the RE 
stage. The actual expenditure of the Department in NER and Sikkim has been more 
than the amount allocate d at RE Stage, i.e. Rs. 220.59 crore. Though there has 
been full utilization of funds during the year 2013 -14, yet some of the major 
impediments being encountered in NER, viz. difficult geographical terrain, issues of 
connectivity, participation of bidders , irregular availability of network (both internet 
and telecommunication), etc., continue to hamper the implementation of various 
schemes/projects of the Department. The Committee take note of the corrective 
measures taken by DeitY like providing connectiv ity to remote locations through 
technologies like VSAT, initiatives to provide solar back -up to address the power 
shortage problem at CSCs, etc. to facilitate implementation of the schemes. The 
Department have reportedly established 11 centres of the NIELI T, the body 
responsible for training, starting from base level to IT for jobs standard. Further, the 
Department are planning to open a BPO with the objective of providing jobs and 
address the problem of migration from the region. Based on the success and 
usability of Mobile Based Agro Advisory System in Meghalaya, Media Lab Asia is 
also contemplating expansion of the system in other States, viz., Arunachal Pradesh, 
Mizoram and Tripura. While taking note of the initiatives taken to address the 
impediments en countered in NER, the Committee stress the need for sustained 
efforts by the Department for inclusive growth of NER so as to have holistic e -
development spread across the country.  The Committee would like to be informed 
about the outcome of the fresh initiatives taken by the Department in NER.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The initiatives taken by the Department for the benefit of North Eastern Region 
and Sikkim include the following: 
 
 It was decided in the 7th Empowered Committee Meeting that connectivity 
through VSATs would be provided for CSCs in North -Eastern states and 

13 
 
difficult areas where connectivity through BSNL is unavailable. The project 
was approved with a total cost of Rs. 4 9.88 Crore, to be implemented by 
National Informatics Centre Service Inc. (NICSI) and CSC e -Governance 
Services India Ltd. (CSC -SPV). CSC-SPV is providing and managing roll out 
of VSATs and bandwidth & transponder / hub infrastructure is being provided 
by NICSI.  
 
Status of the project as on February 2015:  
 
State/UT VSATs 
Planned 
WPC Cleared Installed VSATs 
Arunachal Pradesh 90 90 79 
Assam 354 347 272 
HP 361 334 235 
J&K 37 34 25 
Jharkhand 326 325 245 
Manipur 355 349 263 
Meghalaya 147 147 140 
Mizoram 136 135 116 
Nagaland 127 96 36 
Rajasthan 167 167 146 
Tripura 145 144 118 
Uttarakhand 207 206 194 
Total  2452 2374 1869 
 
 To address the power shortage problem at CSCs, it has been proposed that 
the State Designated Agencies (SDAs) in the North-East & difficult States 
may provide solar power backup to CSCs facing acute power problems 
including non-availability of power for less than 4 hours in a day or bad quality 
of power. Under the scheme, while Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, GoI 
(MNRE) would provide 90% subsidy on the actual capital expenditure of 
complete solar power systems required including comprehensive 
maintenance for a period of 5 years, the remaining 10% of the subsidy would 
be funded by the State Government. The status of pr oposals submitted & 
approved by MNRE is as below: 
1.  MNRE has approved Solar Power back -up proposal of Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland till date. 
2.  351 and 217 solar power back -up units have been installed and 
commissioned at CSCs in Manipur and Mizoram respectively. 
3.  Himachal Pradesh, Assam and J&K have submitted their 
proposals to MNRE for enabling Solar power back -up at CSCs 
and are under consideration of MNRE. 
4.  Arunachal Pradesh has to re -submit the proposal as per the 
revised benchmark set by MNRE. 
5.  Uttarakhand and Tripura are expected to submit their proposals 
in this financial year 2015-16. 
 

14 
 
 Due to initiatives taken by the department, now 1869 CSCs have been 
provided with connectivity through VSATs and are providing services to the 
citizens. Similarly, 568 CSCs got Solar power backup in the region. 
 Under Cyber Security Programme, efforts are being made to promote R&D 
activities and Cyber Security awareness and training at various North East  
institutions.  The budget allocated du ring 2013-14 (Rs.1crore) for the Cyber 
Security activities under North East head has been fully utilized. 
 Six new NIELIT Extension Centers have been made operational in the North -
Eastern States, viz. Assam: Silchar, Jorhat and Kokrajhar, Manipur: 
Churachandpur, Senapati, and Mizoram: Lunglei. 
 At present 16 NIELIT Centres/Extn Centers are providing training in the IECT 
domain in all North-Eastern States. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
NEW SCHEMES/PROJECTS  
 
Digital India Programme 
 
The Committee note that the „Digital India Programme‟ is one of the three new 
schemes conceived by the Department for implementation during the current 
Financial Year 2014 -15, with an allocation of Rs. 500 crore. This is a flagship 
programme of the Government of India, with a vision to transform India into a 
digitally empowered society and knowledge economy, the basic idea being to have 
ICT infrastructure and deliver all Government services electronically so that citizens 
are empowered in real terms in today‟s digital space.  Its vision areas are centered 
on „Digital Infrastructure as a utility to „Every Citizen‟ , „Governance & Services on 
Demand‟ and „Digital Empowerment of Citizens‟.  The programme aims to provide 
the much needed thrust to the nine pillars of growth areas, namely, Broadband 
Highways, Universal Access to Mobile Connectivity, Public Internet Acces s 
Programme, e -Governance–Reforming Governance through Technology, e -Kranti–
Electronic Delivery of Services, Information for All, Electronic Manufacturing, IT for 
jobs and Early Harvest Programmes. The Committee further note that the proposal 
for various components of the „Digital India Programme‟, including their financial and 
physical targets are to be moved separately for getting due approvals. Some of the 
components of the „Digital India Programme‟ for the year 2014 -15, viz. „ IT platform 
for messages‟ and „Government greetings to be e -Greetings‟, securing email within 
Government, comprising 10 lakh Government employees, have been completed. 
Targets have been set for implementing other components such as Biometric 
attendance, upgrading of Government Webs ites, standardising Government email 
design, making school Books to be eBooks, SMS based weather 

15 
 
information/disaster alerts, National Portal for Lost and Found Children, Wi -Fi 
enablement of universities, tourist places (Goa), Central Government Offices an d 
Trains.  The Committee also note that for various other components under the 
„Digital India Programme‟, projects/ proposals have already been initiated.  The 
Committee compliment the Government for initiating the „Digital India Programme‟ 
which would go a long way in transforming the country into a digitally empowered 
society.  While appreciating the achievements made so far in the current year, the 
Committee desire that steps be taken to implement the other components of the 
scheme within the stipulated time frame. The scheme being an all canvassing 
scheme taking into its fold both the Central and State Governments, DeitY have to 
perform the onerous task of diligent coordination.  The scheme is presently at its 
early stages of execution and the Committee would review its progress in due 
course. The Committee would like to be informed of further progress made in the 
direction of achieving other milestones, including those earmarked for the current 
fiscal.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of progress/status  of the schemes under Digital India Programme 
being dealt with by the e-Governance Division of DeitY are as given below: 
 
i. National Information Infrastructure (NII): The EFC note on NII has been moved 
for providing connectivity to Government  Departments and institutions at state, 
district, block and village panchayat levels.  
ii. CSC 2.0: EFC note on CSC 2.0 has been moved. The objective of CSC 2.0 is to 
establish one CSC in every Gram Panchayat. 
iii. e-Kranti: The Cabinet has approved e -Kranti (NeGP 2.0) in March, 2015.             
e-Kranti provides a new framework for e-Governance initiatives in the country. 
iv. Government Process Re -engineering: GPR guidelines have been shared with 
DARPG on 22.10.2014 for finalization. DARPG has circulated the same to a ll 
Central Depts for obtaining inputs. In addition, data digitization and Aadhaar 
seeding have been initiated in various departments. 
 
The details of progress of the schemes under Digital India Programme being dealt 
with by the HRD Division of DeitY are as given below: 
 
Action points under 
various Pillars 
Allocation of 
work to the 
Groups/ 
Attached Offices 
and officers in 
DeitY 
Status 
eKranti-Electronic 
delivery of services 
 Digital Literacy 
Program 
 
 
Action: HRD 
Division 
A scheme to cover 42.5 lakh persons throughout 
the country with a total budget outlay of Rs. 380 
crore has been approved. It has been decided to 
include Anganwadi Workers, Accredited Social 

16 
 
Health Activists (ASHAs) and Authorised Ration 
Dealers as the beneficiaries in the Scheme.   
IT for Jobs 
 Train people in 
smaller towns & 
villages for IT 
sector jobs 
 
 
Action: HRD 
Division 
 
 
 
 
 
A proposal prepared by NIELIT to create a pool of 
trained 55 Lakh Citizens including candidates from 
SC/ST/ BPL Section and Women candidates in the 
area of ICT  over a period of 4 years (Phase -I)  is 
under process. 
 Train Service 
Delivery Agents to 
run viable business 
delivering IT 
services 
 
Action: NIELIT 
 
Co-ordination: 
HRD Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inputs from NIELIT are as under: 
 
1.   NIELIT has designed a three level course for 
Digital Marketing using e -Commerce Website. The 
levels are as under: 
 
a.    Digital Marketing for Beginners – 60 Hours 
basic course with 26 hours of the ory and 34 
hours of practical 
 
b.  Digital Marketing for Intermediate users – 90 
hours course with 38 hours of theory and 52 
hours of practical. 
 
c.    Digital Marketing course for Advance users – 
120 hours with 49 hours of theory and 71 
hours of practical. 
 
2.    Course has been designed by an internal 
committee and based on inputs taken from industry 
players. 
 
3.    An advertisement announcing the launch of the 
Course is going to be published shortly. 
 
 Telecom service 
providers to train 
rural workforce to 
cater to their own 
needs 
Action: DOT 
Coordination: 
HRD Division 
Inputs from DoT are as under: 
 
(i) The item was discussed in the inter -ministerial 
Advisory Groups on Skill Development in Telecom 
Sector on 19th Sep 2014. Based on the inputs fro m 
Advisory Groups, a meeting with the HR -Heads of 
Telecom Service providers was held on 20th Nov 
2014, and a follow -up meeting held up on 4th Dec 
2014. Efforts are being taken to rope in ITI for 
providing telecom training in rural areas. 
 
(ii) ITIs being u nder the control of State 
Governments, a DO letter dated 19th Dec 2014 
was addressed by Secretary (T) to all the Chief 
Secretaries offering the training infrastructure of 
Telecom PSUs for hand-holding of ITIs for Telecom 
courses. The details of PSU infrast ructure have 
been made available on DoT website for easy 
access and wider dissemination. 
Electronics 
Manufacturing – Target 
NET ZERO imports 
 „Scheme for financial 
assistance to 
States/UTs for Skill 
Development in ESDM 
Sector‟  
Action: HRD 
Division 
 
A Scheme for “ Skill Development in ESDM for 
Digital India ” has been approved to cover 30 
States/UTs for facilitating skill development for 
3,28,000 persons in ESDM sector at an outlay of 
Rs. 411 crore (approx.) in a period of 4 years.  

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
(i) Programme on enabling all Schools with Virtual Class Rooms 
 (ii) Good Governance and Best Practices 
The Committee note that two other new schemes, i.e. (i) Programme on 
enabling all schools with virtual classrooms and (ii) Good Governance and Best 
Practices have also been contemplated, with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore each, for 
implementation during the year 2014-15, with the objectives to enable schools which 
will be ICT enabled and which will have connectivity with virtual classrooms and  to 
promote and fund the projects which encourage good governance and best practices 
in Ministries/States, respectively .  According to the Department, under the good 
governance and best practices scheme, projects from States/UTs having completion 
period of 2-3 years are being funded.  Under the Programme for enabling all schools 
with virtual class rooms, in the first phase, 300 schools having ICT infrastructure are 
being targeted to enable virtual class rooms.  Considering that both these schemes 
are at their nascent stages of implementation, the Committee observe that 
coordinated efforts supported by meticulous planning ar e absolutely essential. The 
Committee would evaluate the efficacy of measures taken for the effective 
implementation of these schemes.  The Department, however, should apprise the 
Committee the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under “ Good Governance and Best Practices”, 8 proposals have been 
approved and funds amounting to Rs. 70.87 crores have been released. 
Under “Enabling all Schools with Virtual Class Rooms”, one project has been 
approved with an outlay of Rs. 94.07 crores. Funds amounting to Rs. 55 crores have 
been released. The project aims to implement virtual classrooms in 3500 schools 
and 50 DIET centres across 7 states. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
ONGOING SCHEMES 
 
E-Governance 
 
The National e -Governance plan was conceived in  May, 2006 with a 
vision to make all Government Services accessible to the common citizen in 
his/her locality, through an efficient, transparent and reliable mechanism. Under 

18 
 
the programme, a robust e -infrastructure is being created to facilitate 
deployment of ICT solutions by various Departments and State Governments. 
The Committee note that for e -Governance, the Plan allocation is Rs. 1230 
crore for the year 2014 -15 which include  Rs. 475 crore for Electronic 
Governance and Rs. 755 crore for Natio nal e -Governance Action Plan 
(NeGAP). The Committee take note of the fact that the Department have been 
able to achieve decent utilization of funds under the Electronic Governance 
Programme during the years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14.  The Department have 
referred to implementation hazards like lack of interest by domain owners, non -
readiness of industry for new standards and resistance by industry.  The 
Department have been continuously organizing workshops, trainings, seminars 
and meetings with various stakeholde rs like Ministries/ Departments of Central 
and State/UT Governments and industry to overcome the difficulties and these 
measures have been found successful.  While appreciating the initiatives taken 
by the Department to overcome the hindrances, the Committ ee desire that they 
should continue this trend of optimal utilization of funds for fruitful 
implementation of such a significant scheme.  The Committee may be apprised 
of the outcome of the study of the independent third party assessment of 
projects for th e year 2014 -15 in terms of their impact, utility, sustainability, 
scalability and replicability.”  
 
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that the scheme for establishment of State Wide 
Area Networks (SWANs) is one of the components under e -Governance which 
had been approved for implementation across the country in March 2005 with a 
total outlay of Rs. 3,334 crore.  In the  year 2014-15, Rs. 196.02 crore has been 
allocated for this programme.  The Committee find that during the first two years 
of the Plan period, the Department have almost fully utilized the funds and in 
the current year, there is a steady progress of utiliz ation.  As on date, SWAN 
proposals from 34 States/UTs have been approved and in 33 States/UTs, 
SWANs have been made operational and 29 States/UTs have been integrated 
using the National Knowledge Network (NKN).  However, out of the 29 
States/UTs only 25 St ates/UTs are utilizing more than 60 percent of bandwidth 

19 
 
of the existing link capacity.  The Committee note that the delay in the entire bid 
process management, delay in engaging consultant, State elections, non -
availability of lease line connectivity in r emotely located blocks, etc. continue to 
act as stumbling blocks for implementation of the SWAN scheme in all the 
States/UTs.  Additionally, Third Party Auditors (TPAs) engaged by the 
Department to review the scheme have identified low bandwidth utilizatio n by 
the States/UTs, non -adherence to the SLAs by the Network Operators, poor 
presence of connectivity by Broadband Service Provider, poor quality and low 
availability of power and improper configuration of some of the monitoring 
devices etc. to be some of  the factors contributing to the delay in the 
implementation of the scheme.  The Committee are constrained to point out that 
even after more than a decade, issues confronting the establishment of SWANs 
are yet to be fully resolved. Taking note of shortfall  in capacity utilisation of 
SWANs, the Committee recommend that  concerted efforts should be made  by 
the Department to complete the establishment of SWANs as per the new 
deadline and ensure that the established SWANs function properly, with full 
broadband utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
The DeitY would monitor more vigorously and regularly the performance 
of each SWAN in the State/UT especially w.r.t. uptime of PoPs during prime 
business hours and bandwidth utilisation. In some states, there is an acute 
shortage of power which at times renders SWAN PoPs non functional.  
 
The States are also being impressed upon from time to time for              
e-enablement of their offices and provide them with horizontal connectivity 
under SWAN so that digitization efforts of various departments/offices can 
further push delivery of online services. The department is holding meetings 
regularly with State Governments through Video Conferencing to address 
various challenges in the operation and utilisation of SWAN scheme. 
It is relevant to mention here that,  at present, 30 States/UTs are utilizing 
more than 60% of bandwidth by connecting horizontal offices under the 
SWANs. Network Operators have also been instructed to strictly meet the 
contractual obligations such as SLA compliance etc. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
State Data Centres (SDCs) 
 
The Scheme of State Data Centres (SDCs) approved in January, 2008 was 
identified as one of the important elements of the core infrastructure for supporting e-
Governance initiatives.  The Committee are concerned to note that even after a 
lapse of 6 years, the scheme of State Data Centres (SDCs) is yet to be 
operationalised in all the States/UTs.  As on 31 st August, 2014, 23 SDCs have been 
made operational and it is yet to be completed in States/UTs like Bihar, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Punjab, Uttarakhand, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Goa.  Some of the reasons attributed to non -
operationalisation of SDCs in the States are  the delay in identifying/change in the 
site/handing over the site to the selected bidder, delay in provisioning of raw power 
for the SDC, delay in awarding LoI and contract to the selected bidder, delay in the 
completion of the Final Acceptance Test, etc.   The Committee note that DeitY are 
engaged in conducting review meetings with States/UTs concerned to resolve the 
problems.  They, however, urge the Department to closely monitor the  
implementation  and find early solutions to the identified problems and ensure setting 
up of  SDCs in the remaining States/UTs in the current fiscal.   
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the note of the suggestions made by the Committee, DeitY assures to 
monitor the implementation more vigorously and regularly. It may be noted th at to 
resolve the issues, DeitY is taking up the matter at various levels including sending 
letters from Hon‟ble MCIT to Chief Ministers of states, from Secretary, DeitY to Chief 
Secretary of the states and continuous monitoring through Project Implementat ion 
Committee (PIC) meetings, Video conferencing (VC) and emails.  
Deity has been vigorously following up with the various stakeholders to 
resolve the issues of non/slow implementation of SDCs. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) 
 
The Committee note that under the Common Service Centres (CSC) Scheme, 
approved in 2006, as of now 1,36,851 CSCs have been made operational covering 

21 
 
Thirty-three States/ UTs. However, out of the 1,36,851 CSCs, 1,22,651 CSCs have 
connectivity, of which 51,3 05 CSCs have BSNL connectivity with reported 
transactions of 74,047. As many as 14,200 CSCs still lack any kind of connectivity.  
The Committee further observe that there are major shortfalls in achievement of 
target for operationalization of CSCs in most of the States/UTs particularly in States 
like Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, etc., so much so that out of  the 
targeted 60 CSCs for Goa and 45 for Sikkim, not a single CSC had been 
operationalised till 31 st July 2014, for Haryana out of 1159 C SCs only 1 had been 
operationalised; for Karnataka out of 4913 planned, only 904 had been 
operationalised;  and for Tamil Nadu out of  5440 planned, only 1130 CSCs had 
been operationalised. Non -availability of broadband connectivity, lack of power, left 
wing extremism in some States, termination of contracts with private Service Center 
Agencies, lack of e -services, etc., have been cited as the reasons impacting the 
sustainability and functioning of CSCs. The Committee observe that the CSCs 
scheme had been conceived with an objective  to develop a platform that can enable 
the Government, private and social sector organizations to align their social and 
commercial goals for the benefit of the rural population in the remotest corners of the 
country through a combination of IT based as well as non -IT based services. 
However, even after so many years of its operation, the scheme is yet to achieve the 
desired results. Expressing displeasure over the significant delay in roll -out of the 
CSCs, the Committee recommend to the Department to take requisite steps to 
remove the bottlenecks a nd ensure that the revised timeline for establishment/ 
operationalisation/roll-out of all CSCs is achieved. The Department should also make 
sure that all the CSCs are made functional and are connected within this Plan 
period. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The following are actions taken for CSCs: 
 
i. The Empowered Committee in its 10th meeting had recommended for 
extension of the CSC scheme till March 2017 without any additional financial 
implication. The reason behind such extension was that in most of the states 
adequate G2C services are still not available. Various departments of these 
states delivering Citizen Centric Services have not yet completely digitized 
their records / data and therefore  the services have not been e -enabled. This 
has adversely impacted the financial viability of CSCs in most of the states. In 
this regard, DeitY has issued the necessary advisory vide letter no. 
8(31)/2010-EGPMU dated 03-Aug-2012. 
 

22 
 
ii. The Empowered Committee i n its 10th meeting had also recommended that 
existing Gram Panchayat(GP) Bhavan may be leveraged for setting up of 
CSCs. DeitY had issued a guideline to this effect on 03 -Aug-2012, according 
to which, the states may take an appropriate decision to relocate  CSCs from 
private premises to Panchyat Bhavans etc. with concurrence of the Service 
Centre Agency (SCA) and the concerned departments. This would enable 
continuity in CSC operations and synergy with development schemes at the 
Panchayat level as well as be tter recognition and convenience to the location 
population. Also, connectivity is being provided to Gram Panchaytas under 
National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) project. In this way, CSCs in GPs will 
get benefit of the uninterrupted and high bandwidth connectivity. 
 
iii. In order to expedite the completion of implementation of pending CSCs, DeitY 
has issued an advisory to the states/ UTs vide letter no. 2(76)/2006 -EGPMU 
(Vol. III) dated 27 -Jan-2015 requesting to involve District e -Governance 
Society (DeGS) for supervising, managing and monitoring of the CSC scheme 
in states/UTs, in case the contract of the state with SCA has expired and 
rollout of CSCs is pending.  
 
iv. DeitY has also instructed all states/UTs to improve the uptime of CSCs for 
having better transacti ons by ensuring more and more digitization of the 
Government services deliverable to the citizens vide letter no. 8(2)/2013 -CSC 
dated 28-Apr-2014. 
 
v. DeitY has already advised to integrate CSC Connect with all Government 
portals and other Service Access Prov iders' portal for seamless delivery of 
services to the citizens vide letter no. N -22014/9/2012-eGov2 dated 17 -Sep-
2014, letter no. 8(2)/2013 -CSC dated 28 -Apr-2014 and letter no. 2(76)/2006 -
EGPMU (Vol-II) dated 01-Oct-2012. 
 
 
The current status of CSCs in states of Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Haryana and 
Karnataka as on 28-Feb-2015 is following:  
 
i. 32 CSCs were operational in Sikkim.   
ii. In Tamil Nadu, 1130 CSCs have been made operational out of 2720 planned 
CSCs.  
iii. In Haryana, 247 CSCs ha ve been made operational out of 1159 planned 
CSCs.  
iv. In Karnataka, state government has informed on 09 -Mar-2015 that tenders for 
selection of SCAs are now in process.  
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Mobile Governance 
 
The Committee note that DeitY had initiated a massive countrywide initiative 
on mobile governance to provide Government services to the people through mobile 
phones and tablets and had notified a framework for mobile Governance in 
February, 2012. DeitY are  operationalizing Mobile Seva through two projects, viz. 

23 
 
„National Rollout for the Mobile Services Gateway‟ at an estimated outlay of Rs. 21.5 
crore over 36 months and „m -Enablement of Government Departments through 
Mobile Seva‟ at an estimated outlay of  Rs. 96.89 crore over 36 months, to be 
implemented by DeitY‟s agency, Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(C-DAC) Mumbai.  As of now, funds to the tune of Rs. 11.93 crore have been 
released to C -DAC Mumbai against which an amount of Rs 8.75 crore ha s been 
utilized. Keeping in view the fact that mere Rs 8.75 crore has been utilized out of the 
estimated outlay of Rs. 118.39 crore which is just 7.39 percent, the Committee  view 
that the projects for operationalising  Mobile Seva will not be completed as  
scheduled.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the timeline by which these 
two projects are planned to be rolled out.   
 
According to the Department, the Mobile Seva platform has undergone 
security audit by CERT -empanelled agency, STQC and the NIC Cyber Security 
division. The Committee are given to understand that considering the vulnerability of 
the Android system – a platform largely used in mobile these day -the Department 
are planning to host the scanning facility on their website and for everyo ne in the 
country to log on and test and clean their system if there is a virus and this facility 
was expected to be operational by  November, 2014. While lauding the initiatives 
taken by the Department for securing mobile Governance/delivery of services, t he 
Committee desire that the Department should now focus on the final roll out of the 
„Mobile Services Gateway‟ and „m -Enablement of Government Departments through 
Mobile Seva‟ within the scheduled time frame. The Committee may be apprised of 
the status in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
DeitY is already implementing Mobile Seva  through two projects by DeitY‟s 
agency Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Mumbai: 
 
a) “National Rollout for the Mobile Services Delivery Gateway”, through 
administrative approval dated 24-Jan-2013, over 36 months.  
 
b) “m -Enablement of Government Departments through Mobile Seva”, through 
administrative approval dated 20-Jun-2014, over 36 months. 
 
Key achievements so far are as follows: 
 
i. DeitY has notified the Framework for Mobile Governance in February 2012, 
which now acts as the prime driver for Government Departments and 
Agencies across the nation towards adoption of mobile governance.   

24 
 
ii. A centralized Mobile Services Delivery Gateway (MSDG) has been 
operationalized in July 2011 and has now become the core infrastructure of 
choice for enabling the availability of public services through mobile devices. 
iii. MSDG offers the following channels:  
 “Push SMS” has seen massive adoption by Government Departments/ 
Agencies at the centre, states and UTs. Over 1678 Departments/ 
agencies are already on board and over 333 crore SMS notifications 
have already been sent to citizens/ businesses by the integrated 
departments. 
 "Pull SMS" is operational on two short codes – 51969 (all telcos) and 
166 (major telcos), and also on one long code 9223166166 (all telcos), 
offering 406 services.  
 Mobile Apps – A government mobile appstore has been made 
operational in year 2012 ( https://apps.mgov.gov.in/index.jsp) and 
currently it hosts over 455 fully functional mobile apps that are free to 
download, most of which have been developed in -house by the CDAC‟s 
development team in collaboration  with the concerned Government 
Departments or Agencies. 
 Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) – Currently operational with 
over 3.79 lakh transactions.  
 Unstructured Supplementary Services Data (USSD) is a session based 
interactive service. USSD is operational with 6782 transactions. 
iv. The Mobile Seva portal www.mgov.gov.in was launched in January 2012 and 
is available round -the-clock for both departments and citizens with live up -to-
date information on all features and  solutions. From the “Department 
Services” tab on the portal, interested departments/ agencies can quickly 
register themselves online for availing Mobile Seva services. 
v. Information and interaction is also provided through regular posts on the 
Mobile Seva social page www.facebook.com/DIT.MGOV.   
vi. Mobile-based payments can be offered through the integration of Mobile Seva 
with PayGov. 
vii. The Mobile Seva project won the United Nations Public Service Awards 
(2014) unde r the category "Promoting Whole -of-Government Approaches in 
the Information Age".  
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Since its inception in 1976, NIC has emerged as the prime builder of e -
Government/e-Governance application in Government Ministries/ Departments at the 
Centre/States, Districts and Blocks. NIC, through its ICT network – „NICNET‟, has 
institutional linkages with Ministries/Departments of the Central Governme nt, State 
Governments/UTs and District administrations of India.  The Committee are happy to 
note that the NIC has maintained a healthy trend in utilizing allocated funds over the 
years.  The Committee further note that NIC at present has 3796 Scientific a nd 
Technical manpower to support ICT requirements. An estimated additional strength 
of around 4000 temporary staff are working with NIC across the country. The 
Committee have been informed that based on a professional study, a proposal was 

25 
 
marked for creat ion of 1407 posts across different levels of scientific and 
administrative officers to meet the e -Governance requirement of NIC. However, the 
Committee do not find any follow-up action on the part of the Department to take the 
proposal forward. Considering that NIC‟s activities have expanded manifold and it is 
the only Government body engaged in end -to-end ICT -needs of 60 Lakh 
Government employees and providing e -Governance and citizen charter services to 
the citizens of India and it has an organizational p resence across 648 districts, 
across the States, and more than 75 Central Government Ministries/Departments, 
there is an urgent need for augmenting the staff strength of NIC.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take expeditious steps to pilot the 
proposal for creating posts so as to strengthen the technical arm of NIC.  Organizing 
regular training programmes for the employees of NIC to keep them up -to-date with 
state-of-the-art technologies is an important area which requires constant attention of 
the Department.  At the same time, the Department should initiate action for 
upgradation of basic infrastructure at NIC centres across the country to match with 
its massive expansion of activities. The Committee would like to be informed  of the 
specific steps taken in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
NIC on the recommendations of `Expert Committee on HR Policy for e 
Governance‟ for creating 1407 post has already been submitted to Finance Division 
of DeitY for Inter -Ministerial appro val.   Further, NIC has already created Virtual 
classrooms at NIC -Bhubneshwar, Pune and Hyderabad for organizing various 
technical training facilities programmes on technology areas.  It has been proposed 
to create State of the art training infrastructure at NIC Hqrs to launch both classroom 
as well as e-learning programmes. 
 
The upgradation of NIC infrastructure is an ongoing exercise. The need for 
such upgradation arises due to continuous change in technology. Some of the recent 
steps taken to upgrade NIC include setting up of new NIC Cloud at Delhi, approval of 
new Data Centre at Bubneshwar, upgrading NICNET by linking it with NKN, State 
Informatics Offices and District Informatics Offices in new States and new districts 
created across the country, suppor t for new Ministries/Departments and Central 
Government organizations across the country, e -office and e -procurement 
infrastructure for whole of Government etc.  The demands of NIC have increased 
significantly as technology becomes an integral part of larg er number of activities of 

26 
 
various e-Governance initiatives.  There is increasing demands for expanding NIC 
infrastructure, including need for additional manpower. 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 
The Committee note that since inception of the project, there has been a 
gross variation and persistent mismatch in the proposed and allocated GBS under 
NKN. The Committee in their previous Reports on Demands for Grants have been 
disapproving the adhocism of fund allocation to such an important programme and 
stressed the need for adequate allocation of funds.  The Committee are constrained 
to find that the shortfall in allocation have resulted in reduced outcome and delayed 
the implementation of NKN.  The C ommittee note that for the years 2012 -13 and 
2013-14, the allocations at BE stage was Rs. 360 crore for each year whereas at RE 
stage it was reduced to Rs. 152.19 crore and Rs. 352.23 crore, respectively, as 
against the proposed allocation of Rs. 2406 cror e and Rs. 1240 crore, respectively.  
The Committee note a similar trend of allocation during the year 2014 -15 wherein 
Rs. 300 crore has been allocated as against the proposed allocation of Rs. 1500 
crore.  This situation becomes a matter of serious concern  in the light of the fact that 
various schemes of DeitY are being connected through network of NKN and the very 
objective of NKN is to inter -connect all knowledge institutions across the country 
through high speed data communication network covering 1500 i nstitutions 
comprising all universities, institutions of higher learning and research.  The 
Committee recommend that the Department should take up the matter at the higher 
levels with the Ministry of Finance and bring to their notice the serious concerns o f 
the Committee in the matter.  
Reply of the Government 
Time to time requests from the higher level have been made to Ministry 
Finance to take steps for allocation of adequate funds for NKN.  Some of the 
references are given below : 
  
i)        D.O. letter dated 18.04.2013 from MCIT to Finance Minister for allocation of 
Rs. 1240 Cr. for FY 2013-14  
ii)       D.O. letter dated 10.04.2013 from Dr. R. Chidambaram, PSA to GOI and 
Chairman, HLC(NKN) to Finance Minister for Rs. 1270 cr. for FY 2013-14.. 
iii)      D.O. letter dated 10.02.2014 from Dr. R. Chidambaram, PSA to GOI and 
Chairman, HLC(NKN) to Secretary, Department of Expenditure for allocation of 
additional budget of Rs. 400 Cr. in the FY 2013 -14 and Rs. 1100 Cr. for FY 
2014-15..   

27 
 
  
It is noteworthy that no budgetary cut was imposed on the allocations made for 
NKN in BE 2014-15. Further, keeping in view the serious concerns expressed by the 
Standing Committee on the allocation of inadequate funds for NKN, Ministry of 
Finance was requ ested for an allocation of Rs. 855 Cr. for NKN in the Budget 
Estimates for the FY 2015 -16.  However, a provision of Rs. 150 cr. has been made 
for NKN. With the present allocation of funds, the  number of Districts connected 
through NKN would be reduced.  
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
The Committee note with concern that though the number of cyber fraud 
cases during the last three years has come down, yet financial loss due to e -fraud 
has increased from Rs. 38 crore in 2011 -12 to Rs. 67 crore in 2012 -13.  In fac t, the 
data maintained by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) also reflects that the 
number of cyber crime cases registered has increased over the years.  Cases 
registered under the IT Act have increased almost four times from 1791 in 2011 to 
4356 in 2013.  Despite several initiatives taken by the Department to tackle online 
financial fraud/loss, the Department have identified deficiencies, viz. mis -
configuration of web server, irregular and improper updation of digital certificate 
leading to poor auth entication of online banking website, non -following of secure 
coding practices while developing the web applications, hosting environment of web 
applications not hardened  properly,  web applications not securely connected with 
databases leading to information disclosure vulnerability, etc. which caused increase 
in cyber crime/fraud.  Herein lies the significance role of cyber security experts.   
However, against the growing demand for cyber security experts in the country 
which is estimated to be 5 lakh by 2016, the Committee find that India has at present 
only 44,000 information security professionals out of which around 600 are in the 
Government. Moreover, the cyber security related activities are handled by 
generalist IT professionals and the country lac ks specialists in the field of cyber 
security.  Though the Department have taken key initiatives for capacity building 
through formal and informal methods and launching of the ISEA project, these 
measures have not been adequate enough to address the cyber security needs of 
the country. The Committee while taking cognizance of the Department‟s initiative 
with regard to the non -formal sector wherein they are working closely with the 
Ministry of HRD to increase the number of cyber security professionals throug h the 

28 
 
ISEA programme, emphasize that more efforts need to be made to create a vast 
pool of resource/ IT/cyber security experts to provide a secure cyber space to its 
users. 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the direction of creating a vast pool of Cyber Security  experts, it is 
recognized that although various activities and programs initiated by the Government 
have made positive contribution in creation of work force of cyber security 
professionals, yet the entire demand of cyber security professionals in the cou ntry 
may not be met by the Government initiatives alone. Keeping this in view, 
Government has initiated a public -private partnership program with the active 
involvement of private sector in the form of a Joint Working Group. The Working 
Group produced its report and recommendations outlining the means of engagement 
with the private sector.  The report of Working Group has laid a road map for 
capacity building to meet the demands of cyber security professionals in a mission  
mode  through PPP  arrangements.  With these initiatives, Govt. intends to expand 
its reach and increase the scale for meeting the demand for cyber security 
professional work force in the country. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
e-Industry (Electronic Hardware) 
 
Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing (Productivity and 
Employment) 
 
It is distressing to find that allocations made under the Electronics/IT 
Hardware manufacturing sector are insignificant.  In the year 2012 -13, an amount of 
Rs. 5 crore was allocated against the proposed GBS of Rs. 1434.50 crore. In the 
year 2013-14, allocation was increased to Rs. 100 crore which was reduced to Rs. 
10 crore at the RE stage.  The allocation in 2014 -15 is again Rs. 85 crore as against 
the proposed GBS of Rs. 4713.71 crore. The expenditure over the years has also 
fallen below the RE allocation. The funding and extent of utilization under this sector  
speak poorly of the pace of electronics hardware manufacturing in the country.   
 
 

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The expenditure on electronics manufacturing is growing at significant pace 
for few years. 
2009-10 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2010-11 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2011-12 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2012-13 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2013-14 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2014-15 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
0.49 1.56 0.61 4.89 7.89 67.3* 
* As on March 2015 
  
In addition, an amount of Rs. 77.07 crore released as grant in aid to schemes for 
development of skill in Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 2014-15. 
 
It is also correct that amount of expenditure is yet inadequate. The most of the 
policies for electronics manufacturing have been approved in  2012 -13 and 
thereafter. These policies viz. M -SIPS; EMC, Skill Developm ent Schemes etc. are 
largely formulated in the manner that it leads to expenditure after the implementation 
is done by corresponding players. 
 
As a result of new policy initiatives, there has been significant change in the 
investment in this sector and exp enditure since 2012-13. In the last one and the half 
year or so, 61 investment proposals involving investment of Rs. 20,282 crore have 
been received under M -SIPS. This includes 11 proposals from Multinational 
companies. It is relevant to mention that when a Multinational company takes 
decision to invest, they make choice after evaluation of other countries. Since 
electronics products are importable on zero duty, each of these investments reflects 
a new trend of multinationals choosing India over other desti nation.  Apart from the 
proposals received, after the launch of „Make -in-India‟ campaign, the level of interest 
has increased significantly. Several other companies have evinced interest and are 
contemplating investment in this sector. These investments sh ould fructify within 
next 6-12 months.  
 
The current trend clearly indicates that electronics manufacturing sector is the new 
and emerging investment opportunity in the country.  
 
During 2015 -16 an allocation of Rs. 74 crore has been provided for electronics 
hardware and IT/ITes industry. There are existing commitments of about Rs. 280 
crore apart from new commitment under M -SIPS/Incubator/EMC etc. Therefore, the 
budget allotment is inadequate. The Standing Committee may recommend additional 
allocations of funds for promotion of electronics sector in the country. 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
The Committee note that as per the data furnished by the Department during 
the year  2011 -12, 2012-13 and 2013-14, the country imported for USD $ 12,645.76 
million,  USD $ 11,487.64 million and USD $ 12,696.82 million, respectively, which 
included items su ch as telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless 
networks; Personal computer (laptop, palmtop, etc.), Videophone; Monolithic 

30 
 
integrated circuits –digital, Digital processing units, Solar cells/photovoltaic cells; 
Solid-state non -volatile storage  devices; Printed circuits and Machines, etc. The 
Committee also note that as per the information provided by the Indian Cellular 
Association, the quantum of handsets imported in the country has increased from 
143 million in 2011 -12 to 187 million in 2013 -14. The India Electronics and 
Semiconductor Association (IESA) – Frost and Sullivan Report on „Indian Electronics 
System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) Market‟, released in January 2014 
(provided by DeitY) shows that during the year 2014, an estimated 66%  of the total 
demand of electronic products in India would be met from imports while 34% would 
be met from domestic production. Out of the total domestic production, 20% is 
estimated to be high value added, while 80% is estimated to be low/ medium value -
added production. The aforesaid data furnished by the Department substantiate the 
country‟s increased dependency on imports.    The Committee, therefore, have been 
impressing upon the Department to give focused attention to this sector and make 
the country self-reliant in hardware manufacturing. The Committee are happy to note 
that the promotion of electronics manufacturing is included as a key component of 
the recently launched „Digital India Programme‟ of the Government. Some of the 
steps taken to boost ind igenous production of electronic hardware are the 
enunciation of the National Policy on Electronics 2012, Modified Special Incentive 
Package Scheme (M -SIPS), setting up of two Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication 
(FAB) Manufacturing facilities, Electronics Manu facturing Clusters (EMC) Scheme, 
Electronic Development Fund (EDF), 100% FDI in electronic hardware 
manufacturing sector through automatic route, etc.  The Committee recognize that 
one of the major hindrances on the path of domestic manufacturing is that a t present 
import is cheaper than manufacturing. To address this, the inverted duty structure 
has been rationalized by the Government so that domestic manufacturing get certain 
benefits that offset initial disadvantages.  Further, import duty has been incre ased on 
these items and incentives are extended for export of these goods. The Committee 
believe that these fiscal incentives would certainly give a boost to the indigenous 
manufacturing sector in electronic hardware.  Indigenous manufacture policy allows 
global players to manufacture in the country which will further give fillip to the 
upcoming electronic market in the country.  The Committee hope that all these 
measures will be taken to their logical end, facilitating transformation to a self -reliant 
India in the manufacturing sector.  
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department expresses gratitude for the observations of Standing 
Committee and note for guidance. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
e-Innovation/R&D 
 
Center for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
The Committee note that C-DAC is the premier R&D agency of DeitY carrying 
out R&D and innovation activities ranging from conceptualization to field deployment 
in the area of Electronics, Information and Communication Technology.  Feeling the 
need to develop indigenous CAS for boosting the development and manufacturing of 
STBs in the country and based on the recommendations of a Committee of Experts, 
the Department have finalized the specifications and released an Expression of 
Interest (EoI) for the Develop ment of Indian CAS. The Committee have been 
informed that M/s ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore, has been shortlisted for 
development and implementation of the India CAS in association with C -DAC. The 
tripartite agreement is expected to be signed shortly and Indian CAS is expected to 
be built and tested and would be ready for integration and deployment by November 
2015.  In view of the huge requirement of millions of STBs in the country, the 
Department should seize the opportunity and expedite the process of manufacturing 
of Set Top Boxes in a systematic and phased manner and take measures to stay 
ahead in competition with established players in the market.  
 
Reply of the Government 
A Conditional Access System (CAS) is a system used to limit the access of 
TV signals to only authorized viewers and forms an integral part of Set Top Boxes 
(STBs). Conditional Access systems are highly proprietary and dominated by few 
global companies, which is a major impediment in design and development of 
domestic STBs. Based on the recommendations of a Committee of Experts; the 
specifications of the proposed Indian CAS were finalized. After following due 
tendering processes, M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore has been shortlisted 
for the development and implementation of  the Indian CAS in association with the 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC). C-DAC will be primarily 
responsible for design review, code review, monitoring, testing and validation of the 

32 
 
entire project.  Out of the total project cost of Rs .29.99 crore, Rs.19.79 crore is the 
DeitY‟s support amount and remaining amount will be contributed by M/s. By Design 
India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore. Letter of Award was issued to M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. 
Ltd., Bangalore on 05.11.2014. Tripartite Agreement has  been executed between 
DeitY, C -DAC and M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore for development and 
Implementation of Indian CAS on 18.11.2014. CAS system is expected to be built, 
tested and be ready for integration and deployment within 12 months from th e date 
of issuance of Letter of Award (By November 2015). The DeitY support amount 
(advance-1st stage) is also being released in this regard. 1 st installment of Rs. 5.93 
crore has been released as grant to M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Further, the Government has taken the following initiatives: 
(i). BCD of 10% imposed on import of Set Top Boxes.  
(ii). The domestic STB manufacturers had to pay CST equivalent to VAT rate 
(typically 12.5%). It has been resolved by extending the facility of form „C‟ to 
STBs vide Department of Revenue‟s O.M dated 13th August, 2014. 
(iii). Export incentive of 5% has been provided to STBs under Foreign Trade 
Policy. 
(iv). To curb inflow of sub -standard STBs, especially from China mandatory 
compliance to safety standards notified.  
  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
e-Inclusion 
 
Vikaspedia 
 
 
The Committee note that the project „Vikaspedia‟, approved in March, 2013, 
was planned to be developed in all the 22 Indian official languages and English. So 
far, it has been developed in 10 languages viz. Hindi, Telugu, Assamese, Marathi, 
English, Tamil, Gujarati, Kannada, Bangla and Malayalam   and the remaining 
languages are planned to be added in phases by June 2015. The Committee further 
note that for the year 2013 -14, an amount of  Rs. 331.33 lakh was  allocated which 
was fully utilized and for the year 2014 -15, an amount of Rs. 450.31 lakh has been 
allocated for the project.  Considering the fact that it is more than one year since the 
site was launched and since it includes important domains such as A griculture, 
Health, Education, Social Welfare, Energy and e -Governance, the Committee 
observe that the Department should assess the site‟s efficacy in terms of 
dissemination of information, content, accessibility, and also the need for expanding 
the domain s/subjects based on need and relevance. The Committee also 

33 
 
recommend to the Department to complete the development of the site in the 
remaining 12 languages as per the scheduled timeline so as to deliver maximum 
benefits to the targeted groups. The Committ ee may be apprised about the action 
taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
DeitY is vigorously pursuing the issue of making the Vikaspedia portal 
available in all 22 languages and 6 selected domains as these impact the socio -
economic life of peopl e, especially the rural masses. In a recently organised 
workshop in December, 2014 by DeitY wherein officers from other line ministries, 
NGOs and UN organisations were invited for their suggestions to improve the reach 
and utility of the portal, it was dec ided that more domains may be considered based 
on their utility only after making the portal live in all 22 languages and 6 selected 
domains. 
Presently, the portal has been made ready in 4 more languages namely 
Sanskrit, Urdu, Punjabi and Oriya and this wo uld be launched in May, 2015. The 
development of the portal in all remaining 8 languages will be completed by August 
2015.  
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
Supercomputing 
The Committee note that India possesses a wealth of High Performance 
Computing (HPC) related  experience and expertise. However, in recent years India 
has under -invested in HPC and is falling behind other major HPC players of the 
world. The Committee also note that in this direction a meeting of the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) was held und er the Chairmanship of the Secretary 
(Expenditure) on 28 th August, 2014. The EFC have favorably recommended the 
„National Supercomputing Mission (NSM): Building Capacity & Capability‟ proposal 
with an outlay of Rs. 4,500 crore over a period of seven years,  to be jointly steered 
and implemented by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and DeitY. 
The Committee further note that requisite approvals and the minutes of the meeting 
are under approval and therefore no funds have been utilized out of the p roposed 
Rs. 4,500 crore. The Committee strongly feel that in the era of shifting paradigm 
towards Information Technology for e -Development of India and increased usage of 
Cloud computing for mass storage, India should continue with their endeavour in 

34 
 
Supercomputers. The Committee stress that the Department should be futuristic in 
their approach and should work in coordination with DST for clearance of all the 
necessary approvals at the earliest so as to reap the benefits of supercomputing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A proposal on National Supercomputing Mission with joint implementation by 
the Department of Science & Technology (DST) and the Department of Electronics & 
Information Technology (DeitY) was submitted to the Department of Expenditure and 
also circulated to the all concerned in July 2014. The Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC), Chaired by Secretary (Expenditure), in its meeting held on 28 th 
August 2014 considered the joint proposal on the “National Supercomputing Mission 
(NSM): Building Capacit y & Capability” having an outlay of ` 4500 Crores over a 
period of seven (7) years, and recommended to the Government for requisite 
approvals.   
Subsequently, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) chaired 
by the Honourable Prime Minister held on  25th March, 2015 approved the “National 
Supercomputing Mission” (NSM). This will enable India to leapfrog to the league of 
world class computing power nations. 
Status: The Administrative approval for the Mission has been issued by Department 
of Electronics and Information Technology on 9th April 2015. The Mission would be 
implemented and steered jointly by the DST and DeitY through Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) and Indian Institute of Science (IISc), 
Bangalore. 
An Action plan for pre -operative activities has being prepared. The setting -up of 
Steering and Monitoring mechanisms for the mission in the form of the Governing 
Board (GB), the Executive Board (EB), Expert Groups/ Technical committees and 
Mission Directorate is presently under process.  
  

35 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  -NIL- 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
E-Security 
 
Cyber Security 
 
Cyber security programme aims at building a secure and resilient cyberspace 
for citizens, business and Government. In order to address the issues of cyber 
security in a holistic manner, the Government announced „National Cyber Security 
Policy‟ on 2 July, 2013. It is a matter of concern that the programme remain under 
funded year after year. In the year 2014-15, as against the proposed GBS of Rs. 510 
crore, the  Department have received only Rs. 128 crore for Cyber Security.  
Similarly, in the years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, against the proposed allocation of Rs. 
206 crore and Rs. 400 crore, allocations at BE stage remained at Rs. 51.20 crore 
and Rs. 60.37 crore, respectively; besides, there were further cuts at the RE stage. 
The reduced allocation has obviously caused delay in implementation of the key 
initiatives. What is further disquieting to note is the fact that the Department have 
failed to utilize even the fund allocated at RE stage. It is imperative on the part of the 
Department to improve the utilization of funds with better planning so as to secure 
enhanced allocation under such an important programme. Though the Committee 
have been assured that fu nds are reallocated to ensure that this programme does 
not suffer, they desire the Department to be focused and see that the two key 
initiatives taken in 2014 -15 for implementation - National Cyber Coordination Centre 
and Botnet cleaning malware - are implemented, as envisaged.    
Reply of the Government 
 
Establishment of National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) and Botnet 
Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre are the two key initiatives envisaged by the 
Department for priority implementation. Efforts have been made for implementation 
of these initiatives as envisaged.   
 
The National Cyber Coordination Centre project required extensive 
consultation with all the stake holder entities as well as evaluation of all the 

37 
 
technological aspects of the project.  This initiative has completed the consultation 
and eva luation process and the project has been approved for implementation. 
Action is initiated with regard to preliminary work for implementation of the project. 
 
The Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre also involves close 
coordination with the stake ho lders such as ISPs and technology infrastructure.   
Following the approval of the project, the project implementation has already started.  
Procurement of equipment and site preparation are in progress. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation No.20) 
Indigenous tablets/PCs 
The Committee note that the indigenous low cost Tablet „Aakash‟, now named 
as „Aakash -IV‟, was sanctioned in January, 2009 and was initially a project of the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development initiated under the National Mission on 
Education through I CT (MNEICT) and then transferred to IIT Bombay in April 2012. 
The Committee also note that C-DAC was involved in testing of „Aakash‟ Tablet after 
it was transferred to IIT Bombay. In mid -2013, it was decided that DeitY would take 
forward the „Aakash‟ proje ct. The Committee also learnt that the vendor neutral 
technical specifications for „Aakash -IV‟ were finalized by a technical Sub -Committee 
in August 2013, after placing it for public comments. Thereafter, the tender for 
„Aakash-IV‟ Tablets was put out by D GS&D on 28.01.2014. However, the DGS&D 
rate contract process could not be completed because of inability expressed by the 
vendors to meet certain technical requirements. The Committee have been informed 
that the technical specifications of Aakash -IV tablet  are therefore proposed to be   
reviewed and after a decision taken in the matter fresh tender process will be taken 
up with DGS&D.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) has been developing low 
cost access device namely “Aakash” under National Mission on Education through 
ICT (NMEICT) since September 2010 and Aakash was first launched by the then 
Minister of Human Resource Development in October 2011. 

38 
 
Several issues were raised in media  about the quality and performance of 
Aakash and also regarding the vendor M/s. Datawind who was supposed to supply 
Aakash. Reportedly, under the initial project assigned by MHRD to IIT Jodhpur, a 
contract was sig ned by IIT Jodhpur with M/s. Datawind to supply 2 lakh units of 
Aakash devices. But this supply could not be completed due to certain issues. An 
Inter-Ministerial Committee was constituted for continuous R&D and timely delivery 
of Aakash in December, 2011 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DeitY.  
Meanwhile, MHRD transferred the project to IIT Bombay in April 2012. 
Reportedly, IIT Bombay worked with the vendor and had an upgraded version of 
Aakash delivered for the contracted devices. These devices were d istributed among 
faculty and students across approx. 300 colleges and universities across the country. 
Several applications were developed for extensive testing of the upgraded version of 
Aakash. Meanwhile a technical sub -committee was setup to recommend f unctional 
and technical specifications for the low cost access device. The specifications 
proposed by this committee have been called “Aakash -IV”. These specifications 
were finalised after extensive consultation with industry, academia and other 
Stakeholders. These specifications were formally published in August 2013. These 
specifications have been developed with a view to have a device at a low cost. 
These broad-based and generalized specifications were made available to DGS&D 
for competitive bidding from  all eligible bidders to bring Aakash tablets on their Rate 
Contract. Thereafter, DGS&D initiated the rate contract process. C -DAC was 
assigned the responsibility of testing and certification of the Aakash -IV Tablet. The 
tender for making available Aakash-IV tablet on DGS&D Rate Contract was issued in 
January 2014. Despite best efforts, no vendor has been able to meet the technical 
specifications. The new technical specifications have not yet been finalized. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER –V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE 
OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
‘Right to be forgotten online’ 
 
The Committee note that the „Right to be forgotten online‟ is a new concept 
that has been discussed and tried in the European Union (EU) in recent years and 
this issue has arisen from the desire of some in dividuals to determine the 
development of his/her life in an autonomous way, without being perpetually or 
periodically stigmatized as a consequence of a specific action performed in the past. 
There are also concerns about its impact on the right to freedom  of expression, its 
interaction with the right to privacy, and whether creating the  „right to be forgotten‟ 
would decrease the quality of the Internet while dealing with this issue. The 
Committee understand that the cyber space is quite dynamic in nature a nd the 
actions of the Government are tailored to be in line with the same and a Cyber 
Regulation Advisory Committee ( CRAC) has been set up by the Department to 
advise the Union Government.  The Committee may be apprised of any development 
made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The developments in this area are being followed to enable Cyber Regulatory 
Advisory Committee (CRAC)  to deal with these issues and advise the Government 
as appropriate.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
  

40 
 
Appendix-I  
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2015 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18th December, 2015, from 1 000 hours                     
to 1040 hours in Committee Room ‘ 139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Shri Paresh Rawal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Salim Ansari  
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following six  Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx….. 
II. Action Taken Report on the Second Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2014 -15)’ 
of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology;  
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…. 
IV. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx….. 
V. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..xxxx….;and 
VI. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…… 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Report and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
  

42 
 
Appendix-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SECOND REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,13,15,16,17,18 and 19  
 Total 17 
 Percentage 85 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 12 and 20  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 10 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 14  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5 
 