 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
(MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)  
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Cyber Crime, Cyber Security and Right to Privacy’] 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
17 


 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)  
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Cyber Crime, Cyber Security and Right to Privacy’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which hav e been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
17 
CHAPTERIV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
18 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature…………………………………………………………………………………….. 
21 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on                      
18th December, 2015  
29 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contai ned in their Fifty -second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2015-16) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
6. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
7. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
8. Shri P. Karunakaran  
9. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
11. Shrimati Hema Malini  
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
13. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Smt.) Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Javed Akhtar  
23. Shri Salim Ansari  
24. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan  
25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
26. Shri Meghraj Jain  
27. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
28. Shri Derek O’Brien  
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
30. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
31. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology       
(2015-2016), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the 
Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their  Fifty-second 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Cyber Crime, Cyber Security and Right to Privacy’  
of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Fifty -second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 12th February, 2014 .  The Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty -second Report on              
17th July, 2014.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 18th December, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-second Report of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Fifty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Cyber Crime, Cyber Security and Right to 
Privacy’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department 
of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Fifty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on                      
12th February, 2014. It contained 22 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in re spect of all the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2,3,6,7,9,11,13,14,20,21 and 22 
 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- Nil  
 
 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of w hich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-4, 5, and 19. 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,8,10,12,15,16,17 and 18.  
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to implementation of the 
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee further desire 
that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in    Chapter-I and 
final action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 

 
 
2 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of th eir 
recommendations. 
   
A. Challenges/Constraints relating to human resource (Auditors, Cyber Security Experts 
and Skill Development in IT  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
6. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are given to understand that shortage of manpower is one of 
the major constraints in all the organisations involved in securing Indian cyber 
space. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14), the 
Department had submitted that there is shortage o f cyber security 
experts/auditors/IT skill in the country.  The Committee are extremely disturbed 
to note that even though challenges to cyber space are on the rise, in a country 
with a population of around 1.21 billion, so far only around 42,000 students have 
been trained/undergoing training in various long -term/short-term courses and 
along with the existing personnel, a total of about 65,000 trained personnel are 
available pertaining to cyber security as against the estimated requirement of 5 
lakh trained  personnel.  Though the Department has taken initiatives such as 
conducting extensive training programmes as part of the Information Security, 
Education and Awareness Programme (ISEA) for increasing the number of cyber 
security experts in the India n Govern ment organisations and engaging the 
National Security Council Secretariat with the task of determining the extent of 
augmentation of Cyber Security experts in the Government organizations, the 
Committee feel these initiatives are far from adequate.  This w as echoed by the 
Secretary, DeitY, during the course of evidence when he said ‘we still have a long 
way to go so far as manpower in IT is concerned’.   
 
The Committee are also disappointed to note that there are only 97 Master 
trainers and 44 empanelled au ditors by Cert -In in the country. The Department 
has submitted that the list of empanelled auditors has been brought down 
because they have to pass a stringent test. The Committee feel that while the 
quality and examination process cannot be compromised, t he number of 
empanelled auditors is very less considering the requirement in the field and 
there is an urgent need to empanel more number of auditors to meet the 
requirement. The Department has also submitted that critical shortage of cyber 
security profes sionals need to be tackled in mission mode with innovative 
recruitment and placement procedures along with specialized training of existing 
manpower. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to increase  the number of cyber 
security experts/auditors/IT skill in the country on top priority basis so as  to 
ensure that shortage of man power does not come in the way of securing Indian 
cyber space. The Committee may be kept apprised about the status of the 
increase of cyber security experts/auditors/IT skill in the country.” 
(Para Nos. 2.8 and 2.9, Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 

 
 
3 
 
7. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
 
“Regarding empanelment of auditors, it is submitted that t he auditing 
organizations go through a  stringent process of practical skill verification before 
getting empanelled under CERT -In.  This empanelment process is open for all 
auditing organizations based in the country that possess the required skills and 
competency for undertaking audits and they can apply any time during a block 
period for empanelment.  The number of organizations empanelled by CERT -In 
at any given point of time depends on the number of organizations that posses s 
the required skills and qualify the practical tests. 
  
Regarding the number of cyber security experts, it is submitted that the 
Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA)  project of the Department  
has so far trained more than 42,000 persons at  the formal and informal level 
through the involvement of around 40 institutes in the country.  Continuing with 
this initiative, the Department has taken  actions for Phase II of the ISEA Project 
initiation w.e.f. 1.4.2014.  The project targets to train ov er 1,14,000 persons 
through various formal and informal courses with the involvement of 51 
institutes.” 
 
8. Taking note of the critical shortage of cyber security  professionals in the country, the 
Committee had recommended to the Department to increase the  number of cyber security 
experts/auditors/personnel with IT skill on priority basis. While observing that the number of 
empanelled auditors is very less, the Committee had felt that there was an urgent need to 
empanel more number of auditors to meet the r equirement. However, the Department, 
instead of giving any detail as to what act ion is being taken for increasing the number of 
empanelled auditors, have merely restated that auditing organizations go through a stringent 
process of practical skill verifica tion before getting empanelled. The Committee  feel that the 
Department, without compromising on the stringent procedure, should take necessary steps 
in imparting training and upgrading technical skill of personnel in cyber security measures so 
that their level of competency is enhanced, enabling more number of auditors to meet the 
criteria automatically and get empanelled as certified auditors.  
Similarly, on the issue of increase in the number of cyber security experts, the 
Department have submitted that the Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) 
project being implemented by the Department have so far trained more than 42000 persons 
at the formal and informal level by involving around 40 institutes in the country, and that 
action ha s been taken for phase II of ISEA project targeting to train over 1,14,000 persons 
through various formal and informal courses by involving 51 institutes. In this regard, the 

 
 
4 
 
Department, however, have not clarified as to whether these formal and informal level 
courses train personnel to make them mere computer literate or specialize them in cyber 
security making them cyber security experts . In any case, considering the fact that the 
number of cyber security experts is very l ess compared to the actual requirement in th e 
country, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation  and urge the Department to 
take concrete measures to increase the pool of cyber security experts so as to tackle the 
growing threat of cyber security looming over the IT infrastructure of the country. 
B. Research and Development to secure Cyber Space 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
9. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Research and development activities are being carried 
out by eminent uni versities/organisations in areas of cyber security  which inter-
alia include (a) Cryptography and cryptanalysis, (b) Network and System Security, 
(c) Monitoring and Forensics and (d) vulnerability remediation  and the key 
priority of identified areas as id entified by the Department is to carry out 
innovative R&D with focus on basic research, technology development and 
demonstration, setting up test -beds, transition, diffusion and commercialization 
leading to widespread deployment in the field to enhance sec urity of cyber 
space in the country. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that funds 
allocation for R&D in cyber security during the year 2012-13 could not be utilized 
fully due to procedural compliance for settling of pending UCs and budget for 
the year 2013-14 has been cut down by Rs. 10 crore (approx). This budgetary cut 
is a matter of extreme concern particularly when the Department  has stated 
that large funds need to be allocated to undertake development of key 
technologies and present fundin g provided to R&D in the area of Cyber Security 
does not allow undertaking projects for development of strategic technologies.   
 
The Committee feel that specialised research being an important and integral 
part of cyber security programme, adequate attent ion needs to be given to this 
aspect with sufficient funding. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should immediately take necessary steps for optimum utilisation of 
funds under R&D in cyber security and also facilitate research in strat egic 
technologies. The Department should also facilitate in design of programmes for 
development/enhancement/promotion of skills/expertise for R&D in cyber 
security.”  
 
10. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
 
“Cyber Security R&D programme of the Department is aimed at development / 
enhancement of skills and expertise in the area of cyber security by facilitating 
basic research in strategic technologies.  Research and development is ca rried 

 
 
5 
 
out in strategic areas of cyber security including cryptography and cryptanalysis, 
network & system security, monitoring & cyber forensics by initiating projects in 
association with recognized R&D organizations.  The programme has resulted in 
technology development as well as promotion of skills / capability development 
for indigenous R&D.  More strategic technologies need to be developed and the 
Department is requesting for enhanced allocation of funds in this regard.” 
 
 
11. Expressing serious concern over the under-utilization of funds in R&D for cyber 
security during the year 2012 -13 and reduction of budgetary allocations by Rs. 10 crore for 
the year 2013 -14 owing to pending UCs, the Committee had recommended to the 
Department to take necessary step s for optimum utilization of fund s in the R&D sector and 
facilitate research in strategic technologies. However, it is disquieting to note from the action 
taken note of the Department that no concrete steps have been taken in this direction. Apart 
from mentioning that R&D is being carried on in  certain areas like cryptography , 
cryptanalysis, cyber forensics, etc. , the Department have not enumerated any specific plans 
to facilitate research in these strategic technologies in pursuance of the recommendation o f 
the Committee . T herefore, the Committee , while reiterating their earlier stand, once again 
exhort the Department to inform in clear and concrete terms about the specific steps taken 
for optimum utilization of fund, liquidation of pending UCs and plans for enhanc ement in 
expertise/skill in R&D for cyber security. 
 
C. Cyber Appellate Tribunal (earlier known as Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal)   
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 19) 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Cybe r Regulations Appellate Tribunal (CRAT) was 
established in October, 2006 in accordance with the provision contained under 
Section 48(1) of the IT Act 2000, and after the amendment of the IT Act in the 
year 2009, the Tribunal is known as Cyber Appellate Tri bunal (CAT). As per the IT 
Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by the Controller of Certifying 
Authorities or by an Adjudicating Officer under the Act can appeal before the 
Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT). The main objectives of the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal is to consider and decide the validity/legal propriety of the orders passed 
by the Adjudicating Officers and to spread awareness about the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal (CAT) mechanism for redressing the grievances of the aggrieved party 
against the ord ers of the Adjudicating officers appointed under IT Act 2000 and 
2008. The Committee also note that till date there is only one Cyber Appellate 

 
 
6 
 
Tribunal in the country though the Act provides for setting up Benches in other 
parts of the country which has n ot yet been done. The Committee are surprised 
to learn that since inception of CAT only 17 appeals have been disposed off by the 
former Chairperson and 21 appeals are still pending for hearing in the Tribunal 
which are scheduled for disposal on appointment  of the new Chairperson. The 
Committee are also given to understand that Member (Technical) has taken over 
the charge in the month of December 2012 and CAT is making efforts to discharge 
their responsibilities with the existing manpower and steps have been  initiated to 
recruit additional manpower for its effective functioning. While expressing their 
displeasure over the undue delay taking place in disposal of appeal by the Cyber 
Appellate Tribunal, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to 
deploy adequate manpower at the earliest so that appeals that are pending for 
hearing in the Tribunal are disposed of expeditiously.  Efforts may also be made to 
set up CAT branches in other parts of the country, if need arises. The Committee 
may be kept apprised about the disposal status of cases before CAT.” 
 
(Para No. 2.26, Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
13. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated that they have taken steps for appointment of Chair person for 
the Cyber Appel late Tribunal and  Rule No. 13 of the Cyber Regulation Appellate 
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 2000 provides for hearing the appeal at any place of 
the country to cater to the needs of other parts of the country.  Further, Video  
conferencing f acility has been established in 24 S tates and UTs to enable 
litigation of the remote areas to plea their cases remotely. 
 
14. While observing that there is only one Cyber A ppellate Tribunal (CAT) in the country 
and in view of the pendency of cases in the T ribunal, the Committee had recommended to 
the Department to deploy adequate manpower at the earliest so that the pendency of  
appeals could be disposed off expeditiously by the Tribunal. The Committee had also 
recommended to the Department to make effort s for setting up CAT Benches in other parts 
of the country. In this regard, though the Department have informed that they have taken 
steps for appointment of Chairperson or  the CAT, the action taken reply does not indicate 
any timeline as to by what time the Chairperson will be appointed. The Department have also 
not addressed that part of the recommendation where in the Committee had specifically 
recommended to deploy adequate manpower and  wanting to know the actual status of 
disposal of cases before CAT. While expressing their displeasure over the way the issue has 
been dealt with , the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and call upon  the 
Department to expedite the appointment of the Chairperson for CAT within a specified 
timeframe and also deploy adequate manpower in CAT so that the appeals pending in the 
Tribunal are disposed off expeditiously and the Committee be apprised of the disposal status 

 
 
7 
 
of all the 21 appeals pending.  The Committee may also be apprised as to how v ideo 
conferencing facili ty established in the 24 S tates and UTs has facilitated the remote appeal 
process and helped in quick disposal of cases relating to cyber crime.  
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Cyber-Crime and Financial Losses 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a consistent increase in cyber 
crime cases in the country during last five years.  As per the cyber -crime data maintained by 
National Crime Records Bureau (NC RB), a total of 420, 966, 1791 and 2876 Cyber Crime cases 
were registered under Information Technology Act during the years 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 
respectively, and a total of 276, 356, 422 and 601 cases were registered under Cyber Crime 
related Sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC) during 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 respectively. In 
addition, number of Cyber Crime cases registered by Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
during the years 2010, 2011 and 2012 under provisions of Information Technology Act 2000 and 
other acts were 10, 12 and 11 respectively. The Committee find it disquieting to note that the 
quantum of financial loss and privacy related cases in the country due to cyber -attack/fraud in 
last few years have increased. According to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in the last five years 
though the number of fraud cases reported by Banks on account of ATM Debit Cards/Credit 
Cards/Internet have decreased from 15018 (in 2010) to 8322 (in 2012), yet the amount involved 
had increased from Rs. 40.48 cror e in 2010 to Rs. 52.67 crore in 2012.  Further, the number of 
cases registered by CBI pertaining to financial frauds under the provisions of Information 
Technology Act 2000 ranged between 6 to 8 during 2008 to 2011 and amount involved 
increased from Rs. 6. 42 crore to Rs. 28.79 crore. The Committee are of the view that the 
reported number of cases involving financial fraud due to cyber related cases is just tip of the 
iceberg as a number of cases go unnoticed and unreported.  
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that as of now there are several agencies which are 
involved in maintaining separate data with regard to cyber crime cases. National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB) under Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is maintaining data on cyber frauds. The 
mechanism for recording data with regard to Internet financial frauds, along with quantum of 
loss, is being maintained by Reserve Bank of India and Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).  
The Committee have been informed that DeitY regularly interacts with Banks, RBI an d CBI 
regarding cyber frauds related actions such as prevention, investigation, support, technical 
advisories, promotion of best practices and compliances, yet in view of ever increasing 
incidence of cyber crime cases and their impact on country’s security, finance and economy as a 
whole the Committee fail to understand as to how the Department concretises its cyber 
security strategies when so many agencies are involved in data collection and maintenance and 
when there is absence of any centralised monitori ng system and centralised maintenance of 
data relating cyber fraud. The Committee feel that there should be one single, centralised 
cell/agency to deal with all cases of cyber crime/threat in the country. This will not only help 
the Department in knowing t he pattern of the crime but also prevent recurrence of same kind 
of crimes with newer strategies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
work in the above direction and apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard.  
 
 

 
 
9 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Issues related to cyber crime are under the business domain of Min. of Home Affairs 
(MHA).  Further, Law and Order being a state subject, all actions related to crime including 
cyber crime are dealt with by respective states/UTs.  Many of th e states have set up cyber 
crime cells which are monitoring such crimes.  At the national level, relevant data is being 
maintained by single agency i .e. National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) under MHA. DeitY is 
closely working with MHA and other agencies. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014-Parl. dated 
17.07.2014)  
 
Challenges/Constraints relating to human resource (Auditors, Cyber Security Experts and skill 
development in IT)  
 (Recommendations Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee  note that the complex inter -connectivity of Internet with borderless 
environment, evolving innovative technologies, lack of awareness and rapidly changing security 
and threat landscape has posed massive challenge to cyber security ranging from data theft,  
espionage and Denial of Service (DoS) attacks to offensive actions by adversarial State and Non -
State actors. The Committee also note that anonymous attacks – groups sponsored by Nations 
and terrorist groups also have become a major cross border challenge in Cyber Space.  
  
 The Committee are unhappy to note that though all critical sector organizations under 
Central Government Ministries/Departments are mandated to implement information security 
best practices as per ISO 27001, there are 546 organizations in the country which have obtained 
the ISO 27001 certification. What is more intriguing is that the Department has not made any 
effort to ascertain as to why all the Government organisations have failed to obtain ISO 27001 
certification.  The Committee ne ed not emphasise that adhering to information security best 
practices helps in containing the cyber crime to a great extent.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Department to take necessary steps in identifying the reasons for all the 
Government Depart ments/ organisations for not following the information security best 
practices and urge upon them to expeditiously obtain ISO 27001 certification to enable them to 
adhere to information security best practices. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The approach to imp lementing security best practices in Govt. and critical sector 
organizations is taken up by way of implementing a comprehensive Cyber Crime Management 
Plan (CMP) for Countering Cyber Attacks and Cyber Terrorism.  The CMP has been approved by 
the National C risis Management Committee for wider circulation and implementation among 
key central Ministries, all States & UTs and critical sector organizations within their domain.  
The implementation of Cyber Crisis Management Plan along with implementation of secur ity 
best practices is being regularly reviewed by the Department as well as Secretary, Security in 
the Cabinet Secretariat for periodic reporting to the National Crisis Management Committee. 
The Ministries/ Departments have taken several steps and implemen tation of CMP is well in 
progress.  In order to assist the organizations for implementing the CMP as well as security best  
 

 
 
10 
 
practices, the Department is providing assistance in form of guidelines, templates and self -
assessment tools besides conducting enabling workshops.  Secretary, Security is making specific 
efforts in urging the organizations for implementing Crisis Management Plan and security best 
practices on priority. 
  
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014-Parl. dated 17.07.2014) 
 
Cyber Crime Cell and Cyber Crime Lab 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 
The Committee note that there is Cyber Forensics training lab at Training Academy of 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to impart basic and advanced training in cyber for ensics 
and investigation of cyber -crimes to Police Officers associated with CBI. The Committee also 
note that the Government has also set up cyber forensic training and investigation labs in the 
States of Kerala, Assam, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh , Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Jammu & Kashmir for training of Law Enforcement and Judiciary in these States. The 
Committee are of the strong opinion that there is an urgent need to increase the number of 
cyber-crime cells and labs in the States and pro vide requisite manpower, training and 
infrastructure to them. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take 
concrete initiatives in setting up the cyber -crime cells and labs in States where these do not 
exist and also upgrade and strengthen th e existing cyber crime cells with adequate fund and 
infrastructure so as to cope up with the rapid cyber threat and privacy infringement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department has set up Cyber Crime investigation training Labs for Law Enforcement and 
judiciary in CBI, Kerala and all the states of Northeast  to facilitate training to the Police and 
judicial officers with regard to Cyber crime forensic and legal aspects.  In addition, Cyber 
Forensics Training Labs for Police have been setup at Pune, Kolkata, Ba ngalore and Mumbai.  
Awareness Workshops are being organised regularly in major cities to sensitize the police 
officers. MHA, under the cyber crime investigation program, is supporting establishment of 
Cyber Crime Police Station (CCPS) and Cyber Crime Inve stigations and Forensic Training 
Facilities (CCIFTF) in each state/UT of India under police modernization scheme. The 
Department is working with High Courts in the country to train judicial officers in the area of 
cyber crimes and  interpreting  electronic evidence. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Budgetary allocations to tackle the Cyber threats 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that even though the expenditure pattern has been Rs. 20-30 crore 
on an average for each year for tackling cyber threat, a sum of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated 
for Twelfth Five Year Plan against the proposed sum of Rs. 1500 crore. The Secretary, DeitY,  
 

 
 
11 
 
informed the Committee that the Department pro poses to approach the Planning Commission 
for allocation of more funds. However, considering the quantum increase in allocation and 
keeping in view the continuous under -utilisation of funds, the Committee trust that with higher 
allocations received for the  current Plan period as compared to earlier years the Department 
will increase their capacity building for carrying the programmes so as to utilise the allocated 
funds and achieve the desired objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In support of the National  Cyber Security Policy objectives, the Department has taken 
steps to initiate key projects in the area of cyber security commensurating with the allocation 
made for the program during the 12th Plan. Allocation of more funds is needed. 
 
(Department of Elect ronics a nd Information Technology O.M. No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Concerns associated with upcoming technology 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee observe that National e -Governance Programme (NeGP) is one of the 
ambitious projects of th e Government and the Department is planning to use ‘Cloud 
computing’ for e -Governance Programmes and for storing its data. The Committee also note 
that the Government of India has recently published GI Cloud (Meghraj) – ‘Strategic Direction 
Paper’ and ‘Ado ption and implementation Roadmap’ as a part of this Cloud initiative which 
prescribes the precautions, standards and guidelines on security addressing the various 
challenges and risks and gives more clear dimension to the timelines of implementation. With 
regard to the usage of ‘Cloud computing’, the Committee in their Twenty -seventh Report 
(2011-12), had expressed apprehensions about technological and legal challenges associated 
with the concept of ‘shared platform’ and had recommended the Department to co nduct a 
study/survey to find out the existing scenario nationally and internationally and be prepared 
with a mechanism to deal with the risks associated with the usage of Cloud computing and be 
vigilant about such emerging technologies.  However, the Commi ttee are surprised to note that 
though NeGP has entered seventh year of its implementation, the Department has neither 
conducted any study/survey in this regard nor has any data on instances of cyber security 
breaches encountered in e -Governance projects. The Committee feel that NeGP being a 
visionary project of the Government, the Department should not show any laxity. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to conduct a study/survey to find out the 
instances of cyber security breaches in NeGP p rojects. While cautioning the Department to be 
extra vigilant with the usage of the new technology ‘cloud’  which is still at a nascent stage, the 
Committee desire that the Department would stick to their assurance of keeping security issues 
on priority, p articularly, in the implementation of e -Governance projects and make the 
programme foolproof. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the two (2) policy papers published by the Department in June, 2013, the 
National Clouds are being established in India for pr oviding cloud service to government 
departments / ministries . The IT services over cloud are hosted in India.  The first National 
cloud is implemented by NIC which is owned and managed by Government. As part of SDC 
phase-II, every State Data Centre is bei ng upgraded for providing cloud services to the line 
departments in their respective State.  The Department  is also in the process of setting up 
Cloud Management Office (CMO), which will be responsible for coming up with the necessary 
policies and guideli nes on interoperability, integration, data security, portability, operational 
aspects, contract management, etc. which will help us in addressing security and risk 
challenges.  
  
The Department has conducted a study tour to three pilot states to understand  the 
security posture of e -Gov Infrastructure. Based on the study, an advisory was issued by 
Department to all the states to plug the shortcomings. 
 
To assure security in e -Gov projects and prevent security breaches, the Department has 
developed an e -Governance security policy document for guiding the top management and   
implementation level guidelines for operational level personnel involved in implementing e-Gov 
projects at state and central level.  
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
MoUs and International Treaties  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that in a globalised economy, a focused approach to international 
relations is vital particularly in case of cyber -space which by its very nature is borderless and 
anonymous.  The Committee also note that the Department has taken numerous collaborative 
efforts and has geared up to encourage sustainable development and strengthening 
partnerships with other countries. In addition, ‘Nat ional Cyber Security Policy (NCSP) -2013’ 
provides for information sharing and cooperation arrangements with other countries to 
develop bilateral and multi -lateral relationships in the area of cyber security with other 
countries and to enhance national and global cooperation among security agencies, CERTs, 
Defence agencies and forces, Law Enforcement agencies and the judicial systems. The 
Committee are also given to understand that Department enters into international cyber 
security cooperation arrangements with organizations engaged in similar activities, in the form 
of Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) and in case of absence of MoUs with some 
countries, the provisions of MLAT (Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty) are used for eliciting support 
for cyber crime cases. The Committee are happy to note that the Department has signed MoUs 
in the area of cyber security with USA, Japan, South Korea, Mauritius, Kazakhstan, and Finland 
and during the year 2012 -13, MoU has also been signed with Canada in ICT and Electroni cs 
sector. Further, the Department with active assistance of the Ministry of External Affairs, is also 
having engagement dialogue with several countries such as Malaysia, Israel, Egypt, Canada,  

 
 
13 
 
Brazil that are willing to cooperate and share information wi th regard to cyber security 
incidents and vulnerabilities in IT products and systems. While appreciating the above 
initiatives, the Committee desire the Department to continue with these initiatives and enter 
into MOUs and exchange programmes with more num ber of countries for having legal and 
technical tie-ups for addressing the cross border challenges associated with cyber security. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department with the active assistance of Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)  is 
having engagement / dialogues with various countries that are willing to cooperate and share 
information with regard to cyber security incidents and vulnerabilities in IT products and 
systems. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
Preparedness/Policies/legal Initiatives to address the issue (IT Act and Cyber Security) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that keeping in view the security risks and vulnerabilities of the 
internet/computer run systems li ke defence establishments, hospitals, transportation, Banks, 
Government organisations, Government has taken several steps to improve the alertness of the 
Government and other critical sector organisations and as part of Cyber Crisis Management 
Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber attacks and cyber terrorism , all Ministries/Departments of 
Centre/State Governments and their organisations and critical sectors have been mandated to 
continuously assess the posture of their IT systems and networks. In addition, the Department 
has advised organizations to report the cyber security incidents to CERT -In within one hour of 
occurrence of the cyber attack incident or noticing the incident. The Committee recommend 
that CCMP should be frequently reviewed and revised so as to  keep pace with the rapid 
changing nature of cyber threats. Further, DeitY should ensure that all the Central 
Ministries/Departments/ Organisations/State Governments implement the Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan (CCMP) in right earnest.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The cyber Crisis Management Plan is being reviewed  and revised on periodic basis every 
year and reflects the changing nature of cyber threats and related response measures. The 
implementation of Cyber Crisis Management Plan along with implementation  of security best 
practices is being regularly reviewed by the Department as well as Secretary, Security in the 
Cabinet Secretariat for periodic reporting to the National Crisis Management Committee.  In 
order to assist the organizations for implementing t he CMP as well as security best practices, 
the Department is providing  assistance in the form of guidelines, templates and self -
assessment tools besides conducting enabling workshops.  Secretary, Security is making specific 
efforts in urging the organizat ions for implementing Crisis Management Plan and security best 
practices on priority. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014)  

 
 
14 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee have also been informed that  there are provisions under Sections 43 A, 
66 A, 67, 69 B, 70 (1), 70 (4), 70 -B, 72 A, 79 and 84 A, in the Information Technology Act, 2000 
(IT Act) to address to the problems relating to cyber crime.   On the issue of adequacy of the 
existing legal frame work for dealing with the cyber -crimes, the Department has stated that IT 
Act, 2000 addresses all aspects related to cyber crimes in a comprehensive manner with 
adequate compliance and deterrent provisions and at present, there is no need to amend the 
Information Technology Act to address National Cyber Security Policy. At the same time, the 
Department has also stated that since it is a dynamic area, the IT Act will be amended as and 
when needed. The Committee are of the view that even though the existing p rovisions of IT 
Act, 2000 may seem adequate to address all aspects related to cyber crimes in a comprehensive 
manner in the present circumstances, in view of the recent uproars over Section 66A of IT Act 
and in the light of everyday development in the area , the Department needs to  put in place a 
system of periodical review of the existing provisions in various Sections of the Act. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take the above issue seriously so as to have 
preparedness on all provisions as  the entire country is rapidly becoming dependent on 
Information Technology. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As provided in Section 88(1) of the Information Technology Act 2000, a Cyber Regulation 
Advisory Committee (CRAC) has been constituted to advise the Central Govt. either generally as 
regards any rules or for any other purpose connected with the Act. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
Education/Awareness/Training 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of Home Affairs has advised State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations to build adequate technical capacity in 
handling cyber crime including technical infrastructure, cyber police stations and trained 
manpower for detection, registration, investigation and prosecution of cyber crimes.  The 
Committee also note that the Government has formulated a set of investigation manuals with 
procedures for Search, Seizure Analysis and Presentation of digital evidence i n courts.  The 
manuals have been circulated to Law Enforcement Agencies in all States.  In view of technical 
expertise required in handling cyber crime, the Committee are of the opinion that mere 
issuance of advisories would not solve the problem. Rather, the Department should proactively 
coordinate with the Ministry of Home Affairs/State Governments for building up the 
capacity/training police personnel for detection, registration, investigation, handling of cyber 
crime evidences, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department has set up Cyber Crime investigation training Labs for Law Enforcement and 
judiciary in CBI, Kerala and all the states of Northeast  to facilitate training to the Police and 
judicial officers with regard to Cyber crime forensic and legal asp ects.  In addition, Cyber 
Forensics Training Labs for Police have been setup at Pune, Kolkata, Bangalore and Mumbai.  

 
 
15 
 
Awareness Workshops are being organised regularly in major cities to sensitize the police 
officers.  MHA, under the cyber crime investigat ion program, is supporting establishment of 
Cyber Crime Police Station (CCPS) and Cyber Crime Investigations and Forensic Training 
Facilities (CCIFTF) in each state/UT of India under police modernization scheme.. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information  Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
The Committee further note that in order to gauge the level of cyber security 
preparedness as well as awareness in the country, the Department has initiated a project 
‘National e -Security Index’ in association with Data Security Council of India (DSCI) and the 
project is expected to enable studies and surveys in different sectors and segments in the 
country and provide information in the form of an index that can guide polic y related actions in 
the country. The Committee recommend that the project should be implemented expeditiously 
and the Committee may be apprised of its status/outcome. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Developmental efforts for creation of model for depiction of N ational e-Security Index is 
complete and the same has been validated using test data. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014-Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee are extremely unhappy to not e that when asked about the initiatives 
taken by the Government to create awareness about cyber -crime amongst children, the 
Department has furnished exactly the same reply that was provided to the Committee during 
the examination of Demands for Grants (201 1-12) which inter-alia include 150 workshops 
organised in schools covering 20,000 students upto 10 th Grade.  In view of the non -availability 
of updated information, the Committee are unable to assess the action taken by the 
Department after 2011 and are no t sure whether awareness/workshops have been conducted 
by the Department thereafter.  The Committee would like the Government to take up 
projects/schemes for awareness programmes for children on continuous basis. The Department 
should also take necessary a ction in coordination with concerned authorities to make the 
curriculum of cyber security mandatory in schools syllabus. In addition to this, the Committee 
also recommend the Department to set up a national help line/call centre for common public  
which can  guide them about dealing with cyber crime and redressal mechanism. The 
Committee may be apprised about the Department’s concrete action in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department has implemented Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA ) 
project w.e.f. March 2005 onwards.  Awareness workshops for school children, college students 
etc. are designed and conducted.  These workshops are conducted at various locations through 

 
 
16 
 
the centres of C -DAC, NIELIT and other participating institutes of ISEA project.  So far 623  
workshops have been organized across the country covering about 21,600 Teachers / Parents / 
CSC / NGOs, including various Government officers etc., and about 6 0,100 school children / 
Engg. or Degree college students. During these workshops, around 50,500 Awareness Kits (with 
promotional material, Booklets and Hand Books) were distributed.  Further, around 50 posters 
on various topics of Information Security Awareness have been designed and around 1,20,000 
posters were distributed to target users in schools, colleges, etc.  
 
A dedicated website for information security awareness 
(http://www.infosecawareness.in) has been developed and launched by C -DAC, Hyderabad.  
The website includes separate sections for Children, Students and Pare nts where various 
aspects on guidelines, security risks and tips, understanding of security concepts etc. have been 
included. Further, around Forty (40) cartoon/ animation (3D/2D) videos  have been developed 
and made available through this websites for down loads. Course material like guidelines for XP, 
Windows server 2008, Vista, Linux, wireless configurations developed. Several security e -Books 
have been developed (Security Guidebook, Security Tool Kit, Children Hand Book, Guidebook 
for Teachers and Parents ) and made available on the web site. There are around 9800 
downloads so far. Hindi, Malayalam, Kannada versions of Security Awareness Handbook has 
been developed.   
 
Twelve (12) e -newsletters were designed and distributed through email / website.  12 
newsletters were designed, printed and distributed across 10,000 colleges, schools and 
government organizations. Information Security Awareness Diary for 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013 
with 365 tips; 365 Days Information Security tips calendar; Wall calendar for 2011,  2012, and 
2013; Table top calendar for the year 2010 and 2012;  Pocket Calendar for 2012 were designed 
and developed. 
 
To sensitize and create awareness about safe use of Electronic devices among citizens, 
Multimedia based Multi -lingual brochures highligh ting secure use of devices designed and 
being distributed along with the devices by the manufacturers. A website has also been hosted 
to promote awareness for securing devices.   
 
A project is on -going in Northeast in the states of Mizoram, Nagaland and Tr ipura to 
create awareness among school and college students.  Awareness programmes are regularly 
conducted in schools and colleges identified by the State Government in these states. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/201 4-Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 

 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Challenges/Constraints relating to human resource (Auditors, Cyber Security Experts and skill 
development in IT) 
 (Recommendations Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee are given to und erstand that shortage of manpower is one of the 
major constraints in all the organisations involved in securing Indian cyber space. During the 
examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14), the Department had submitted that there is 
shortage of cyber securit y experts/auditors/IT skill in the country.  The Committee are 
extremely disturbed to note that even though challenges to cyber space are on the rise, in a 
country with a population of around 1.21 billion, so far only around 42,000 students have been 
trained/undergoing training in various long -term/short-term courses and along with the 
existing personnel, a total of about 65,000 trained personnel are available pertaining to cyber 
security as against the estimated requirement of 5 lakh trained personnel.  Th ough the 
Department has taken initiatives such as conducting extensive training programmes as part of 
the Information Security, Education and Awareness Programme (ISEA) for increasing the 
number of cyber security experts in the Indian Government organisati ons and  engaging the 
National Security Council Secretariat with the task of determining the extent of augmentation 
of Cyber Security experts in the Government organizations, the Committee feel these initiatives 
are far from adequate.  This was echoed by t he Secretary, DeitY, during the course of evidence 
when he said ‘we still have a long way to go so far as manpower in IT is concerned’.   
 
 The Committee are also disappointed to note that there are only 97 Master trainers and 
44 empanelled auditors by Cert-In in the country. The Department has submitted that the list of 
empanelled auditors has been brought down because they have to pass a stringent test. The 
Committee feel that while the quality and examination process cannot be compromised, the 
number of empanelled auditors is very less considering the requirement in the field and there is 
an urgent need to empanel more number of auditors to meet the requirement. The 
Department has also submitted that critical shortage of cyber security professionals need to be 
tackled in mission mode with innovative recruitment and placement procedures along with 
specialized training of existing manpower. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Department should make concerted efforts to increase the number o f cyber security 
experts/auditors/IT skill in the country on top priority basis so as to ensure that shortage of 
man power does not come in the way of securing Indian cyber space. The Committee may be 
kept apprised about the status of the increase of cyber  security experts/auditors/IT skill in the 
country. 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Regarding empanelment of auditors, it is submitted that  the auditing organizations go 
through astringent process of practical skill verification before getting empanelled under C ERT-
In.  This empanelment process is open for all auditing organizations based in the country that 
possess the required skills and competency for undertaking audits and they can apply any time 

 
 
19 
 
during a block period for empanelment.  The number of organizations empanelled by CERT-In at 
any given point of time depends on the number of organizations that possess the required skills 
and qualify the practical tests. 
 
Regarding the number of cyber security experts, it is submitted that the Information 
Security Education And Awareness (ISEA)  project of the Department  has so far trained more 
than 42,000 persons at the formal and informal level through the involvement of around 40 
institutes in the country.  Continuing with this initiative, the Department has taken   actions for 
Phase II of the ISEA Project initiation w.e.f. 1.4.2014.  The project targets to train over 1,14,000 
persons through various formal and informal courses with the involvement of 51 institutes. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Techno logy O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Research and Development to secure Cyber Space 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that Research and development activities are bei ng carried out by 
eminent universities/organisations in areas of cyber security  which inter-alia include (a) 
Cryptography and cryptanalysis, (b) Network and System Security, (c) Monitoring and Forensics 
and (d) vulnerability remediation  and the key prior ity of identified areas as identified by the 
Department is to carry out innovative R&D with focus on basic research, technology 
development and demonstration, setting up test -beds, transition, diffusion and 
commercialization leading to widespread deploymen t in the field to enhance security of cyber 
space in the country. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that funds allocation for 
R&D in cyber security during the year 2012 -13 could not be utilized fully due to procedural 
compliance for settling of  pending UCs and budget for the year 2013 -14 has been cut down by 
Rs. 10 crore (approx). This budgetary cut is a matter of extreme concern particularly when the 
Department  has stated that large funds need to be allocated to undertake development of key 
technologies and present funding provided to R&D in the area of Cyber Security does not allow 
undertaking projects for development of strategic technologies.  The Committee feel that 
specialised research being an important and integral part of cyber security  programme, 
adequate attention needs to be given to this aspect with sufficient funding. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should immediately take necessary steps for 
optimum utilisation of funds under R&D in cyber security and also facilitate research in strategic 
technologies. The Department should also facilitate in design of programmes for 
development/enhancement/promotion of skills/expertise for R&D in cyber security.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Cyber Security R&D programme of the Department is aimed at development / 
enhancement of skills and expertise in the area of cyber security by facilitating basic research in 
strategic technologies.  Research and development is carried out in strategic areas of cyber 
security including cryptog raphy and cryptanalysis, network & system security, monitoring & 

 
 
20 
 
cyber forensics by initiating projects in association with recognized R&D organizations.  The 
programme has resulted in technology development as well as promotion of skills / capability 
development for indigenous R&D.  More strategic technologies need to be developed and the 
Department is requesting for enhanced allocation of funds in this regard. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Cyber Appellate Tribunal (earlier known as Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
The Committee note that the Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal (CRAT) was 
established in October, 2006 in accordance with the provision contained under Section 48(1) of 
the IT Act 2000, and after the amendment of the IT Act in the year 2009, the Tribunal is known 
as Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT). As per the IT Act, any person aggr ieved by an order made by 
the Controller of Certifying Authorities or by an Adjudicating Officer under the Act can appeal 
before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT). The main objectives of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal 
is to consider and decide the validity/ legal propriety of the orders passed by the Adjudicating 
Officers and to spread awareness about the Cyber Appellate Tribunal (CAT) mechanism for 
redressing the grievances of the aggrieved party against the orders of the Adjudicating officers 
appointed under IT Act 2000 and 2008. The Committee also note that till date there is only one 
Cyber Appellate Tribunal in the country though the Act provides for setting up Benches in other 
parts of the country which has not yet been done. The Committee are surprised t o learn that 
since inception of CAT only 17 appeals have been disposed off by the former Chairperson and 
21 appeals are still pending for hearing in the Tribunal which are scheduled for disposal on 
appointment of the new Chairperson. The Committee are also  given to understand that 
Member (Technical) has taken over the charge in the month of December 2012 and CAT is 
making efforts to discharge their responsibilities with the existing manpower and steps have 
been initiated to recruit additional manpower for i ts effective functioning. While expressing 
their displeasure over the undue delay taking place in disposal of appeal by the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to deploy adequate manpower 
at the earliest so that appeal s that are pending for hearing in the Tribunal are disposed of 
expeditiously.  Efforts may also be made to set up CAT branches in other parts of the country, if 
need arises. The Committee may be kept apprised about the disposal status of cases before 
CAT. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department has taken steps for appointment of Chair -person for the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal.  Rule No. 13 of  the Cyber Regulation Appellate Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2000 
provides for hearing the appeal at any place of the country to cater to the needs of other parts 
of the country.  Further, Video conferencing facility has been established in 24 states and UTs to 
enable litigation of the remote area to plea their cases remotely. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technol ogy O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 

 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER –V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF                  
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Increase in Cyber-Crime Cases and Preparedness to tackle the issue  
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that Indian cyber landscape has seen a significant increase in spam 
and phishing activities, virus and warm infections, Bot Net infected systems, etc. and were 
apprised of 20 types of cyber crime being witnessed worldwide.  The Committee are sure by the 
time this Report is tabled many more computer viruses/malwares may have been 
reported/noticed making our systems more vulnerable and prone to attacks.   
 
The Committee are co ncerned to note that the number of incidents of website 
compromise in India has grown 5.5 times during the last 5 years  (2007 -08 to 2013-14) making 
the country amongst top five countries with respect to spam mail.  Further, the phishing 
incidents have inc reased from 392 to 887 during the same period.  Resultantly cyber crime 
threat incidents handled by the Cert -In have also increased considerably during this period.  
Further, 20 different categories of threats have been identified against which whole cyber  
space is required to be protected. The Secretary, DeitY, during the course of evidence was 
candid in admitting that the nature and size of the threat in cyber space in India is looming large 
and it is very much important to protect eleven critical sectors  such as  power, atomic energy, 
space, aviation, transportation, etc. which are predominantly using IT systems. The Committee 
feel that in a rapidly changing scenario where all the systems are getting integrated rapidly 
through IT infrastructure and upcomi ng technologies such as cloud, it is imperative that our 
preparedness to face challenges emanating from any kind of cyber attack is hundred per cent 
full proof. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department should put the proposed 
agenda of 24x7 N ational Critical Information Infrastructure protection centre, which aims to 
protect the critical information infrastructure in the country, on top priority and implement its 
cyber security programmes expeditiously  so that any kind of cyber attack have no  impact on 
functioning of our critical sectors.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In respect of National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), 
Govt. has notified the following: 
 
i) Designating the National Critical Information Infrastru cture Protection Centre, an 
organization  under National Technical Research Organization (NTRO), as a national 
nodal agency in respect of critical information infrastructure protection. 
 

 
 
22 
 
ii) Information Technology (National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection  Centre 
and manner of performing functions and duties) Rule, 2013. 
 
The National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre is in the process of 
identifying the critical centers and related information infrastructure for notificat ion under   
Section 70 of Information Technology Act 2000. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Threat from imported electronics/IT products and hosting of servers outside India (Need for 
Certification unit and hosting of servers in India) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
 The import of electronic/IT products and hosting of servers outside India pose major 
threat to the country’s security in general and threat to the citizen’s security and privacy i n 
particular. The Committee in their Thirty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) had 
raised their concern over the risks involved with imported electronics/IT products and 
recommended the Department to take action in this regard.  The Committee ar e, however, 
unhappy to note that the country depends largely on imported electronics and majority of the 
websites are still being hosted outside India. The Committee are given to understand that 
hosting of websites/servers outside India is largely on accou nt of economical and cost 
advantage reasons because the protection mechanism for securing websites involves significant 
expenditure. The Department itself has admitted that there are Technical concerns viz. attack 
attribution for counter action and Legal c oncerns viz. cooperation and jurisdictional issues due 
to location of internet servers outside country. The Committee also note that the Government 
has adopted strategies to deal with the hassles which include issuance of advisories to all 
intermediaries including national and international service providers, regular dialogue with the 
intermediaries, notification of a ‘Framework and Guidelines’ for use of Social Media by its 
agencies, etc. In addition, the Department has drafted a ‘e -mail policy’ and ‘data storage policy’ 
for the Central Government and the State Governments which would not only mandate all 
Government employees to use the Government mail services, but would also prohibit usage of 
private services hosted whether in India or abroad (as the conf idential and nationally sensitive 
data etc. in 99 percent of the cases emanate from the Government organisations). While all 
these initiatives have been taken note of, keeping in view the security aspects the Committee 
emphasize that the Government should take measures, as far as possible, to locate internet 
servers for critical sectors within the country.  
 
 The Committee note that under the Common Criteria Project of DeitY, STQC has 
established the Indian Common Criteria Certification Scheme (IC3S) at STQ C, New Delhi and a 
full-fledged laboratory at Kolkata, with a capability for testing and certification of security of IT 
Products as per International standards, ISO/IEC 15408, based on Common Criteria Standards 
up to EAL4. Presently, evaluations are under taken for certification of IT products like operating 
systems of routers, switches and firewalls; security appliances upto EAL4. The Committee are 
happy to note that India has become 17 th ‘Authorizing Nation’ under Common Criteria 
Recognition Arrangement ( CCRA) and that henceforth the product tested and certified under 

 
 
23 
 
Common Criteria Certification Scheme up to Assurance Level 4 (EAL4) are acceptable not only in 
India but also in other member countries of CCRA without re -testing under the mutual 
recognition arrangements. It is also noted that the present scope of certification is limited to  
network boundary protection device and general purpose operating systems and STQC does 
not have necessary expertise and knowledge in highly complex products such as Rada r etc. The 
Committee have been informed that in view of increasing penetration of ICT in the country, 
STQC Directorate has initiated steps to enhance its capacity for testifying IT products as part of 
its action in Twelfth Plan. In addition, the sub group on testing and certification infrastructure 
under the Joint Working Group for public Private Partnership on Cyber Security also envisage 
setting up of such testing Infrastructure with active participation from private sector. The 
Committee desire that all efforts should be made with due promptitude to create the 
infrastructure and to enhance the capacity of STQC for testing of IT products. The Committee 
also recommend the Department to host more and more servers in India. Not only this, the 
Department should also have stringent measures to safeguard the indigenous servers as most 
of the cyber attacks are in ‘.in’ domain. In addition, the Department should lay down provisions 
for mandatory certification for all imported electronics/IT/telecom products and hav e 
certification centres in each State/UT specifically at all the airports/naval docks/ international 
borders. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has issued guidelines to host the websites of Govt, Ministries/Department 
and other Govt. services on servers located with secure infrastructure service providers in India. 
It has been mandated that all new Govt websites and applications are to be audited with 
respect to cyber security prior to their hosting.  National Informatics Center (NIC)  hosts the 
Govt. websites and the hosted sites are located in National data centres  established within the 
country. NIC facilitates the Government  departments to host their sites on NICNET data 
centres. NIC has taken various security measures  including auditing of sites, deployment of 
Firewalls, Intrusion Prevention Systems, Antivirus solutions and 24x7 monitoring. NIC has 
accorded security issues high priority and has put in place due diligence mechanisms & controls  
encompassing all aspects of people, process & technology. 
 
Further, both the primary and the secondary  DNS servers in respect of .IN Registry are 
hosted within the country. Further, to safeguard the indigenous .IN servers, .IN Registry has put 
in place the following measures: 
 
 Access to .IN domains is performe d via a highly redundant, global, Anycast DNS 
network, which protects against massive distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks. 
 .IN registry is secured behind a 5 layer security  ring with all critical components fully 
redundant hardware software and s ervice provision including a completely functional 
and tested disaster recovery facility. 
 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology has framed E -mail policy.  The 
said policy has been discussed with concerned Ministries & Departments. The Committee of 
Secretaries have also deliberated on this policy. The Policy envisages e -mail servers to be 
located in India. 
 
STQC Directorate of the Department established Common Criteria Test Lab at ERTL 
Kolkata. In order to enhance the capacity for security te sting and evaluation of IT products in 

 
 
24 
 
the country, STQC has initiated steps to draft guidelines and procedures for empanelment of 
Common Criteria Test Labs in public and private sectors.  
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8( 2)/2014-Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Co-operation/coordination with other organizations/countries (NCIIPC, all Ministries, 
Departments, Cyber Appellate Tribunal, CERT-In, Police) PPP and efficacy of organizations 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee no te that apart from Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology/Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) there are multiple 
organisations involved in securing India’s cyber space viz. Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Intelligence Bureau (IB), Department of Telecommunications, National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), National Technical Research Organisation (NTRO), National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), Research and Analysis Wing 
(RAW), etc. In addition, in order to address effectively the issue of overlapping responsibilities 
and enhancing coordination between the stakeholder agencies in the country, the Government 
has approved a framework and has tasked the National Security Counci l Secretariat (NSCS) to 
co-ordinate, oversee and ensure compliance of cyber security policies.  
 
 The Committee also note that one of the primary challenges facing both Government as 
well as Industry is to curb the cyber threat at the earliest and this can not be achieved in 
isolation by either Government or Industry alone and it requires joint efforts and collaboration. 
A Joint Working Group (JWG), set up under the chairpersonship of the Deputy National Security 
Advisor, to work out the details of the Roadm ap for cyber security cooperation has inter -alia 
recommended for setting up of permanent mechanism for Public Private Partnership. While 
appreciating the initiatives and the coordination of Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology with various organisations, the Committee recommend the Department to 
implement the recommendations of the Working Group in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Joint Working Group set up by National Security Council Secretariat(NSCS) has 
identified the guiding principles and objectives that would underpin the overall framework and 
roadmap for Public Private Partnership (PPP) on Cyber Security.  It envisages setting up of 
Institutional Framework, Capacity building in the area of Cyber Security, Developmen t of Cyber 
Security Standards & Assurance mechanisms, augmentation of testing & certification facilities 
for Information Technology products. Department is working with NSCS to implement the 
above recommendations and the action plan for implementation of t he recommendations is 
being worked out. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
MoUs and International Treaties  
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee note that the Department has articulate d on the need for global cyber 
jurisprudence in various international fora.  The Committee also feel that in this era of inter -
dependence and inter -connectivity, a separate discipline of cyber jurisprudence and new 
international court for cyber jurispruden ce is the need of the hour which would go a long way 
in dealing with threats in cyber space.  While admiring the initiatives taken by the Department, 
the Committee recommend the Department to redouble their efforts in making India a 
pioneering country for the cause of cyber jurisprudence.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Considering the importance of cyber security, the Department is actively working with 
the Ministry of External Affairs in the area of Global Internet Governance to articulate its 
concerns and pos sible ways of enhancing cooperation among countries in dealing with threats 
in cyber space. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014)  
 
National Cyber Security Policy-2013 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that in order to create a framework for comprehensive, 
collaborative and collective response to deal with the issue of cyber security at all levels within 
the country, the Department has prepared ‘National Cyber Security Policy (NCSP)  – 2013’ in 
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, user entities and public.  The aim of the policy is to 
facilitate creation of secured computing environment and enable adequate trust and 
confidence in electronic transactions and also guide stakehol ders’ actions for protection of 
cyber space.  Out of 47 objectives outlined in NCSP -2013, 8 areas have been prioritized by the 
Department. However, the Committee find it strange to note that NCSP does not depict any 
deadline/target except for the skilled f orce and it lacks detailed picture/road map for achieving 
all the goals of National Cyber Security Policy. On the issue of tentative deadlines by which the 
rules/guidelines for NCSP-2013 would be in place, the Committee are given to understand that 
DeitY has already initiated steps to identify the follow up actions as well as agencies responsible 
and timelines for such actions.  The Government is in the process of preparing individual 
schemes which are to be implemented by the Government and the Joint Worki ng Group set up 
under the aegis of National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS). Further, the Department has 
assured to implement major programmes in the next one year.  While appreciating the aims 
and objectives of the NCSP which is definitely a step forw ard, the Committee  urge the 
Department to chalk out the definite targets/time frame on priority areas with fixing up of 
responsibilities of different agencies involved/to be involved. The Department should ensure 
that the micro plans of the Policy are wor ked out at the earliest and implementation takes off 
during 2014 itself  so as to address the urgent need of dealing with the cyber security threats 
and the need to build capacity in the country in terms of infrastructure, preventive and 
protective legal actions, grievance redressal mechanism, evaluation and compliance verification 

 
 
26 
 
for imported IT product, certification, awareness, etc. The Department must also ensure that 
the NCSP -2013 policy which is expected to facilitate creation of secured computing 
environment and enable adequate trust and confidence for the IT users in the country meets its 
objectives. 
Reply of the Government 
In line with the directions of the Cabinet Committee on Security, while approving the 
National Cyber Security Policy 2013, the Department in association with the National Security 
Council Secretariat (NSCS) is in the process of identifying actionable points, as well as different 
agencies responsible for implementation of such actions.  Further, as directed by Cabinet 
Committee on security, Department has identified key projects that are to be initiated in the 
current year itself.  These key initiatives are in support of implementing the National Cyber 
Security Policy and are related to creation of mechanisms for security threats, e arly warning 
and response to security threats. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
Cyber Security and Right to Privacy 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee note that balancing cyber secu rity and right to privacy is extremely 
complex.  The Committee are given to understand that in the absence of any Bill on privacy, the 
Information Technology Act 2000 as amended in 2008 takes care of data privacy and data 
protection.  The Act contains adequate provisions to deal with various cyber related offenses as 
well as protection of privacy of individuals.  These provisions include Section 43 and section 66 
for penalty and stringent punishment for hacking of website, Section 43A - for compensation to 
the affected person for failure to protect data, Section 72 -for penalty for breach of 
confidentiality and privacy, Section 72A -for punishment for disclosure of information in breach 
of lawful contract. In addition, The Information Technology Rules (Reasonable Security Practices 
and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information), 2011 notified on 11 th April, 2013 
under section 43A of the Information Technology Act defines the sensitive personal data and 
reasonable security practices and procedures. T he Rules require body corporate to provide 
policy for privacy and disclosure of information (Rule 4), obtain consent of user for collection of 
information (Rule 5), prior permission required from provider of information before disclosure 
of sensitive personal information (Rule 6).  While the above provisions have been taken note of, 
the Committee are extremely unhappy to note that the Government is yet to institute a legal 
framework on privacy.  When asked about the status of the above legislation, the Depa rtment 
has diverted the issue stating that the Department of Personnel and Training is still in the 
process of evolving legislation to address concerns of privacy, in general, and it is still at the 
drafting stage.  The Committee seriously feel that in vie w of enormous data, very sensitive in 
nature, being consigned to cyber space each day particularly in the light of Government’s 
visionary UIDAI programme, the Government should not jeopardize the privacy of citizens on 
the plea that the Department is conce rned only with Section 43(A) which it is based on self -
regulation.  Though the Department has stated that personal information may not come under 
the purview of DeitY, the Committee are of the opinion that the Department should carry out 
their responsibili ties at least with regard to the digital data. The Committee, while 
acknowledging the complex nature of the cyber space and the maturity and competence 

 
 
27 
 
required in balancing cyber security and right to privacy, desire that the Department in 
coordination wi th the Department of Personnel and Training, multi -disciplinary 
professionals/experts should come out with a comprehensive and people friendly policy which 
may protect the privacy of citizen and is also foolproof from security point of view. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to protection of sensitive personal information, the Information Technology 
Act 2000, as amended in 2008, contains adequate provisions (Sections 43, 43A,72A and 66) to 
deal with the aspects of data security as well as protection o f sensitive personal information.  
The Department is participating in consultation process of the Department of Personnel and 
Training with regard to protection of privacy of citizens. 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/20 14-Parl. dated 
17.07.2014)  
Cyber Security and Right to Privacy 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 17) 
While taking note of the Department’s stand on the recent instances of surveillance and 
interception of data (though only meta-data) by other countries, that incursion into the content 
of the country’s data will not be tolerated, the Committee are of the strong opinion that the 
Department should have exercised enough caution so that such a situation was not allowed to 
occur at the first instance.  Further, the Commi ttee feel that the Department should be 
extremely vigilant and cautious in terms of safety as well as in terms of policy with different 
countries so as to avoid such leakage and interception of sensitive data in the name of 
surveillance.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to take remedial 
measures and come out with a policy which should be implemented stringently so as to obviate 
recurrence of such instances.   
Reply of the Government 
 
In the wake of concerns regarding US electroni c surveillance activities, efforts are being 
made to enhance country's capacity to protect data and information flows by building better 
cyber infrastructure and by evolving new cyber security practices.  Efforts are also being made 
towards these objective s by promoting the evolution of better international internet 
governance-norms, through ongoing discussions at international fora. Framing of e -mail Policy 
and National Cloud is one such direction, 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M .  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee note that the existing system for registering complaints for grievance 
redressal regarding cyber-crime involves reporting with the local polic e stations or cyber -crime 
cells of law enforcement agencies, however, further redressal process of such cases is similar to 
other crime related cases. The Committee are given to understand that since Law and Order is a 
State subject, all actions related to  crime including cyber crime are dealt with by respective 

 
 
28 
 
States/UTs and relevant data of such cases are being maintained by National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB). Further, many of the States have set up cyber crime cell which are monitoring 
such crimes. In view of the fact that there is steep rise in cyber -crime instances and the rate at 
which common man in our country is affected, the Committee are surprised to learn that not all 
the States have a separate cyber crime cell and there is no centralized syste m/cell for 
monitoring cyber -crime. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department for having 
mandatory cyber -crime cell not only in each state but also in each District and Block. The 
Committee also recommend for having a centralized system/cell for mo nitoring cyber -crime 
which would have real -time details of registration and disposal status of cyber -crime 
throughout the country. The Department may also expedite follow up with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs about the Department’s request to increase the awareness among people 
regarding the mechanism of reporting cyber crime cases with the cyber crime cells of law 
enforcement agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
Under the cyber crime investigation program, Ministry of Home Affairs is supporting the 
establishment of Cyber Crime Police Stations (CCPS) and Cyber Crime Investigations and 
Forensic Training Facilities (CCIFTF) in each State/UTs of India under Police modernization 
scheme. 
 
Issues related to cyber crime are under the business domain of Min. of Home Aff airs 
(MHA).  Further, Law and Order being a state subject, all actions related to crime including 
cyber crime are dealt with by respective states/UTs.  Many of the states have set up cyber 
crime cells which are monitoring such crimes.  At the national leve l, relevant data is being 
maintained by single agency i,e. National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) under MHA. 
 
On the issue of steps to increase the awareness among people regarding the mechanism 
of reporting cyber crime cases with the cyber crime cells of la w enforcement agencies, the 
matter had been referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs earlier by this Department on 14th 
Sept., 2011 and subsequently by Secretary of the Department to Home Secretary on 5th Dec., 
2011.  Following the observations by the Committee in its 27th Report on the action taken by 
the Government, Secretary of the Department has once again written to Home Secretary on 
7th May, 2012, requesting for necessary steps by MHA in this regard.  Department is awaiting a 
suitable response from MHA on the status of actions and pursuing its efforts for specific actions 
by MHA. 
 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology O.M.  No. 8(2)/2014 -Parl. dated 
17.07.2014) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
  

 
 
29 
 
Appendix -I  
 
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2015 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the  18th December, 2015, from 1000 hours                     
to 1040 hours in Committee Room ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Shri Paresh Rawal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Salim Ansari  
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitti ng of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following six Draft Action Taken Reports: -  
I. Action Taken Report on the Fifty -second Report on the subject ‘Cyber Crime, 
Cyber Security and Right to Privacy’; 
II. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx… 
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…. 
IV. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…. 
V. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…...xxxxx ; and 
VI. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the above Report  and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 

 
 
31 
 
Appendix-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-SECOND REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2,3,6,7,9,11,13,14,20,21 and 22 
 
 
 Total 11 
 Percentage 50 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- Nil   
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-4, 5, and 19. 
 
 
 Total 03 
 Percentage 13.64 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,8,10,12,15,16,17 and 18.  
 Total 08 
 Percentage 36.36 
 
 