 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Revival of Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited’] 
 
 
 TWENTY-SEVENTH 
 
 
 
 
 
               LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
              NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
27 
 


  
TWENTY-SEVENTH 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Revival of Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 


(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
CONTENTS 
 
Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations/ which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
17 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
41 
CHAPTERIV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
42 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations/ in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
46 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee held on 8th August, 2016. 
  
  48 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/    
Recommendations contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
         50    

                                                                      
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur   -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
 6. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
  7. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
8. Shri P. Karunakaran 
9. Shri Virender Kashyap 
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
11. Smt. Hema Malini 
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
13. Dr. K.C. Patel 
  14. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20.  Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@ 21. VACANT 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
* 23. Shri Suresh Gopi 
24.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
25. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
**26. Dr.  Prabhakar Kore  
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien  
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
  29.  Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
30. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya  
# 31.  VACANT 
  Secretariat 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y. M. Kandpal - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
*  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 20.05.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 23.05.2016. 
#   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, M.P. and Shri Salim Ansari, M.P. retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
01.07.2016 and 04.07.2016 respectively. 
@ Ms. Mehbooba Mufti, M.P. resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 
05.07.2016. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 28.07.2016.   
(ii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology          
(2015-2016), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the            
Twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Revival of Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited ’ of the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 7th August, 2015.  The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action 
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
on 9th March, 2016. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 8th August, 2016. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
08 August, 2016 Chairperson,  
17 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
  
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Revival of 
Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited’ relating  to the Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  the          
7th August, 2015. It contained 19 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of 
Telecommunications and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been acce pted by the 
Government 
 
 Recommendation  Nos.:- 1,2,3,4, 5, 6, 8,9, 12, 13, 14, 15,16, 17 and 19  
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Recommendation  No.: NIL  
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Recommendation  No.: 7  
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 Recommendation Nos: 10, 11 &18  
4. The Committee in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) had undertaken 
a comprehensive examination of the subject ‘Revival of Indian Telephone 
Industries (ITI) Limited’.   Established in 1948 , ITI was the first Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU)  of the country to assist the Government in the sensitive and 
strategic telecommunications field.  The Committee had observed that ITI being the 
sole telecom equipment manufacturer during the pre -liberalization period was a 

2 
 
profit earning entity for more than 40 years.  However, after liberalization, the 
manufacturing infrastructure of ITI which was set up for fixed line telephone 
almost bec ame redundant  and it borrowed heavily from Banks/Institutions for 
expansion leading to further losses over the years.  As the net worth of ITI got 
completely eroded in 2003-04, the Company was referred to BIFR and was declared 
a ‘Sick’ Company on 31 st March, 2004.  Even after receiving Rs.4566.77 crore  
assistance during the period from 2004 to 2013, the Company could not be revived 
mainly because the Capex infusion  was limited to only Rs.150 crore which was 
grossly inadequate for plant upgradation for GSM/CDMA technology.  A re newed 
effort for the revival of ITI was initiated and numerous agencies, such as BIFR, SBI, 
DoT, BRPSE etc. were involved in preparation of  the Revival Plan before it was 
finally approved by the CCEA on 12 th February, 2014.  However, the pace of revival 
process had been extremely slow and it took more than 9 years before being finally 
approved by the Cabinet.  As per the proposal approved by CCEA , ITI’s revival has 
to be supported through financial restructuring by final infusion of Rs.4156.79 
crore, consisting of Rs.2264 crore as capital grant for upgradation of manufacturing 
infrastructure at its various units and the balance amount of Rs.1892.79 crore as 
financial assistance in the form of grant s-in-aid for clearing statutory liabilities and 
meeting other commitments made by ITI. 
The Committee , in their Ninth Report , had recommended for requisite 
allocation of funds for ITI to enable D epartment of Telecommunications to adhere 
to the disbursement schedule approved by the Cabinet, focus ing on bringing the  
Company back to profitability  mode, expand ing its customer base and address ing 
the business requirements of the Private Sector as well, acquir ing the state-of-the-
art technology and striving for transfer of tec hnology for major products.  The 
Committee ha d also emphasized on attracting strategic partners to go for joint 
venture, recruit ing fresh personnel to absorb new technology, reduc ing social 
overheads by taking employees  and trade unions on board, taking  advantage of 
business opportunities offered by projects like ‘Make in India’, ‘Digital India’ and 
‘Smart Cities’  etc.  The Committee had suggested that  granting of Defence PSU 
status to ITI would help in revival of the Company.   

3 
 
5. The Committee, while furnishing their comments on some of the 
recommendations which have already been accepted by the Government for 
action, trust that utmost importance will be given to implementation of  all the 
Observations/Recommendations. The Committee further desire that Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V 
of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.   
(Recommendations Sl. Nos. 4 & 5) 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“As per the Revival Plan approved by CCEA, the disbursement of funds 
has to be done in two stages.  In the first stage, an amount of Rs.1455.79 
crore consisting of Rs.460 crore for projects which required immediate 
assistance and Rs.995.79 crore for paymen t of liabilities had  to be 
disbursed.  In the second  stage, an amount of Rs.2701 crore consisting 
of Rs.1804 crore for projects and Rs.897 crore  for clearing liabilities was 
to be disbursed based on the progress of the projects covered in the first 
stage.  During the year 2014-15, a request had accordingly been sent by 
DoT to the Ministry of Finance to make a provision of Rs.460 crore under 
Plan head and Rs.1892.79 crore under non -Plan head in the General 
Budget 2014-15 regarding the Revival Plan of ITI.  However, an amount 
of Rs.460 crore only was allocated at BE stage under the Plan head, and 
no fund was allocated under the non -Plan head.  The Committee note 
that after persistent efforts made by the Department, the Ministry of 
Finance allocated Rs.165 c rore for payment of 1997 wage revision 
arrears to the ITI employees  in November, 2014, Rs.200 crore as soft 
loan in September, 2014 and Rs.100 crore as loan in March, 2015 for 
making payment of salaries to its employees.  As a result of delayed 
allocation of matching funds under grants -in-aid for making payment 
towards statutory liabilities, Rs.460 crore allocated under Plan head for 
project implementation could not be utilized as Planned.  The first 
tranche of Capex amounting to Rs.192 crore was released to ITI as late as 
February, 2015.  The Committee observe that owing to the delay in 
approval of the revival proposal and late release of funds by the Ministry 
of Finance, the implementation of the revival Plan will now come into 
effect from 2015-16, i.e. deferred by one year.  Another tranche of Rs.50 
crore for Capex infusion and further  Rs.150 crore as grants -in-aid for 
making payment of salaries to the employees of ITI have been allotted in 
the General Budget 2015 -16.  Since the Revival Plan is to be 

4 
 
implemented in two stages, the Committee desire the Ministry of 
Finance to ensure requisite allocation of funds to enable DoT to adhere 
to the disbursement schedule approved by the Cabinet so that 
implementation of the Revival Plan is not hampered further due to lack 
of funds.  The Committee stress that DoT should constantly coordinate 
with the Ministry of Finance for timely release of funds as provided for in 
the financial package to facilitate execution of the Revival Plan.” 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 “The Revival Plan of ITI envisages improvement of its core competency 
in electronic/telecom equipment manufacturing by upgrading the 
manufacturing infrastructure at all its manufacturing units and to 
simultaneously diversify into Service Projects (National Popul ation 
Register, Data Centre, Optical Fibre Laying Projects, AMC business, etc.), 
Smart Card manufacturing, Battery Manufacturing and LED products 
manufacturing to make each unit of ITI a separate profit centre and 
sustain their profitability independently.   18 projects have been 
identified by ITI for execution under the Revival Plan.  The Committee 
note that out of Rs.460 crore earmarked for projects in the first stage, 
capital investment planned by ITI were spread  over two phases in the 
Financial Year (FY)  2014-15.  Phase -I related to activities/projects to be  
completed in FY 2014 -15 while Phase – II related to the projects for 
which infrastructure upgradation was to be started in 2014 -15 so that 
the orders against these projects could be executed in 2015 -16. With 
capital investment of Rs.460 crore planned in Phase -I and Phase-II in the 
six units, viz. Bengaluru (Rs.197 crore), Naini (Rs.79 crore), Palakkad 
(Rs.117 crore), Mankapur (Rs.29 crore), Rae Bareli (Rs.33 cro re) and 
Srinagar (Rs.5 crore), t urnover of the order of Rs.524 crore and 
Rs.1271.50 crore was estimated during the year 2014 -15 and 2015 -16, 
respectively.  However, out of Rs.242 crore released so far, Rs.79.61 
crore has been utilized by only three plants of ITI, viz. Bengaluru        
(Rs.46 crore), Palakkad (Rs.26.48 crore) and Rae Bareli (Rs.7.13 crore) for 
procurement of machinery and equipment. Obviously, the turnover from 
the Capex cannot be achieved as planned and ITI’s expectation for the 
same to materialize during 2015-16 also appear unattainable. 
A review of the 1 st stage implementation of the Revival Plan shows that 
there is a shortfall in allocation  to the tune of Rs.118 crore towards 
capital investment and  Rs.380.79 crore under grant -in-aid for meeting 
liabilities.  Evidently, the 1 st stage implementation  is lagging far behind 
owing to belated allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance, coupled  
with the slow  pace of utilization of available funds by ITI.  Consequently, 
the 2 nd stage implementation, which is based on the progress o f the 
projects covered in the first stage where ITI planned Capex investment of 
the remaining amount, i.e. Rs.1804 crore, will be delayed.  In the given 
situation, the Committee are constrained to conclude that the targets 

5 
 
set for estimated turnover, garne ring operating profit and likely 
turnaround of manufacturing plants are not going to be realized as 
envisaged in the projected performance.  Now, since the entire business 
plan for revival stands deferred and needs to be restructured with 
revised Capex plans, the roadmap for restructuring needs to be carefully 
worked out.  The Committee emphasize that the thrust of execution of 
the Revival Plan should be to bring ITI into profitability immediately so as 
to create a platform on which the Company can be built  up.  Once the 
Company is profitable, it would be in a position to acquire technologies 
to move to the 2 nd stage.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ITI should strive for optimal and efficient utilization of available funds to 
accomplish activities/ projects planned for different phases in the 1 st 
stage of implementation and secure release  of funds to step up activities 
in phase III in the 2 nd stage of implementation.  The corporate office of 
ITI should take quick decisions in its investment plans for all the six 
plants and ensure speedy release of funds for procurement of machinery 
and equipment required for upgradation of manufacturing infras tructure  
in these units.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this direction.  They would also like to be informed  about the 
renewed Capex plans and estimated turnover and the time by which ITI 
will be brought to profit mode.” 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 5) 
8. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated 
as under:- 
“DoT has been actively pursuing with Ministry of Finance (MoF) for 
timely release of funds for smooth implementation of the Revival Plan 
approved by CCEA. However, till date MoF has released only Rs. 507 
crore against the approval of Rs. 4,156.79 crore. This comprises of an 
amount of Rs . 192 crore to meet capex requirements Rs. 165 crore for 
payment of 39 months’ pay revision arrears, as per  1997 pay revision, to 
employees of ITI  and Rs 150 crore to meet the establishment cost. 
The status of revival efforts of M/s ITI Limited was reviewed by 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on 6 th July 2015. It was decided by CoS 
that the revival plan of ITI may be funded from Universal Service 
Obligation Fund (USOF). Thereafter in a meeting taken by Secretary DPE 
and Secretary BRPSE on 14 th August 2015, it was decided that the 
Department (i.e. DoT ) may examine the project funding for those goods 
and services in the production profile of ITI which have use for 
penetration of telephone network in rural and remote areas from USOF 
and accordingly, funding of the business and operational plan for the 
revival of ITI may be taken up. Hence, the matter was discussed with 
USOF and a committee has been constituted comprising of officers from 
USOF, DoT, ITI and BBNL. The committee with representatives from 

6 
 
officers from USOF, DoT, ITI and BBNL is in the proces s of finalizing the 
projects and activities related to USOF that ITI can undertake.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 “Infrastructure up -gradation for implementation of projects is a long 
process. Considering that the technology is fast changing, the b usiness 
plan needs to be done taking into consideration the current market 
scenario and, accordingly, the detailed project reports are required to be 
prepared. These reports are then submitted to ITI Board and Apex 
Committee for approval. The infrastructur e required for each project is 
to be finalized and action needs to be taken for tendering, ordering, 
procurement, installation, commissioning etc. As the revival plan of ITI 
was approved in February 2014 itself, ITI had initiated proactive action 
on the infrastructure up-gradation and most of the project activities had 
been brought up to the level of ordering for equipment  at the time of 
release of funds by the Government. 
 
Out of Rs. 2264 Crores sanctioned by CCEA as equity for capital 
investments under re vival plan, Government had released Rs. 192 
Crores, during February 2015, as first phase disbursement to the 
company. This amount is planned for implementing various projects 
under Defence business, SCADA, MLLN, Smart cards, HDPE Pipe 
manufacturing, SMPS, Component screening, Vehicle Tracking System 
(VTS), 3D printing, Contract manufacturing, Business with PSUs etc. 
Sixteen projects have been identified under this capex plan. The 
infrastructure up -gradation for implementation of these projects has 
almost be en completed in various plants of ITI.  Out of Rs .192 crore, 
company has drawn around Rs 151.35 crore as on 31st October 2015. 
 
In BE 2015 -16, Government has approved Rs.50 crore for ITI under plan 
expenditure. The business plan for utilization of Rs. 46 crore under this 
allocation has already been approved by ITI Board and the Apex 
Committee and they are part of two projects which are currently under 
implementation. This amount will be utilized during 3 rd/ 4 th quarter of 
2015-16 after complete utilization of Rs. 192 crore already released. The 
plan for utilization of balance Rs. 4 crore has also been made. However, 
ITI has drawn plans for implementation of many more projects during 
the current year/next year and has requested for allocation of more 
funds un der plan head towards these new projects. These projects 
include manufacturing of telecom products like Wi -Fi, NGN, LTE and 
GPON, manufacturing optical fiber, augmentation of manufacturing of 
HDPE pipe, expansion of ITI’s Data Centre etc. An additional cap ex of 
appx. Rs. 270 crore has been estimated for these projects and ITI has 
requested DoT to kindly consider allocation of this fund, in addition to 
the already allocated amount of Rs. 50 crore, towards capex during 
2015-16. Based on the allocation of fund s during 2015 -16 and 2016 -17, 

7 
 
ITI shall prepare detailed project reports and submit to DoT and the Apex 
Committee.”  
(Reply to recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
9. As per the Revival Plan for ITI approved by CCEA, an amount of Rs.4156.79 
crore consisting of Rs.1892.79 crore as Grants -in-Aid for payment of statutory 
liabilities and Rs.2264 crore as capex in the form of equity infusion were to be 
released in two phases by the year 2015 -16. Observing that due to delay in 
approval of the revival proposal and late  release of funds by the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF), the implementation of the Revival Plan had been deferred by one 
year, i.e., by 2015 -16, the Committee in their original Report had desired that the 
Department should impress upon  MoF to ensure requisite a llocation of funds to 
enable DoT to adhere to the disbursement schedule and also recommended that 
ITI should strive for optimal and efficient utilization of available funds to 
accomplish activities/proposals planned.  From the Action Taken Note furnished b y 
the Department, the Committee note that allocation and utilization of funds is still 
a critical issue.  As per the disbursement schedule, the total amount of Rs.4156.79 
crore was to be released to ITI by the end of 2016. However, ti ll date, M oF has 
released only Rs.507 crore , comprising of Rs.192 crore under Plan, Rs.165 crore for 
payment of 39 months’ pay revision arrears as per 1997 pay revision and Rs.150 
crore to meet the establishment cost.   
With regard to capital investment under Revival Plan,  the Department have 
informed that out of Rs.192 crore released, the Company had drawn around 
Rs.151.35 crore as on 31.10.2015.  Business Plan for utilization of Rs.46 crore out of 
Rs.50 crore allocated under Plan at BE 2015-16 had been approved by ITI Board and 
Apex Committee and the amount will be utilized after complete utilization of 
Rs.192 crore already released.  The Department have also informed that the Plan 
for utilization of Rs.4 crore has also been made  and ITI has drawn up plans  for 
implementation of many more projects during the current year/next year and has 
requested for allocation of more funds under plan head towards some new  
projects. An additional capex of approx. Rs.270 crore has been estimated for these 

8 
 
projects and ITI has requested DoT to consider allocation of this fund, in addition to 
the already allocated amount of Rs. 50 crore, towards capex during 2015-16.  
The Committee also note that as per the decision of the Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) following a review  meeting on 6 th July, 2015, the Revival Plan of 
ITI may be now funded from USOF.  Thereafter in a meeting taken by Secretary DPE 
and Secretary BRPSE on 14 th August, 2015, it was decided that DoT may examine 
the project funding for those goods and services in the production profile of ITI 
which have use for penetration of telephone network in rural and remote areas 
from USOF and accordingly, funding of the business and operational plan for the 
revival of ITI may be taken up. After discussing the matter with USOF, a Committee 
was constituted with the  representatives from officers from USOF, DoT, ITI and 
BBNL and this Committee are stated to be in the process of finalizing the projects 
and activities related to USOF that ITI can undertake.  The Committee note that the 
basic purpose of USOF is to provide telecommunication services to people residing 
in rural and remote areas of the country at affordable price. Considering the higher 
capital cost of providing telecom services in rural and remote areas, the Committee 
are of the view that USOF should be exclusively utilized for the stated aims of 
expanding telecom services in  such areas. The Committee hope that pro jects and 
activities related to USOF, that ITI can unde rtake must have been finalized by now 
by the Committee constituted for the purpose.  
With regard to  the status of utilization of fund especially under Plan , the 
Committee observe that  the implementation of Revival Plan of ITI as approved by 
CCEA is far fro m reality.  If ITI is to be revived as approved by the CCEA, there is a 
need to strictly adhere to its disbursement schedule and no piecemeal infusion of 
fund as done currently would be sufficient for revival of ITI.  Considering that status 
of manufacturing of telecom equipment in the country is extremely low and ITI can 
play major role in meeting the telecom equipment requirement in the country, the 
Committee desire that earnest effort s be made by the  Department at the highest 
level and impres s upon the Ministry of Finance with the detailed plan for 
expeditious release of funds so that ITI can upgrade the manufacturing 
infrastructure for its various plants.  

9 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
10. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee  note that ITI has core competency in encryption, 
network projects, multi -layer PCB manufacturing, dedicated network 
system unit, ASCON, CDMA and GSM network installation and 
maintenance.  ITI is also the only Company in the country where BTS 
system for GS M network is made.  The major customers of ITI are BSNL, 
MTNL, BBNL, Defence, Railways, Banks, State Governments, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Rural Development,   Vikram Sarabhai space 
Centre, etc. ITI has plans to implement projects such as the National ID 
Card manufacturing for NPR Project, Tablet PC manufacturing, solar 
project, defence  projects, data Center and IT projects, G -PON (Gigabit 
Passive Optical Network), Carrier Ethernet, Software defined Radio (SDR), 
ADSL-CPEs,  Long Term Evaluatio n (LTE), SMPs  and SCADA, and LED 
based lighting products. The Committee further note that 18 projects had 
been approved in the Revival Plan and out of these, priority projects 
based on current requirement have been identified  and the 
implementation of infrastructure upgradation for manufacturing is under 
progress.  The Committee have  been informed that the total estimated 
market in the country of 16 identified projects, to name a few: Defence, 
NPR, GSM, Data Centre and IT  projects, LTE,  etc. is Rs.9100 0 crore and in 
this, the market share of ITI is projected to be Rs.22610 crore.  As per the 
ITI business portfolio, out of 27 products,  21 products have relevance at 
present and out of these there is high business potential for 10 products.  
The Committee,  however, find that ITI has high competence for 
manufacturing of 5 products which are relevant now and have high 
business potential for products, viz. NGN, encryptors, software defined 
radios, smart cards and solar products.  As of now, ITI has no major 
products/solutions which are being supplied to the Private Sector and in 
order to address the Private Sector, ITI is strengthening its R&D and 
focusing on marketing.  The Committee recognize that there exists a huge 
market for various products identified und er the ITI Revival Plan. 
Considering that ITI has high competence for manufacturing 5 specific 
products, the Commi ttee find it essential for ITI to  strengthen and 
increase its core competency so that  it can take advantage of the 
opportunity available in the market for various products.  The committee 
are of the view that apart from catering to the needs and requirements 
of Government Departments/Organizations greater efforts should also be 
made by ITI to expand its customer base and address the business 
requirement of the Private Sector as well.” 
 
 

10 
 
11. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated 
as under:- 
“ITI is putting all out efforts to maximize the revenues from the 
products mentioned above. ITI Bangalore plant has succ essfully 
executed the purchase order for NGN products received from BSNL 
worth Rs. 47.72 Crores during 2014 -15. Further, Advance Purchase 
Order (APO) from BSNL to the tune of Rs. 120 Crores is available for 
execution during 2015 -16, which is likely to be c onverted into a PO this 
year. ITI is also pursuing to get an order for supply of NGN equipments 
to BSNL for upgrading their C-DOT based switching systems 
ITI is a leader in encryptor business with Defence. Considering that 
encryption products for the India n Defence are being procured only 
from three PSUs, viz., BEL, ITI and ECIL, ITI has the largest share of 
supplying in-house developed encryption products to Indian Army. The 
major communication network of Indian Army, ASCON, has been set up 
by ITI. ITI’s R &D mainly focuses on encryption technology and currently 
new products have been developed for high speed IP communication 
with the allocation of major share of the capex under Rs. 192 Crore 
plan. ITI has participated in the major tenders of ASCON Phase IV 
Encryption and Encryptors for Network For Spectrum (NFS) of Indian 
Defence and is hopeful of getting orders. 
Software Defined Radio (SDR) is latest product in wireless 
communication which has wide use, especially for the Defence forces. 
ITI has taken proac tive role in identifying a Indian technology partner 
more than two years back. These products have been demonstrated to 
Defence Units and have been found to be compliant to the 
requirements. ITI is expecting an immediate major tender from Indian 
Defence for SDR and hopeful of getting good orders in future. 
Smart Card is already a project in ITI for more than 12 years. Palakkad 
plant of ITI started smart card business with the supply of SIM cards to 
BSNL and MTNL. It diverted into manufacturing secured perso nal 
Identity cards based on National Population Register (NPR) data. It has 
supplied such cards to Home Ministry as well as to Ministry of Fisheries. 
However, the opportunities for smart cards is very high considering the 
opportunities in the areas of Driv ing License, Motor Registration Card, 
Unorganized Workers’ Identification Card etc. Hence, the company is 
augmenting the infrastructure to address diversified smart card 
markets. 

11 
 
With respect to solar project, ITI’s Naini plant has already infrastructure 
to manufacture solar panels up to a capacity of 300Wp with an annual 
capacity up to 5 MWp. This capacity is further augmented with the 
funding support under the revival plan. The plant has already executed 
some orders for supplying solar power products to BSNL and UP Police.  
Thus, ITI has major plans to market the products indicated in the Report 
of the Standing Committee on IT and it is hoped that these products 
would enable the company to earn good part of its revenue in the 
coming years.” 
12. Recognizing that there exists a huge market for various products identified 
under the ITI Revival Plan, the Committee had recommended that apart from 
catering to the needs and requirements of Government Departments/Organisations 
greater efforts should also  be made by ITI to expand its customer base and address 
the business requirement of the private sector  as well. From the Action Taken Note  
furnished by the Department , the Committee note that ITI is putting all out efforts 
to maximize the revenues from the  various products identified under the Revival 
Plan. However, the focus of revenue generation be it participation in ASCON Phase 
IV En cryption and En cryptors for Network for Spectrum (NFS), Software Defined 
Radio (SDR), manufacturing of Sm art card, Solar project, etc. are still largely based 
on the requirements of Government Departments/Organisations like Defence, 
BSNL, etc. The Committee note that the reply of the Government is completely 
silent on the recommendation of the Committee to expand IT I’s customer base and 
address the business requirement of the Private sector as well. The Committee  also 
note that ITI has no major products/solutions which are being supplied to the 
Private sector and in order to address the Private sector, ITI is strengthening its  
R&D and focussing on marketing . To take advantage of the opportunity available in 
the market for its various products, the Committee once again reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that apart from catering to the needs and requirement of 
Government Departments/Organisations greater efforts should also be made by ITI 
to expand its customer base and address the business requirement of the Private 
sector. 
 

12 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that ITI is to recruit fresh personnel to absorb the 
new technologies proposed in the revival proposal as per requirement.  
The proposal for the barest minimum fresh induction of hands to meet 
the essential requirements of various initi atives is to be considered with 
due concurrence of the Apex Committee.  At present, ITI is in the process 
of implementation of 16 projects and has identified R&D projects where 
fresh personnel can be inducted.  The proposal for recruitment of 31 
engineers and 10 diploma holders was prepared for submission to the 
Apex Committee.  Considering the fact that lack of in -house R&D to 
deliver fruitful results, non recruitment of fresh permanent Engineers for 
two decades, lack of skilled and experienced manpower in  all the Units to 
take up new technology products, etc. have been largely responsible for 
hindering the performance of ITI, the Committee recommend that the 
proposal for induction of fresh personnel need to be approved at the 
earliest so that the process o f such induction could be started for the 
larger benefit of the Company.” 
14. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated 
as under:- 
“The proposal for recruitment of fresh Engineering graduates & Diploma -
holders needs to be approved in the APEX Committee. ITI is in the 
process of firming up its requirement and is expected to take up this 
issue in the next meeting of the Apex Committee.”  
15. While observing that ITI are in the process of implementation of 16 projects 
and has identified R&D projects where fresh personnel can be inducted and for this  
a proposal for recruitment of 31 Engineers and 10 diploma holders had been 
prepared for submission to Apex Committee , the Committee in their original 
Report had recommended that the proposal for induction of fresh personnel need 
to be approved at the earliest so that the process of induction of fresh personnel 
could be started for the larger benefit of the Company.  The Committ ee, however, 
note that the proposal for recruitment of fresh Engineering Graduates and Diploma 
holders had still not been approved by the Apex Committee.  The Committee are of 
the view that it is essential for ITI  to recruit fresh personnel to absorb the n ew 
technologies proposed in the revival proposal . Considering that  lack of in -house 
R&D, non -recruitment of fresh personnel , Engineers, lack of skilled and 
experienced manpower to take up new technology products, etc. have largely 

13 
 
hindered the performance  of ITI, the Committee are of the view that any further 
delay in the recruitment of fresh personnel would only lead to further delay in  
successful implementation of the Revival Plan.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that ITI should firm up its requiremen ts so that the proposal for induction of fresh 
personnel may be approved at the earliest and induction starts without any delay.     
  (Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
16. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that ITI has been playing a significant role in 
meeting the requirement of the country’s Defence needs.  The 
Committee have been given to understand that encryptors are the forte 
of ITI and at one point of time ITI was the only Company supplying 
encryptors to Defence.  ITI has impl emented the Army Static 
Communication Network (ASCON) 1, 2 and 3 projects and is likely to get 
ASCON-4 also.  According to the Department, 70 percent of the 
encryption equipment deployed and working in the Defence sector is 
from the Bangaluru Unit of ITI.  A study was reportedly conducted by the 
Ministry of Defence in 2013 which suggested that ITI has got all the 
capabilities of producing electronics and telecommunications equipment 
for Defence.  The report recommended that ITI could be classified as a 
Defence PSU.  The Defence Research and Development Organization 
(DRDO) had also carried out a study and given the clearance that ITI has 
got all the capabilities to meet their requirements.  However, the 
proposal to confer Defence status to ITI was not agreed to by the 
Department of Defence Production as the Committee constituted for 
considering the proposal felt that conferring DPSU status to ITI would not 
in any way facilitate ITI to get Defence orders in view of the fact that as 
per provisions in the Defence  Procurement Policy, DPSUs have to 
compete with the private industry for getting Defence orders.  The   
Committee note that in order to enhance product portfolio in Defence, ITI 
is planning to introduce products such as Satellite Trans Receiver and 
Access equipment, Radars and allied equipment, Weapon Control System, 
Navigation system and Equipment, Missile Systems and Equipment, 
Electronic Fuzes for Gun, High Grade Bullet Proof Jackets, etc.  The 
Committee have also been informed that Command and Control 
Technologies and Solutions, Intelligent Robotic Platforms, Radio 
Communication Units, Satcom terminals etc. have been identified by 
DRDO for production by ITI and approval given for formation of Strategic 

14 
 
Business Unit(SBU ) for their electronic products.  T he proposal is under 
finalization and MoU has to be signed between DoT and DRDO.  In view of 
the foregoing initiatives and considering the strength of ITI in the field of 
encryption, the Committee feel that according the status of Defence PSU 
to ITI will i ncrease its prospects to get more work orders.  In the opinion 
of the Committee, seeking the Defence PSU status for ITI need to be 
favourably considered in view of the inherent strengths of the domestic 
telecom PSUs.  With the implementation of the ongoing  revival package, 
the Defence PSU status will boost the morale of the company, besides 
giving a competitive edge to the company vis -à-vis other Defence PSUs.  
The Committee, therefore , recommend the Department to take up the 
matter once again and impress u pon the Department of Defence 
Production for such status to be given to them.  The Committee also 
recommend that efforts should be made to upgrade necessary 
infrastructure of ITI so that it can also participate in many opportunities 
reserved for Defene PSU s.  The Committee further stress the need for 
early finalization of the proposal for signing of MoU with DRDO for 
formation of SBU.” 
17. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated 
as under:- 
“ITI has been a supplier of tele com equipments and encryption products 
for secured communication of Defence for more than three decades. ITI 
has a major share in the Indian Army’s communication network and 
encryption products for such network have been supplied with in -house 
design. All the three phases of Indian Army’s communication network – 
ASCON – has been set up by ITI. Currently, Defence has floated a major 
tender for ASCON Phase IV. ITI has already participated in one part of the 
tender for the supply of encryption products. ITI is  also preparing for 
participating in the communication network part of the tender. In 
addition, ITI has also participated in another major tender for supply of 
encryption products for the prestigious Network For Spectrum (NFS) 
tender. ITI is already part o f the execution of the NFS project, wherein ITI 
has bagged two major orders for laying optical fiber for appx. 13,000 kms, 
for the NFS project in the eastern and north eastern states of the country. 
ITI has also participated in the Phase II tender for the Army Wide Area 
Network. 
In addition to the above, ITI has tied up for technology transfer for 
Software Defined Radio and High Frequency Radio Handsets. ITI is also 
looking for partners for more defence projects, like, Radars. 

15 
 
ITI wanted a tie -up with DRDO to work as its partner in the development 
process and, accordingly, formation of Strategic Business Units of DRDO 
had been mooted. This would have helped ITI not only for the supplies to 
DRDO during the development phase, but also for bulk supplies of the 
new products to Defence. Even though DRDO team had visited ITI’s plants 
in Bangalore and Raebareli and had been convinced of ITI’s capabilities, 
DRDO has turned down the proposal for SBU formation in ITI which was 
communicated vide letter no. DRDO/CCR&D(SI )/ DI2TM/07/20/15 dated 
13th August 2015, indicating that DRDO is a R&D organization and 
production in numbers does not fall under DRDO’s charter and therefore 
there is no need to establish the SBU.” 
18. The Department  had informed the Committee that  ITI had been playing a 
significant role in meeting the requirement of the country’s Defence needs.  
Encryptors being the forte of ITI , at one point of time , ITI was the only Company 
supplying encryptors to Defence and 70 per cent of the encryption equipme nt 
deployed and working in the Defence sector is from the Bengaluru Unit of ITI.  A 
study conducted by the Ministry of Defence in 2013 had suggested that ITI could be 
classified as Defence PSU.  Even the study conducted by DRDO had given the 
clearance that  ITI has got all the capabilities to meet their requirements.  While 
observing that the proposal to confer Defence status to ITI was not agreed to by the 
Department of Defence Production  (DDP) as the Committee constitute d for 
considering the proposal felt that conferring DPSU status to ITI would not in any 
way facilitate ITI to get Defence orders in view of the fact that as per provisions in 
the Defence Procurement Policy, DPSUs have to compete with the private industry 
for getting Defence orders, the Commi ttee had recommended the Department to 
take up the matter once again and impress upon the D DP for granting of Defence 
PSU status to ITI.   
The Department, in their Action Taken Note, have  furnished details about  
the status of participation of ITI in variou s tenders floated for Defence projects like 
ASCON Phase -IV, Network for Spectrum (NFS), tie up for technology transfer for 
Software Defined Radio and High Frequency Radio Handsets, etc. ITI is also looking 
for partners for more defence projects like Radars .  With regard to formation of 
Strategic Business Units with DRDO, the Department have stated that the proposal 

16 
 
has been turned down by DRDO on the ground that DRDO is a R&D organization 
and production in number does not fall under DRDO’s Charter and there fore there 
is no need to establish the SBU.  The Action Taken Note is, however, completely 
silent on the recommendation of the Committee for taking up the matter with D PP 
for granting of Defence PSU status to ITI and upgradation of necessary 
infrastructure of ITI to participate in many opportunities reserved for Defence PSUs.  
It appears that no follow up action has been taken by the Department on this 
recommendation of th e Committee.  Considering that both the studies conducted 
by the Ministry of Defence and DRDO had found ITI capable of meeting their 
requirements, the Committee are of the view that proposal for granting of Defence 
PSU status to ITI needs to be favourably considered which will also further increase 
its prospect to get more work orders.  The Committee desire that the Department 
should once again impress the Department of Defence Production for granting of 
DPSU status to ITI and also upgrade the necessary  infrastructure so that apart from 
taking up projects like ASCON, NFS, Radars, etc. it may also be able to participate in 
various other projects reserved for Defence PSUs.  
Besides, the Committee understand that there is a huge Defence related 
need in the cou ntry and most of the Defence PSUs, whether it is Bharat Electronics 
Limited or Bharat Dynamics Limited or Hindustan Aeronautical Limited,  are         
over-flooded with the demand , the Committee , therefore, desire that efforts 
should also be made by the Dep artment/ITI to collaborate with these Defence PSUs 
to  extract some work from them.  The Department may keep the Committee 
apprised of the action taken in the above matters. 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 1) 
The Indian Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited was established in 1948 and was 
incorporated on 25th January, 1950 under the then Mysore Companies Act, 1938 
and later converted as the first Public Sector Undertaking (P SU) of the country to 
assist the Government in the sensitive and strategic telecommunications field. ITI 
started its operations in Bengaluru in 1948, which were further extended to other 
areas by setting up manufacturing plants at Srinagar in Jammu and Kas hmir (1968); 
Naini (1971), Rae Bareli (1973) and Mankapur (1984) all in Uttar Pradesh; and 
Palakkad (1976) in Kerala. Apart from these manufacturing plants, ITI has a dedicated 
Network System Unit (NSU) for executing turnkey projects and installation and 
maintenance support of all products supplied by it. ITI was the sole telecom 
equipment manufacturer to cater to the needs of the entire country during the post -
Independence and pre -liberalization period. Initially, the technology used was 
predominantly fixed line technology based on electromechanical switching systems. 
From electromechanical systems, ITI had a smooth migration to the electronics 
systems as the sole manufacturer for P&T. Based on the needs of the nation, the 
entire range of telecommunications  equipment was designed, developed, 
manufactured, supplied and maintained by ITI. ITI contributed to the total 
communications infrastructure as well as the telephone instrument requirements of 
the country for nearly five decades. ITI was a profit earning e ntity for more than 40 
years. The Committee, however, note that after the liberalization of the telecom 
market in the early nineties, the performance of ITI started going down and over a 
period of time, it became a chronic loss making company. In the succe eding 
paragraphs, the Committee seek to review the developments and factors that 
adversely affected the performance of ITI in the post -liberalization period, efficacy of 
financial support extended to the Company by the Government in the intervening 
phase a nd progress of implementation of its revival plan approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in February, 2014.  
Reply of the Government 
Introductory Para of the Report.  No action required 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 

18 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No.2) 
The Committee observe that in order to improve tele -density, under the 
liberalization policy, the Government had opened up the telecom sector to gl obal 
private players, thus exposing ITI to a highly competitive market for the first time.  
With this sudden change in its business environment, including loss of its monopoly 
after liberalization and the advent of mobile phone technology, ITI was not read y to 
face the new challenges as it did not have the requisite  technology base.  
Consequent upon shifting of technology from fixed line to mobile technology like 
GSM and CDMA , the manufacturing infra of ITI which was set up for fixed line 
telephone almost b ecame redundant.  Manufacturing in ITI became a matter of 
grave concern since virtually no product was available for manufacturing due to the 
emerging changes in the fast growing technology.  The Committee further note that 
ITI, with a small equity base of  about Rs.30 crore, went on expanding by opening up 
six large manufacturing units and employed 33000 personnel during its peak period. 
In order to expand, instead of equity infusion from the Government , ITI  borrowed 
heavily from Banks/Institutions.  With c hange of market dynamics, ITI could not bear 
the burden of large borrowings, manpower cost, and cost of maintaining huge 
infrastructure, leading to continuous losses over the years.  Even the manpower, 
whose expertise was in fixed line telephony became surplus.  
 Analysis of the financial performance of ITI during  the last two decades 
indicates that the Company had incurred losses for the first time during the period 
1994-97.  It again went into losses in 2002 -03 and has not been able to generate any 
profit since then.  As the net worth of ITI got completely eroded in the year 2003 -04, 
the Company was referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR) and was declared a ‘sick company’ on 31st March, 2004.  The BIFR was engaged 
in formulating a rehabilitation scheme for ITI.  Since then, though efforts have been 
made to revive the Company through various measures the PSU could not come to 
the profit mode.  It is disquieting to note that even after receiving Rs.4556.77 crore 
as financial assistance from the Government during the period from 2004 to 2013, 
the PSU could not be revived and its accumulated losses continued to increase and 
the net worth got eroded.  As a consequence, the accumulated losses and net worth 
of the company stood at Rs.5166 crore and Rs. (-) 1648 crore, respectively, at the end 
of March, 2015.  The Committee find that the major component of financial support 
of the Government was meant for clearing of liabilities and statutory dues.  The 
Capex infusion was limited to only Rs.150 crore which was found grossly inadequate 
for plant upgradation for GSM/CDMA technology that resulted in time and cost 
overrun in implementation of new projects accentuating accumulated losses.  The 
Company did not succeed in reestablishing itself in the market.  In hindsight, the 
Committee view that with the change of market dynamics, the major focus of the 

19 
 
Government’s financial support to ITI should have been oriented towards structured 
capital investment for R&D improvement , upgradation of manufacturing 
infrastructure, recruitment of fresh personnel, enabling the PSU to acquire and 
absorb technology to sustain competition and gain market share. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approv ed the proposal for 
providing financial assistance for revival of M/s ITI Limited on 12th February 2014. 
The Revival Plan of M/s ITI Ltd. is based upon improvement of its core competency in 
electronic/telecom equipment manufacturing by up -grading the manuf acturing 
infrastructure at all its manufacturing units and to simultaneously diversify into 
Service projects (National Population Register, Data Centre, Optical Fiber Laying 
projects, AMC business etc.), Smart Card manufacturing, Solar panel manufacturing,  
Battery manufacturing and LED product manufacturing to make each unit of ITI a 
separate profit centre and sustain their profitability independently. 
 
The thrust of the revival plan approved by CCEA on 12.02.2014 is on providing 
financial support to ITI fo r enabling capital investment for upgradation of ITI’s 
manufacturing infrastructure, recruitment of fresh personnel, enabling the PSU to 
acquire and absorb technology to sustain competition and gain market share. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT, Departm ent of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the BIFR had appointed the State Bank of India (SBI) 
as the Operating Agency (OA) for preparation of a Draft rehabilitation scheme (DRS) 
for ITI, which was received in DOT in April, 2011.  However, keeping in view the 
directions of BIFR, a Revival Plan finalized by a core group in DoT was submitted to 
BIFR on 30 th January, 2012.  The DRS was revised by the OA to take into account the 
Revival Plan prepared by DoT and the finalized DRS was cleared by BIFR on               
27th November, 2012.  The Revival Plan was then submitted to the Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) on 8 th March, 2013.   In its  
meeting held on 19 th July, 2013, BRPSE  reviewed and recommended ITI’s Revival 
Plan comprising of financial assistance of Rs.4156.79 crore.  Based on the 
recommendations of BRPSE, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
approved the prop osal for providing financial assistance for revival of ITI on 12 th 
February, 2014.  As per proposal approved by CCEA, ITI’s revival has to be supported 
through financial restructuring by fund infusion of Rs.4156.79 crore.  The capital 
grant of Rs.2264 cror e was to be given in the form of equity for project 
implementation (Capex) for upgrading the manufacturing  infrastructure at its  
various units for new projects and the balance  amount of Rs.1892.79 crore to be 

20 
 
financial assistance in the form of grant -in-aid for clearing statutory liabilities and 
meeting other commitments made by ITI.  Considering the fact that 
telecommunications is an important area of concern for national security and ITI has 
played a major role in development of telecommunications in t he country, it needs 
to be strengthened to regain its past glory.  The Committee, therefore, support this 
Revival Plan.  The present revival  package will  provide a breathing space to this 
Company so as to work out a strategy to regain its original status and the Committee 
appreciate the move of the Government in this direction.  The Committee, however, 
observe that the pace of revival process had been  extremely slow and took near 
about 9 years before being finally approved by the Cabinet.  In view of the precarious 
state of affairs of the Company, greater effort could have been put in by the agencies 
concerned for expeditious finalization of the Revival Plan.  The Committee are 
inclined to conclude th at the delay in finalization of the Revival Plan has resulted in 
further deterioration of the financial health of the Company, including loss of 
precious time critical to its resurgence.   
(Reply of the Government) 
During the period from 2004 to 2013, i.e.  after the Company was declared sick 
and before the approval of Revival Plan of ITI, Government had provided financial 
assistance of Rs. 4,556.77 Crore to ITI (Annexure). This consisted of a Revival Plan of 
Rs. 2,820 Crore which was approved by CCEA in Feb ruary 2009. However, the thrust 
of this Revival Plan was on cleaning of balance sheet of the Company. As a result of 
this help ITI was able to bring down the interest cost from 2009 -10 onwards, due to 
which its losses came down from   a high of Rs. 688 Cro re in 2008 -09 to Rs. 350 Cr. 
from 2010 -11 onwards. However, the Company’s accumulated losses kept on 
increasing and its network remained negative due to lack of new technology 
products. 
These aspects have been addressed to a large extent in the Revival Pla n 
approved during 2013 -14, which  is based upon improvement of ITI’s core 
competency in electronic/telecom equipment manufacturing by up -grading the 
manufacturing infrastructure at all its manufacturing units and to simultaneously 
diversify into Service pr ojects (National Population Register, Data Centre, Optical 
Fiber Laying projects, AMC business etc.), Smart Card manufacturing, Solar panel 
manufacturing, Battery manufacturing and LED product manufacturing to make each 
unit of ITI a separate profit centre and sustain their profitability independently. 
 
 
 

21 
 
Annexure 
Period Amount 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilization 
Dec. 2004 
– Mar. 
2005 
150.00 Plant up-gradation for GSM/CDMA technology 
458.00 Reimbursement of VRS cost in 2003 -04 (Rs. 338 Cr.) and in 2004 -
05 (Rs. 120 Cr.)  
200.00 Enhancing Equity Base  
93.10 PF and other statutory dues  
23.67 Waiver of interest on Govt. loan  
Oct. 2006  25.00 Salary of employees  
Sep. 2007  100.00 VRS cost reimbursement 
252.00 Payment of statutory dues 
Mar. 
2009  
125.00 Salary of employees  
Aug. 
2009  
2,820.00 Clearing of all liabilities of ITI: 
• Term Loan Guaranteed by 
GoI 
: Rs. 403 Cr. 
• Short Term Loans : Rs. 300 Cr. 
• Floating Rate Bonds : Rs. 390 Cr. 
• Credit Limit (exhausted) : Rs. 893 Cr. 
• Letter of Credit (utilized) : Rs. 523 Cr. 
• PF/Gratuity/Others : Rs. 199 Cr. 
• Interest Liabilities on Cash 
Credits and Bonds 
: Rs. 112 Cr. 
 
Mar. 
2011 
180.00 Working margin  
Jan. 2013 130.00 Salary of employees  
Total  4,556.77 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 4) 
As per the Revival Plan approved by CCEA, the disbursement of funds has to be 
done in two stages.  In the first stage, an amount of Rs.1455.79 crore consisting of 
Rs.460 crore for projects which required immediate assistance and Rs.995.79 crore 

22 
 
for payment of liabilities had  to be disbursed.  In the second  stage, an amount of 
Rs.2701 crore consisting of Rs.1804 crore for projects and Rs.897 crore  for clearing 
liabilities was to be disbursed based on the progress of the projects covered in the 
first stage.  During  the year 2014 -15, a request had  accordingly been sent by DoT to 
the Ministry of Finance to make a provision of Rs.460 crore under Plan head and 
Rs.1892.79 crore under non -Plan head in the General Budget 2014 -15 regarding the 
Revival  Plan of IT I.  However, an amount of Rs.460 crore only was allocated at BE 
stage under the Plan head, and no fund was allocated under the non -Plan head.  The 
Committee note that after persistent efforts made by the Department, the Ministry 
of Finance allocated Rs.165  crore for payment of 1997 wage revision arrears to the 
ITI employees  in November, 2014, Rs.200 crore as soft loan in September, 2014 and 
Rs.100 crore as loan in March, 2015 for making payment of salaries to its employees.  
As a result of delayed allocati on of matching funds under grants -in-aid for making 
payment towards statutory liabilities, Rs.460 crore allocated under Plan head for 
project implementation could not be utilized as Planned.  The first tranche of Capex 
amounting to Rs.192 crore was release d to ITI as late as February, 2015.  The 
Committee observe that owing to the delay in approval of the revival proposal and 
late release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, the implementation of the revival 
Plan will now come into effect from 2015 -16, i.e.  deferred by one year.  Another 
tranche of Rs.50 crore for Capex infusion and further Rs.150 crore as grants-in-aid for 
making payment of salaries to the employees of ITI have been allotted in the General 
Budget 2015 -16.  Since the Revival Plan is to be im plemented in two stages, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of Finance to ensure requisite allocation of funds to 
enable DoT to adhere to the disbursement schedule approved by the Cabinet so that 
implementation of the Revival Plan is not hampered further due to lack of funds.  The 
Committee stress that DoT should constantly coordinate with the Ministry of Finance 
for timely release of funds as provided for in the financial package to facilitate 
execution of the Revival Plan. 
(Reply of the Government) 
DoT has  been actively pursuing with Ministry of Finance (MoF) for timely 
release of funds for smooth implementation of the Revival Plan approved by CCEA. 
However, till date MoF has released only Rs. 507 Crore against the approval of Rs. 
4,156.79 Crore. This compr ises of an amount of Rs 192 Crore to meet capex 
requirements Rs. 165 crore for payment of 39 months’ pay revision arrears, as per 
1997 pay revision, to employees of ITI  and Rs 150 crore to meet the establishment 
cost. 
The status of revival efforts of M/s ITI Limited was reviewed by Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) on 6 th July 2015. It was decided by CoS that the revival plan of ITI 

23 
 
may be funded from Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). Thereafter in a 
meeting taken by Secretary DPE and Secretary BRPSE on 14 th August 2015, it was 
decided that the Department (i.e. DoT) may examine the project funding for those 
goods and services in the production profile of ITI which have use for penetration of 
telephone network in rural and remote areas from USOF and acc ordingly, funding of 
the business and operational plan for the revival of ITI may be taken up. Hence, the 
matter was discussed with USOF and a committee has been constituted comprising 
of officers from USOF, DoT, ITI and BBNL. The committee with representa tives from 
officers from USOF, DoT, ITI and BBNL is in the process of finalizing the projects and 
activities related to USOF that ITI can undertake. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  9 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 5) 
The Revival Plan of ITI envisages improvement of its core competency in 
electronic/telecom equipment manufacturing by upgrading the manufacturing 
infrastructure at all its manufacturing units and to simultaneously diversify into 
Service Projects (National Population Register, Data Centre, Optical Fibre Laying 
Projects, AMC business, etc.), Smart Card manufacturing, Battery Manufacturin g and 
LED products manufacturing to make each unit of ITI a separate profit centre and 
sustain their profitability independently.  18 projects have been identified by ITI for 
execution under the Revival Plan.  The Committee note that out of Rs.460 crore 
earmarked for projects in the first stage, capital investment planned by ITI were 
spread  over two phases in the Financial Year (FY) 2014 -15.  Phase -I related to 
activities/projects to be  completed in FY 2014 -15 while Phase – II related to the 
projects for which infrastructure upgradation was to be started in 2014 -15 so that 
the orders against these projects could be executed in 2015 -16. With capital 
investment of Rs.460 crore planned in Phase -I and Phase -II in the six units, viz. 
Bengaluru (Rs.197 crore), N aini (Rs.79 crore), Palakkad (Rs.117 crore), Mankapur 
(Rs.29 crore), Rae Bareli (Rs.33 crore) and Srinagar (Rs.5 crore), furnover of the order 
of Rs.524 crore and Rs.1271.50 crore was estimated during the year 2014 -15 and 
2015-16, respectively.  However, o ut of Rs.242 crore released so far, Rs.79.61 crore 
has been utilized by only three plants of ITI, viz. Bengaluru (Rs.46 crore), Palakkad 
(Rs.26.48 crore) and Rae Bareli (Rs.7.13 crore) for procurement of machinery and 
equipment. Obviously, the turnover fro m the Capex cannot be achieved as planned 

24 
 
and ITI’s expectation for the same to materialize during 2015 -16 also appear 
unattainable. 
A review of the 1 st stage implementation of the Revival Plan shows that there 
is a shortfall in allocation the tune of Rs.118 crore towards capital investment  and 
Rs.380.79 crore under grant -in-aid for meeting liabilities.  Evidently, the 1 st stage  
implementation is laggin g far behind owing to belated allocation of funds by the 
Ministry of Finance, coupled  with the slow  pace of utilization of available funds by 
ITI.  Consequently, the 2 nd stage implementation, which is based on the progress of 
the projects covered in the first stage where ITI planned Capex investment of the 
remaining amount, i.e. Rs.1804 crore, will be delayed.  In the given situation, the 
Committee are constrained to conclude that the targets set for estimated turnover, 
garnering operating profit and like ly turnaround of manufacturing plants are not 
going to be realized as envisaged in the projected performance.  Now, since the 
entire business plan for revival stands deferred and needs to be restructured with 
revised Capex plans, the roadmap for restructur ing needs to be carefully worked out.  
The Committee emphasize that the thrust of execution of the Revival Plan should be 
to bring ITI into profitability immediately so as to create a platform on which the 
Company can be built up.  Once the Company is prof itable, it would be in a position  
to acquire technologies to move to the 2 nd stage.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that ITI should strive for optimal and efficient utilization of available 
funds to accomplish activities/projects planned for differen t phases in the 1 st stage if 
implementation and secure release  of funds to step up activities in phase III in the 
2nd stage of implementation.  The corporate office of ITI should take quick decisions 
in its investment plans for all the six plants and ensu re speedy release of funds for 
procurement of machinery and equipment required for upgradation of 
manufacturing infrastructure  in these units.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this direction.  They would also like to be info rmed  
about the renewed Capex plans and estimated turnover and the time by which ITI 
will be brought to profit mode. 
(Reply of the Government) 
Infrastructure up -gradation for implementation of projects is a long process. 
Considering that the technology is fast changing, the business plan needs to be done 
taking into consideration the current market scenario and, accordingly, the detailed 
project reports are required to be prepared. These reports are then submitted to ITI 
Board and Apex Committee for approval. The infrastructure required for each project 
is to be finalized and action needs to be taken for tendering, ordering, procurement, 
installation, commissioning etc. As the revival plan of ITI was approved in February 
2014 itself, ITI had initiated proact ive action on the infrastructure up -gradation and 

25 
 
most of the project activities had been brought up to the level of ordering for 
equipments at the time of release of funds by the Government. 
 
Out of Rs. 2264 Crores sanctioned by CCEA as equity for capital  investments 
under revival plan, Government had released Rs. 192 Crores, during February 2015, 
as first phase disbursement to the company. This amount is planned for 
implementing various projects under Defence business, SCADA, MLLN, Smart cards, 
HDPE Pipe manufacturing, SMPS, Component screening, Vehicle Tracking System 
(VTS), 3D printing, Contract manufacturing, Business with PSUs etc. Sixteen projects 
have been identified under this capex plan. (List of projects and the capex plan for 
these projects is sh own in Annexure 1). The infrastructure up -gradation for 
implementation of these projects has almost been completed in various plants of ITI.  
Out of Rs 192 Crores, company has drawn around Rs 151.35 Crores as on 31 st 
October 2015. 
 
In BE 2015 -16, Governmen t has approved Rs. 50 Crores for ITI under plan 
expenditure. The business plan for utilization of Rs. 46 Crores under this allocation 
has already been approved by ITI Board and the Apex Committee and they are part 
of two projects which are currently under implementation. This amount will be 
utilized during 3 rd/ 4th quarter of 2015-16 after complete utilization of Rs. 192 Crores 
already released. The plan for utilization of balance Rs. 4 Crores has also been made. 
However, ITI has drawn plans for implementation of many more projects during the 
current year/next year and has requested for allocation of more funds under plan 
head towards these new projects. These projects include manufacturing of telecom 
products like Wi -Fi, NGN, LTE and GPON, manufacturing optical fiber, augmentation 
of manufacturing of HDPE pipe, expa nsion of ITI’s Data Centre etc. An additional 
capex of appx. Rs. 270 Crores has been estimated for these projects and ITI has 
requested DoT to kindly consider allocation of this fund, in addition to the already 
allocated amount of Rs. 50 Crores, towards ca pex during 2015-16. The list of projects 
under this capex plan is shown at Annexure 2. Based on the allocation of funds 
during 2015-16 and 2016-17, ITI shall prepare detailed project reports and submit to 
DoT and the Apex Committee.  
Annexure 1 
Projects under Phase 1 (with a Capex Plan of Rs. 192 Cr.) 
Sl No. Plant Project Capex (Rs. Cr.) 
1 Bangalore Legacy Secrecy Equipments 38.00 

26 
 
2 1 GB Ethernet Secrecy Equipments 26.00 
3 Multi-Channel Encryption Equipments 44.00 
4 SCADA, MUX and Telephones 7.00 
5 SaaS based Data Centre projects 5.00 
6 Business with PSUs 18.00 
7 
Raebareli 
HDPE Pipe Manufacturing 3.00 
8 Vehicle Tracking System 3.00 
9 Contract Manufacturing with ALIMCO 1.00 
10 Contract Manufacturing for other PSUs 1.50 
11 3D Printing project 4.50 
12 Switched Mode Power Supply 3.00 
13 
Palakkad 
Managed Leased Line Network project 25.00 
14 Component Screening project with VSSC 2.00 
15 Smart Card project 8.00 
16 Naini Solar project 3.00 
TOTAL 192.00 
 
Annexure 2 
Projects and Capex Plan for 2015-16 (Plan Beyond Rs. 192 Cr.) 
Sl No Project 
Capex 
(Rs. Cr.) 
1 
Business with PSUs (HDPE pipe mfg, Fiber 
cable mfg, MAX NGN mfg, Component 
Screening etc.) 
98.00 

27 
 
2 Wi-Fi Solutions for Broadband project 12.00 
3 Carrier Ethernet 20.00 
4 Data Center and IT Solutions (IOT 
Solutions) 23.00 
5 Defence projects 30.00 
6 GPON 10.00 
7 Li-ion Batteries for GSM project 12.00 
8 NPR/Smart Cards 25.00 
9 Solar Panel Manufacturing 30.00 
10 Others 10.00 
 
Total 270.00 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  9 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 6) 
The revival proposal has been prepared after considering the strength of each 
of the six plants.  As far as productivity and financial viability is concerned while the 
Palakkad and Bengaluru Units are having maximum potential, the Raibareli Unit has 
medium potential and Mankapur and Naini have lower potential.  The Committee 
also note  that basic infrastructure is available in all the Units which is being 
upgraded for capacity building.  As per the projected performance under the Revival 
Plan, with Capex investment of Rs.2264 crore, the estimated market share and the  
value addition of ITI units, including Network System Unit (NSUs) and Regional 
Offices (ROs), in the next five years, where projected to be Rs.17727 crore and 
Rs.2624, crore respectively. The Unit with maximum market share was to be 
Raebareli with Rs.3500  crore followed by Mankapur with Rs.3252 crore, Bengaluru 
with Rs.3210 crore, Palakkad with Rs.2970 crore, Naini with Rs.2555 crore and 
Srinagar with Rs.50 crore.  With regard to NSU and ROs, the estimated market share 
was to be of the order of Rs.440 and Rs.1750 crore, respectively.  In respect of value 
addition, the Bengaluru Unit was likely to achieve maximum value addition with 

28 
 
Rs.646 crore, followed by Palakkad with Rs.575 crore, Raibareli with Rs.536 crore, 
Mankapur with Rs.354 crore, Naini with Rs.20 1 crore and Srinagar with Rws.5 crore.  
With regard to NSU and ROs, the value addition was to be to the tune of Rs.176crore 
and Rs.131 crore respectively.  The Committee observe that the Revival Plan is based 
on certain assumptions and expectations.  The p rojected market share will be largely 
dependent upon competition, acquisition of technology, likely competitive scenario 
fall all its products and the ability of the PSU to compete in the market as electronic 
items are at zero duty and telecom items are fa lling to zero duty except some items.  
As of now, when the execution of ITI’s Revival Plan is at its early stages, the  
Committee are not inclined to share the optimism generated to achieve gross sale of 
complex products in a volatile market.  To attain th ese goals, the PSU has to 
successfully go through different phases of transition set out for the purpose and 
progressively achieve the milestones envisaged in the revival Plan.  The primary focus 
of ITI should be directed towards bringing the Company back to profitability as early 
as possible with prudent investment in different manufacturing plants. 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI’s revival plan is based on the report prepared in the year 2011. ITI is a 
manufacturing firm in the electronics/ communication se ctor where the technology 
is changing very fast. Hence, the company’s business plan for its turnaround is 
primarily based on the market dynamics. However, considering the significant 
initiatives of the Government towards “Make in India”, “Digital India” an d “Smart 
Cities” and also the policies like Preferential Market Access, the company is hopeful 
of getting good market opportunities on certain sectors. Accordingly, the company is 
drawing plans for implementation of new projects. With these market opportun ities 
and the Government’s funding support in one side and with reducing manpower in 
the company through VRS and also through normal retirement process, the company 
is confident of turning around within two or three years. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT,  Department of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 8) 
The revival Plan approved by the Cabinet envisaged the institution of a 
comprehensive monitoring mechanism. In pursuance thereof, appropriate 
Committees have been constituted at  Corporate and Unit level of ITI for regular 
monitoring of the implementation o f the Revival Plan.  An Apex Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, DoT with representatives from the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) and Department of Expenditure (DoE), has also been 
constituted. The mandate of the Apex Committee is to rev iew the monitoring of 

29 
 
implementation of the Revival Plan; to review the viability of Units and to identify 
and reorganize the unviable Units; to finalize an elaborate plan to reduce social 
overheads to be submitted by ITI; and to consider induction of bare st minimum fresh 
personnel to meet the essential requirements of various initiatives.  The Committee 
note that review meetings are planned to be held weekly at Unit level, fortnightly at 
mentor/Corporate level and quarterly at Apex level.  So far, meetings  of the apex 
Committee have been held on 27 th August, 2014, 5 th December, 2014 and 15 th May, 
2015.  In the review meetings held with ITI on 19 th March, 2014, 9 th April, 2014 23 rd 
April, 2014 and 17 th July, 2014, PERT Charts have been finalized and performa nce of 
the manufacturing Units was monitored through these  Charts.  The Committee 
further note that it has been decided to run each Unit of ITI as a separate profit 
centre for which functional Directors of ITI have taken up additional responsibilities 
as mentor of ITI Units.  Taking note of the elaborate monitoring mechanism put in 
place from Unit to Ministry level for monitoring of the progress of the ITI Revival 
Plan, the Committee stress that meetings at various levels should be held at regular 
intervals so that any difficulty encountered during project implementation may be 
addressed with  promptitude and  proactive intervention at the appropriate level.  
Recognizing that the Apex Committee holds the onerous responsibility of finalizing 
proposals  regardin g some of the key components of the Revival Plan like reducing 
social overheads, materializing VRS, induction of fresh hands, roll back of retirement 
age for continuance of expert manpower, etc., the Committee desire that these  
need to be addressed on a p urposive manner for early clearance.  It is all the more 
necessary on the part of the Apex Committee to ensure that implementation of the 
Revival Plan does not suffer from extensive procedural formalities. 
(Reply of the Government) 
Proper mechanism has bee n put for reviewing and monitoring the 
implementation of the revival plan. Periodic review meetings are held at various 
levels, i.e., at unit level, Mentor (corporate) level, DoT level (with Member (Services)) 
and at the Apex Committee level. Approval of t he Apex Committee is taken for each 
of the activities and no procedural delay has been seen at any time. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.          
20-56/2015-Fac-II  Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that acquisition of new technology is one of the essential 
ingredients of the Revival Plan.  With regard to technology ownership, ITI has in -
house technologies for five products and Transfer of Technology (ToT) is in place for 
two projects. As part of the Revival Plan, technology tie -ups with leaders in telecom 

30 
 
technologies have been planned by the Company to bring in indigenous 
manufacturing capabilities for major telecom products.  The Company have since 
identified technology par tners for eight telecom/defence products and the process 
of identifying partners for seven telecom/IT projects is in progress.  The Committee 
have been informed that the ITI has since signed MoU for NGN with M/s UT Starcom, 
Hybrid MW with M/s SIAE, CCU  with M/s CDAC and vehicle tracking system with M/s 
Sway Techno Solutions.  Expression of Interests (EoIs) have also been floated for Wi-
Fi systems, satellite terminals and Lithium -Ion battery. The Committee are given to 
understand that to address the need of  the latest technology and in line with the 
‘Make in India’ initiative of GoI, ITI has floated  advertisement inviting India and 
Overseas Telecom/Defence/Electronics Equipment Manufacturers to join ITI,  
Observing that technology tie -up is a long drawn out  process to evolve into 
commercial business, the Committee  stress that products should be competitive and 
the technology the latest;  otherwise the proposed business strategy will not help ITI 
break into the market.  Another important area is technology c hange factor which 
should be carefully factored in the revival strategy; or else, technology change would 
make the entire investment infructuous and the fortunes of the Company will again 
dip within a short time.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that I TI should 
acquire state-of-the-art technology for products to operate in the high -tech telecom 
market so as to withstand competition from private and multinational players.  ITI 
should also endeavour for ToT for major products to expand technology ownershi p.  
The Committee would like to be informed about the achievements of technology tie -
ups, including status of ToT. 
(Reply of the Government) 
As stated under para 6 above, ITI is selecting such projects which are having 
good market potential in today’s scenario. ITI is striving to get technology of state -of-
the-art products in telecom domain for manufacturing in ITI. Broadband products 
(like Carrier Ethernet, DWDM, GPON), Wi -Fi, NGN, LTE etc. are such technologies 
where ITI has been trying to find partners. 
ITI has in -house technology for encryption products for secured 
communication of Defence. ITI has also manufacturing technology for solar power 
modules, smart cards etc. As far as technology tie -ups are concerned, the current 
status is as follows: 
 NGN technology with UTStarcom, USA and C-DOT, India 
 GPON technology with C-DOT 
 Charge Control Unit – CDAC 
 Software Defined Radio (SDR) – Uurmi Systems, Hyderabad 
 HF Radio Handsets – Codan, Australia 

31 
 
 Vehicle Tracking System – Sway Telecom, Pune 
 Temperature Loggers (E-SafeT) – CDAC 
 GSM Passive Monitoring – Halpern International, USA 
 Public Alert Systems – NGIT, Hyderabad 
 E-Banking – Transaction Analysts, Bangalore 
 E-Tendering – Antares Systems, Bangalore 
 
In addition to the above, ITI is in the process of finding  technology partners for 
the following: 
 Carrier Ethernet 
 LTE 
 Wi-Fi 
 Set Top Box 
 Fiber based Intrusion Detection System 
 CCTV based surveillance systems 
 Night Vision Devices 
 Aadhaar based Authentication Solutions 
 Weather Radars 
(Ministry of Communications &  IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.          
20-56/2015-Fac-II     Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee note that ITI is to recruit fresh personnel to absorb the new 
technologies proposed in the revival proposal a s per requirement.  The proposal for 
the barest minimum fresh induction of hands to meet the essential requirements of 
various initiatives is to be considered with due concurrence of the Apex Committee.  
At present, ITI is in the process of implementation of 16 projects and has identified 
R&D projects where fresh personnel can be inducted.  The proposal for recruitment 
of 31 engineers and 10 diploma holders was prepared for submission to the Apex 
Committee.  Considering the fact that lack of in -house R&D to deliver fruitful results, 
non recruitment of fresh permanent Engineers for two decades, lack of skilled and 
experienced manpower in all the Units to take up new technology products, etc. 
have been largely responsible for hindering the performance of ITI, the Committee 
recommend that the proposal for induction of fresh personnel need to be approved 
at the earliest so that the process of such induction could be started for the larger 
benefit of the Company. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The proposal for recruitm ent of fresh Engineering graduates & Diploma -
holders needs to be approved in the APEX Committee. ITI is in the process of firming 

32 
 
up its requirement and is expected to take up this issue in the next meeting of the 
Apex Committee.  
(Ministry of Communicatio ns & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.   
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that ITI has to reduce social overheads for which an 
elaborate plan with clear monitorable targets is to be submitted to the Apex 
Committee before release of financial assistance to ITI.  The social overheads 
incurred are mainly related to maintenance of township for employees, transport 
facilities, hospital, canteen, school, etc. as most of the ITI Units were established in 
remote/under developed areas.  As per the proposal approved by CCEA, the 
projected reduction in social overheads is  estimated to be around 10 per cent over a 
period of 03 years through restructuring and rationalisation of expenses after receipt 
of the revival package.  As part of the endeavour to reduce social cost, M/s. Indian 
Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) has evinced i nterest to the request of ITI to adopt the 
special school run by ITI at Bengaluru.  This would reduce the burden of the Company 
to the extent of Rs. 10 lakh per annum.  Under transportation, effective from 
December 2014, IT Corporate Office, NSU and Rae Ba reli have already reduced the 
transport facility by 25 per cent, thereby achieving saving of Rs. 65 lakh annually.  In 
respect of Bengaluru, Naini and Palakkad Units, the Management plans to initially 
increase the rates of the food being served in the cant een and finally to run the 
canteen at Bengaluru on cost basis.  With regard to Medical head, instructions have 
been issued to the Unit Heads to curtail referrals to outside hospitals and to run the 
hospitals with reduced or without any financial help. It w as also suggested to explore 
the possibilities of providing medical facility through Medical/health Insurance 
Companies.  The Committee recognize that the aforesaid measures are expected to 
bring down the expenditure of the Company considerably and reducin g social cost 
may not lead to absolute cut in benefits to its employees as the Company is trying to 
regulate the facility in such a way that the employees continue to get the existing 
facilities in that form or in better form.  While observing that reducti on of social cost 
is a contentious issue and there has been resistance by employees and trade unions 
against reducing the social cost, the Committee recommend that attempts must be 
made by the Management to take employees and trade unions on board to arriv e at 
amicable resolution of the issue. 
 

33 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
The main Social Overheads that ITI is incurring are Maintenance  of   township 
for   Employees, Transport Facilities, Hospital, Canteen &  School. The reduction in 
cost in these areas are planned to be achieved by: 
 Restructuring & rationalization of Units. 
 Adoption of special School at Bangalore by M/s IOCL & this would reduce 
burden to extent of Rs.10 Lakhs /Annum. 
 Rationalization of transp ort facilities provided to employees. While involving 
the Trade Unions ITI could reduce the Transportation cost at Corporate Office, 
Bangalore Plant, Raebareli and Naini Plants  and efforts are on by ITI to still 
continue to reduce it further at other locations. 
 Canteen Facility:  
      -  At all plant locations ITI has advised its Units to initiate the process of 
outsourcing of canteen while involving the committee members of Trade 
Unions.  Already in ITI Mankapur, Naini, Raebareli, the subsidy for the can teen 
has been reduced.  However, in ITI Bangalore and Palakkad, the discussions are 
on for the same. 
 Medical Plan  
          -   to reduce referrals to outside  Hospitals. 
          -   to run Hospitals with reduced expenses or without any financial help 
          - Exercising option for cashless Mediclaims through Medical/Health 
Insurance Companies 
All the above proposals and implementations have been done by ITI in 
consultations /discussions with the recognized Trade Unions/Associations 
(Ministry of Commu nications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.   
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee note that in the wake of the policy announcements by the 
Government for ‘Make in India’ and ‘Digital India’, a ll the Ministries/Departments 
have been advised to give preference to electronic products from domestic 
manufacturers. Further, the Government have recently drawn up a roadmap for 
developing 100 ‘Smart Cities’ in the country by 2020.  The Committee have be en 

34 
 
given to understand that ITI can be a major player for domestic manufacturing of 
electronic products in India and can play an effective role in this field.  The 
Committee have further been informed that ITI can also play the role of system 
integrator/solution provider for requirements of ‘Smart Cities’ projects and most of 
the equipment required for ‘Smart Cities’ are available with ITI.  ITI is reportedly in 
the process of consultation with the Universal Obligation Fund 9USOF0 and Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam L td.(BSNl0 for the National Optical Fiber Network (NOFN) project 
which is part of the ‘Digital India’ endeavour.  The Committee visualize that the ITI 
can play a very important role in ‘Make in India’, ‘Digital India’ and ‘Smart Cities’ 
projects of the Gove rnment.  In view of the tremendous opportunities being opened 
up by these projects and the recent policy of the Government supporting 
procurement of electronic products from domestic manufacturers,  the Committee 
desire that concerted efforts must be made by ITI to take advantage of business 
opportunities by actively participating in these projects. In order to play an effective 
role in these projects, ITI need to successfully execute the Revival Plan that focuses 
on strengthening R&D, induction of fresh ta lent and more importantly a building, 
through upgradation of manufacturing infrastructure. 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI is relying on the opportunities arising out of the new initiatives of the 
Government, viz., Make in India, Digital India and Smart Cities and also the new 
policies, like Preferential Market Access, National Telecom Policy, National Policy on 
Electronics and Defence Off -set Policy. ITI’s approach for revival is to go for large 
scale manufacturing of state-of-the-art telecom products, like, LTE, Wi-Fi, Broadband 
communication equipments etc. and also the products for the emerging solar and 
smart card markets.ITI has been putting efforts to get indigenous/global partners to 
transfer technologies for these products for manufacturing in ITI . Strengthening R & 
D, induction of fresh talent and infrastructure up -gradation are part of the revival 
plan agenda. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.     
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that the Indian telecom equipment demand is expected 
to grow from US $ 13 billion in 2012 -13 to about US $ 30 billion by 2019 -20.  
However, the domestic value addition in telecom equipment manufacturing is 
extremely low.  The Committee recognize that ITI would be capable of manufacturing 
most of the telecom equipment being imported now with the absorption of 

35 
 
technology from the global Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), infusion of 
fresh talent and upgradation of infra structure for which the required resources have 
already been included in the Revival Plan. The Committee need hardly emphasis the 
urgent need to promote domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment.  They hope 
that with the strengthening of domestic design houses like C-DoT and the R&D of ITI 
in the major areas of telecommunications, the country can move towards achieving 
self reliance in the telecom field.   Stressing that ITI can play a pivotal role in making 
the country self reliant in the telecom sector,  the Committee recommend that the 
various policy initiatives taken in the direction of promoting indigenous 
manufacturing should support the endeavour of ITI by way of some preferential 
treatment enabling it to operate in the highly competitive telecom market. 
(Reply of the Government) 
In order to upgrade and assimilate new technology ITI is already looking out 
for technology partners. ITI has already secured technology tie -ups for some area like 
Software Defined Radio, HF Radio Handsets and is in the proce ss of finalizing 
partners for Carrier Ethernet, LTE and Wi -Fi.  DoT is also trying to work out and 
promote synergy amongst ITI, BSNL, MTNL and C -DOT. In this regard ITI has taken 
into account the requirements of BSNL, MTNL and BBNL in its production plans.  C-
DoT is expected to develop technological solutions that ITI can utilize for 
manufacturing telecom equipment for BSNL, MTNL and BBNL. Besides ITI is also 
taking proactive action to develop end to end Smart -city / IoT solutions to serve the 
industry. It h as planned to manufacture the key components of smart -city solutions 
like sensors, RFIDs, NFC tags, embedded boards etc. Thus ITI is expected to play an 
important role in ‘Make-in-India’ and ‘Digital India’ programs of the Government.  
DoT has also sent a draft Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for 
inter-Ministerial consultation for continuation of reserving a quota in procurements 
planned by BSNL, MTNL and BBNL for ITI Limited. 
A Committee with DoT is also exploring the possibility of giving s ome projects 
related to provision of telecom services in remote and rural areas to ITI on 
preferential / nomination basis with fund support from USOF.   
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.   
20-56/2015-Fac-II     Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee note that ITI has been playing a significant role in meeting the 
requirement of the country’s Defence needs.  The Committee have been given to 
understand that encryptors are the forte of ITI and at one point of time ITI was the 

36 
 
only Company supplying encryptors to Defence.  ITI has implemented the Army Static 
Communication Network (ASCON) 1, 2 and 3 projects and is likely to get ASCON -4 
also.  According to the Department, 70 percent of the enc ryption equipment 
deployed and working in the Defence sector is from the Bangaluru Unit of ITI.  A 
study was reportedly conducted by the Ministry of Defence in 2013 which suggested 
that ITI has got all the capabilities of producing electronics and telecomm unications 
equipment for Defence.  The report recommended that ITI could be classified as a 
Defence PSU.  The Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) had 
also carried out a study and given the clearance that ITI has got all the capabilities to  
meet their requirements.  However, the proposal to confer Defence status to ITI was 
not agreed to by the Department of Defence Production as the Committee 
constituted for considering the proposal felt that conferring DPSU status to ITI would 
not in any wa y facilitate ITI to get Defence orders in view of the fact that as per 
provisions in the Defence Procurement Policy, DPSUs have to compete with the 
private industry for getting Defence orders.  The   Committee note that in order to 
enhance product portfoli o in Defence, ITI is planning to introduce products such as 
Satellite Trans Receiver and Access equipment, Radars and allied equipment, 
Weapon Control System, Navigation system and Equipment, Missile Systems and 
Equipment, Electronic Fuzes for Gun, High Gr ade Bullet Proof Jackets, etc.  The 
Committee have also been informed that Command and Control Technologies and 
Solutions, Intelligent Robotic Platforms, Radio Communication Units, Satcom 
terminals etc. have been identified by DRDO for production by ITI an d approval given 
for formation of Strategic Business Unit(SBU0 for their electronic products.  The 
proposal is under finalization and MoU has to be signed between DoT and DRDO.  In 
view of the foregoing initiatives and considering the strength of ITI in th e field of 
encryption,  the Committee feel that according the status of Defence PSU to ITI will 
increase its prospects to get more work orders.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
seeking the Defence PSU status for ITI need to be favourably considered in vie w of 
the inherent strengths of the domestic telecom PSUs.  With the implementation of 
the ongoing revival package, the Defence PSU status will boost the morale of the 
company, besides giving a competitive edge to the company vis -à-vis to other 
Defence PSUs.  The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department to take 
up the matter once again and impress upon the Department of Defence Production 
for such status to be given to them.  The Committee also recommend that efforts 
should be made to upgrade neces sary infrastructure of ITI so that it can also 
participate in many opportunities reserved for Defene PSUs.  The Committee further 
stress the need for early finalization of the proposal for signing of MoU with DRDO 
for formation of SBU. 
 

37 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI has been a supplier of telecom equipments and encryption products for 
secured communication of Defence for more than three decades. ITI has a major 
share in the Indian Army’s communication network and encryption products for such 
network have be en supplied with in -house design. All the three phases of Indian 
Army’s communication network – ASCON – has been set up by ITI. Currently, 
Defence has floated a major tender for ASCON Phase IV. ITI has already participated 
in one part of the tender for the  supply of encryption products. ITI is also preparing 
for participating in the communication network part of the tender. In addition, ITI 
has also participated in another major tender for supply of encryption products for 
the prestigious Network For Spectr um (NFS) tender. ITI is already part of the 
execution of the NFS project, wherein ITI has bagged two major orders for laying 
optical fiber for appx. 13,000 kms, for the NFS project in the eastern and north 
eastern states of the country. ITI has also partic ipated in the Phase II tender for the 
Army Wide Area Network. 
In addition to the above, ITI has tied up for technology transfer for Software 
Defined Radio and High Frequency Radio Handsets. ITI is also looking for partners for 
more defence projects, like, Radars. 
ITI wanted a tie -up with DRDO to work as its partner in the development 
process and, accordingly, formation of Strategic Business Units of DRDO had been 
mooted. This would have helped ITI not only for the supplies to DRDO during the 
development phase, but also for bulk supplies of the new products to Defence. Even 
though DRDO team had visited ITI’s plants in Bangalore and Raebareli and had been 
convinced of ITI’s capabilities, DRDO has turned down the proposal for SBU 
formation in ITI which was comm unicated vide letter no. DRDO/CCR&D(SI)/ 
DI2TM/07/20/15 dated 13th August 2015, indicating that DRDO is a R&D organization 
and production in numbers does not fall under DRDO’s charter and therefore there is 
no need to establish the SBU. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 20 -
56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  18 of Chapter I) 
 
[(Recommendations Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee note that a total of 1349.706 acres of land are available with 
ITI, of which 775.07 acres have been utilized for townships and 531.07 acres for 
building factories while 74.89 acres have been spared to other organizations and 93 

38 
 
acres have been earmarked for projects.  The Bengaluru Unit has the maximum land 
with 459.10 acres, followed by 352.03 acres in Mankapur, 308.21 acres in Rae Bareli, 
177.73 acres in Naini and 57.973 acres in Palakkad.  The Committee are given to 
understand that there is  much scope for commercial development of ITI land 
available at Bengaluru.  In Doorvaninagar, out of 63 acres, 52 acres of land has been 
converted from industrial to commercial use and in view of its prime location, there 
is scope for establishment of SEZ/ Software and IT Companies.  According to ITI, the 
land/building at Electronic city in Bengaluru is best suited for setting up of 
telecom/Electronic Parks or SEZ which will attract FDI and fetch good revenue to the 
Company.  Since huge opportunities for com mercial development of land is available 
at Doorvaninagar and Electronic City in Bengaluru, the Committee recommend that 
ITI should explore various options for commercial development/use of the available 
land for generation of additional revenue. With prog ressive downsizing of 
manpower, ITI would have surplus infra in township areas which may be utilized for 
earning revenues.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts made in 
this regard. 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI is exploring following opt ions in respect of gainfully utilizing its land at 
Bengaluru:- 
- Utilization of Land for Commercial purpose for setting up of SEZ /Software& IT 
Companies.  
- M/s NBCC is also being involved to explore the option towards utilization of 
Land. 
- Proposal of M/s Aer onautical Development Agency, Bengaluru is also under 
review for consideration of Lease/Rent of ITI Building /hangers to 
accommodate their Labs, Test Facilities, R&D Units with 2000 No. of 
Manpower.  
 ITI has also proposed to dispose of its unutilized residential Flats at Naini.  
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications,  O.M. No.    
20-56/2015-Fac-II     Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
 (Recommendations Sl. No. 19) 
To sum up, the Revival Plan for ITI is at an early stage of implementation and 
its success will largely depend upon the timely allocation of funds by the Ministry of 
Finance as per CCEA approval, capacity building through upgradation of 
manufacturing infra structure at different plants of ITI, reduction of statutory 

39 
 
liabilities and establishment cost support, acquisition of new technology coupled 
with effective ToT deals, skill upgradation as well as cost reduction through efficient 
HR planning, progressive reduction of social overheads, etc.  With constant 
monitoring and workable business plan assume greater significance during the 
course of execution of projects for sustainable revival of the Company.  The primary 
focus of the Revival Plan centres round con verting each Unit of ITI into a separate 
profit centre and sustain their profitability independently.  In this context, the 
viability of each Unit is required to be reviewed after assessing the effect of the 
upgradation of manufacturing facilities.  The Committee desire that the assessment 
should be completed in a time -bound manner so that unviable Units identified in the 
process can be reorganised or even considered for closing down facilitating 
consolidation of the manufacturing facilities of ITI.  They r ecommend that there 
needs to be continuity in top management of the company so that responsibility and 
accountability can be fixed by DoT for achieving the targets for ultimate turnaround 
of the PSU .  The Committee emphasize that ITI should take maximum ad vantage of 
the revival package to turn its fortunes and be in a position to bear the establishment 
cost and other recurring liabilities  because dependence on continued Government 
support with taxpayer’s money is not a viable proposition at all.  The Commi ttee 
support the vision 2020 of ITI that looks forward to turn around the Company to a 
manufacturing hub for strategic electronics and telecom  products, excel in turnkey 
solutions for Information Communication Technology, assume the role of a leader in 
secured communication products and achieve turnover of about Rs.5000 crore. 
Further, the Committee emphasize that ITI has tremendous potential to be an 
integral part of the ‘Make in India’ and ‘Digital India’ endeavours. 
(Reply of the Government) 
In order to review the status of implementation of Revival efforts and in order 
to take stock of the current position of the Company, officers of DoT undertook field 
visits to ITI’s manufacturing plants at Palakkad, Bengaluru, Naini, Raebareli and 
Mankapur. During the visit comprehensive discussions were carried out with the 
Management, Associations, Unions and Employees. Through these discussions the 
Projects / Products where ITI needs to concentrate its efforts in order to turn around 
each one of its manu facturing unit were identified and various modalities required 
for implementing these projects were also discussed. Based upon these discussions 
detailed plans for each unit of ITI has been drawn.  
The monitoring of Revival Plan is being done by an Apex Co mmittee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, DoT with representatives from the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) and Department of Expenditure (DoE). Further, for implementation 
of the Revival Plan, it has been decided to run each Unit of ITI as a sep arate profit 

40 
 
centre for which functional Directors of ITI have taken up additional responsibilities 
as mentors of individual ITI Units. In this context, it is proposed that while 
considering the proposal(s) for any extension of the tenure of the top manage ment 
their performance in achieving the targets for ultimate turnaround of the PSU as 
envisaged in the Revival Plan will be taken into account. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 20 -
56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 

41 
 
CHAPTER –III 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that ITI has core competency in encryption, network 
projects, multi -layer PCB manufacturing, dedicated network system unit, ASCON, 
CDMA and GSM network  installation and maintenance.  ITI is also the only Company 
in the country where BTS system for GSM network is made.  The major customers of 
ITI are BSNL, MTNL, BBNL, Defence, Railways, Banks, State Governments, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Rural Developme nt,   Vikram Sarabhai space Centre, etc. ITI 
has plans to implement projects such as the National ID Card manufacturing for NPR 
Project, Tablet PC manufacturing, solar project, defence  projects, data Center and IT 
projects, G -PON (Gigabit Passive Optical Network), Carrier Ethernet, Software 
defined Radio (SDR), ADSL -CPEs,  Long Term Evaluation (LTE), SMPs  and SCADA, and 
LED based lighting products. The Committee further note that 18 projects had been 
approved in the Revival Plan and out of these, priority  projects based on current 
requirement have been identified  and the implementation of infrastructure 
upgradation for manufacturing is under progress.  The Committee have  been 
informed that the total estimated market in the country of 16 identified projec ts, to 
name a few: Defence, NPR, GSM, Data Centre and IT  projects, LTE,  etc. is Rs.91000 
crore and in this, the market share of ITI is projected to be Rs.22610 crore.  As per 
the ITI business portfolio, out of 27 products,21 products have relevance at pr esent 
and out of these there is high business potential for 10 products.  The Committee, 
however, find that ITI has high competence for manufacturing of 5 products which 
are relevant now and have high business potential for products, viz. NGN, 
encryptors, software defined radios, smart cards and solar products.  As of now, ITI 
has no major products/solutions which are being supplied to the Private Sector and 
in order to address the Private Sector, ITI is strengthening its R&D and focusing on 
marketing.  The  Committee recognize that there exists a huge market for various 
products identified under the ITI Revival Plan. Considering that ITI has  high 
competence for manufacturing 5 specific products, the Committee find it essential 
for ITI  to  strengthen and increase its core competency so that  it can take advantage 
of the opportunity available in the market for various products.  The committee are 
of the view that apart from catering to the needs and requirements of Government 
Departments/Organizations greater efforts should also be made by ITI to expand its 
customer base and address the business requirement of the Private Sector as well.  
 

43 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI is putting all out efforts to maximize the revenues from the products 
mentioned above. ITI Ban galore plant has successfully executed the purchase order 
for NGN products received from BSNL worth Rs. 47.72 Crores during 2014 -15. 
Further, Advance Purchase Order (APO) from BSNL to the tune of Rs. 120 Crores is 
available for execution during 2015 -16, which is likely to be converted into a PO this 
year. ITI is also pursuing to get an order for supply of NGN equipments to BSNL for 
upgrading their C-DOT based switching systems 
ITI is a leader in encryptor business with Defence. Considering that encryption 
products for the Indian Defence are being procured only from three PSUs, viz., BEL, 
ITI and ECIL, ITI has the largest share of supplying in -house developed encryption 
products to Indian Army. The major communication network of Indian Army, ASCON, 
has been s et up by ITI. ITI’s R&D mainly focuses on encryption technology and 
currently new products have been developed for high speed IP communication with 
the allocation of major share of the capex under Rs. 192 Crore plan. ITI has 
participated in the major tende rs of ASCON Phase IV Encryption and Encryptors for 
Network For Spectrum (NFS) of Indian Defence and is hopeful of getting orders. 
Software Defined Radio (SDR) is latest product in wireless communication 
which has wide use, especially for the Defence forces . ITI has taken proactive role in 
identifying a Indian technology partner more than two years back. These products 
have been demonstrated to Defence Units and have been found to be compliant to 
the requirements. ITI is expecting an immediate major tender f rom Indian Defence 
for SDR and hopeful of getting good orders in future. 
Smart Card is already a project in ITI for more than 12 years. Palakkad plant of 
ITI started smart card business with the supply of SIM cards to BSNL and MTNL. It 
diverted into manufa cturing secured personal Identity cards based on National 
Population Register (NPR) data. It has supplied such cards to Home Ministry as well 
as to Ministry of Fisheries. However, the opportunities for smart cards is very high 
considering the opportunities  in the areas of Driving License, Motor Registration 
Card, Unorganized Workers’ Identification Card etc. Hence, the company is 
augmenting the infrastructure to address diversified smart card markets. 
With respect to solar project, ITI’s Naini plant has alr eady infrastructure to 
manufacture solar panels up to a capacity of 300Wp with an annual capacity up to 5 
MWp. This capacity is further augmented with the funding support under the revival 
plan. The plant has already executed some orders for supplying sola r power products 
to BSNL and UP Police.  

44 
 
Thus, ITI has major plans to market the products indicated in the Report of the 
Standing Committee on IT and it is hoped that these products would enable the 
company to earn good part of its revenue in the coming years. 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications  O.M. No.           
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated:  9th March, 2016) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  12  of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
  
  

45 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee are of the opinion that ITI should take advantage of the 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Policy to get one or more multinationals to transfer 
the latest technology  to the company and invest shares in ITI so that the company 
becomes a joint venture.  The committee are aware that similar efforts made by ITI 
in 2009-10 did not fructify.  But now, with equity infusion of Rs.2264 crore under the 
Revival Plan, ITI, over a  period of time, would be a viable and stable unit attracting 
strategic partners to go for joint venture.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that DoT should consider a proposal for approval with the objective to make ITI a 
joint venture Company.  The Com mittee visualise that once ITI becomes a joint 
venture Company, it will have added advantages which can be capitalised gainfully to 
turn around the fortunes of the PSU.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the efforts made in this direction. 
(Reply of the Government) 
Formation of ITI’s Joint Venture companies had been approved earlier by 
CCEA in 2009. The proposal included formation of JVs in Bangalore, Raebareli and 
Naini plants for IP Core Systems, GPON/GEPON Systems and Wi -Max Systems 
respectively. In spite of several attempts, there were no offers to this proposal. 
Considering the approval for significant equity infusion under the current revival plan 
and also considering the thrust towards local manufacturing under the initiatives, 
like, Make in India and Digital India, it is now felt that ITI can try formation of Joint 
Ventures once again. This was discussed in the periodic review meeting on the 
revival plan of ITI at DoT on 13th August 2015 chaired by Member (S), DoT.  
 
The following products, which have a huge market potential, are proposed for 
JVs.  
 
(i) Smart Phone manufacturing  
(ii) LED Display panel manufacturing  
(iii) Li-Ion Battery manufacturing and 
(iv) LTE and Broadband products.  
 
The proposal of setting up of Joint venture companies by ITI was put up fo r “in 
principle” approval of the ITI Board in the Board meeting held on 23 rd September 
2015 and the same has been accorded by ITI’s Board.  
DoT has sought detailed proposals from ITI to obtain the necessary 
Government approvals. 
 

46 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No. 20 -
56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that CCEA had approved the proposal for reduction of 
manpower strength through VRS for which a provision of Rs. 155 crore had been 
made in the Revival Plan.  The Cabinet had also accorded ‘in -principle’ approval for 
roll back of retireme nt age from 58 to 60 years for continuance of expert manpower 
in the company.  As per proposal placed before the Cabinet, manpower reduction 
through VRS was estimated to be 1500, with the VRS to be completed within one 
year from the date of approval of the  Revival Plan.  The Committee have been 
assured that reduction in manpower would not affect the productivity of the 
Company since the VRS route will be restricted to aged, redundant and unskilled 
manpower.  With regard to implementation of VRS, the Committ ee find that a 
detailed proposal for VRS was submitted to DoT in February 2015 followed by a 
presentation in March, 2015.  However, the approval of DoT on the Company’s 
proposal for introduction of VRS was awaited.  In respect of roll back of retirement 
age, ITI was required to submit a detailed proposal in the format required by BRPSE 
and based thereof DoT would seek concurrence of DPE and DoE separately before 
implementing the proposal.  However, no action had been initiated so far in this 
direction.  Sin ce 47.65 per cent of the ITI employees are in the age group of 51 -55 
years and 30.91 percent are 56 years and above, timely finalization of VRS will bring 
down operational costs of the Company.  The Committee recommended that the 
Apex Committee should fina lise the proposal at the earliest for successful 
implementation of VRS.  Since implementation of rollback of retirement age involves 
concurrence of several authorities, early action should be taken to pilot the proposal 
by DoT/ITI in order to facilitate sm ooth implementation of the Revival Plan by way of 
continuance of expert manpower.  The Committee would like to be informed of the 
progress made in this direction. 
(Reply of the Government) 
ITI’s Board has approved a VRS proposal which is based upon the scheme 
already approved by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). The matter was 
examined in DoT and some clarifications sought from ITI, which ITI had replied in 
September 2015. The VRS proposal is now under examination of DoT’s Finance Wing. 
Meanwhile, a request has also been sent to Ministry of Finance to allot the amount 
of Rs. 155 Crore approved by CCEA for meeting VRS expenses. 
ITI had sent a proposal for roll back of retirement age from 58 years to 60 
years to DoT. After examination of the proposal some clarifications and additional 
information had been sought from ITI, which the Company has supplied on 
28.10.2015. The proposal is presently under examination before sending it for 
concurrence of DPE and Department of Expenditure.   
(Ministry of Commun ications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.   
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 

47 
 
(Recommendations Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee note that ITI has been engaged in projects funded by the 
Government and are gearing up for capacity building through upgradation of 
manufacturing infrastructure under the revival package. It has successfully executed 
projects for BSNL and Def ence services.  The present policy of the Government is in 
support of encouraging indigenous manufacture of telecom and electronic products. 
The Committee recommend that reservation quota policy for ITI should be revived 
which will allow the PSU to get wor k orders for Government projects.  This will 
enable the Company to avail of opportunities to compete with private players in the 
field and grow its business prospects, thereby supporting the Government’s effort to 
make the country self-reliant in the telecommunication products. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 DoT has sent a draft Note for inter -Ministerial consultation for seeking the 
approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for  continuance of 
Reservation Quota policy for M/s ITI Ltd. by reservi ng i) 30% of the procurement 
orders placed by BSNL, MTNL and BBNL for M/s ITI Ltd. for the products 
manufactured by it and for 20% of the orders for the turn key projects (like GSM 
network roll-out, etc. of BSNL & MTNL and NOFN network roll-out, etc. of BBNL). 
 
(Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications, O.M. No.    
20-56/2015-Fac-II Dated: 9th March, 2016) 
 
 
 
   
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
08 August, 2016 Chairperson,  
17 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  

48 
 
                  Appendix-I  
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 8TH AUGUST, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 8th August, 2016, from 1 600 hours                     
to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‘ D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
3. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
4. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Dr. K.C. Patel 
10. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
11. Shri D.K. Suresh 
12. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
13. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
14. Shri Suresh Gopi  
15. Shri Meghraj Jain 
16. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
17. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
18. Shri Derek O’Brien 
19. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 

49 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following three  Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. Action Taken Report on the Ninth Report on the subject ‘ Revival of Indian 
Telephone Industries (ITI) Limited’; 
II. …..xxxxx…...xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..….xxxxx…..….xxxxx…..….xxxxx….….xxxxx….; and 
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx….. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Reports  and 
after due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
__________________________________________________________________________________
___ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report.  
 
 
  

50 
 
Appendix-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Recommendation  Nos.:- 1,2,3,4, 5, 6, 8,9, 12, 13, 14, 15,16, 17  and 
19 
 
 Total   15 
 Percentage 78.95 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
 Total 00 
 Percentage 00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 7  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 5.26 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. NoS.:-  10,11 & 18  
 Total 03 
 Percentage    15.79 
 
 