 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS   
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)] 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
33 


 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2016-17) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on    
Demands for Grants (2016-17)’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government………………………………………………... 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………. 
 
25 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration ……………………………………………... 
 
26 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are 
of interim in nature…………………………………………….. 
31 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth  sitting of the Committee held on                   
15th December, 2016  
 
35 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their         
Twenty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
            37       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2016-17) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
  *4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Dr. Sunil Gaikwad 
6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
7. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
8. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
9. Shri P. Karunakaran  
10. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
12. Shrimati Hema Malini  
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Suresh Gopi 
25. Shri Prabhat Jha 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
27. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
28. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
30. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo    -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Director   
3. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abhishek Sharma   - Executive Assistant  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 19.10.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 19.10.2016. 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2016 -2017), 
having been authorised by the Committee, do present the Thirty -third Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in the ir Twenty -sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants 
(2016-17)‟ of the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Twenty -sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016.  The Departmen t of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth Report on                               
1st August, 2016.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
15th December, 2016. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
15 December, 2016  Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the C ommittee contained in 
their Twenty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants (201 6-17)‟ relating to 
the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  the                 
3rd May, 2016. It contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 10      
   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
   
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4, 12,13 and 14  
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the Government 
are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 7, 9 and 11    
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation of the 
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee further desire 
that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and 
final action taken replies to the Observations /Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 

2 
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations.   
BUDGET ANALYSIS  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the gross expenditure of the Department has been 
gradually increasing over the years. During the year 2013 -14, the Department had 
incurred Rs.16796.71 crore as gross expenditure which increased to Rs.18556.56 
crore during 2014 -15. During 2015-16, the gross expenditure of the Department set 
at BE was Rs.19494.26 crore which was increased to Rs.20184.61 crore at RE. For 
the year 2016 -17, an amount of Rs.23122.60 crore has been set at BE which is 
Rs.3628.34 crore more that the BE of the  previous year. The Committee have been 
informed that the gross expenditure of the Department was mainly due to Salaries 
and Pensions which constitute more than 90 percent of the gross expenditure. The 
Department have contended that it is not possible to c ut down the operational 
expenses due to the increasing costs on one hand and obligation to provide Universal 
Postal services to the citizens at affordable costs throughout the country on the other. 
The Committee also note that the expenditure on pension wi ll also gradually increase 
over the years. The only way to offset the growing gross expenditure of the 
Department is by increasing its revenue receipts. During the year 2013 -14, the 
revenue receipts of the Department was Rs.10730.47 crore which increased t o 
Rs.11635.98 crore during 2014 -15. The estimated revenue of the Department in RE 
2015-16 is Rs.12614.01 crore against the Budget Estimate of Rs.12036.87 crore. The 
estimated revenue in BE 2016 -17 is Rs.13827.05 crore which is Rs.1790.18 crore 
more than th e BE of the previous year. The end result can be gauged from the fact 
that revenue deficit of the Department has increased from Rs.5473.10 crore during 
2013-14 to Rs.6258.60 crore during 2014-15. The revenue deficit at RE during 2015-
16 stands at Rs. 6925. 76 crore whereas revenue deficit at BE for the year 2016 -17 is 
Rs.8619.27 crore. The Committee also note that the revenue receipts of the 
Department on account of its Postal Operations as well as remunerations in Saving 
Banks services is gradually witnessi ng an increasing trend. To increase revenue 

3 
 
receipts, the Committee note that the Department are making investment in Small 
Savings Schemes, emerging e -commerce market, and parcel products, namely, 
Express Parcel and Business Parcel, in addition to Speed P ost, Logistics Post and 
Business Post. While appreciating that the Department have been able to consistently 
maintain the increase in growth of revenue over the years, the Committee 
recommend that more business opportunities must be created by the Departme nt to 
further increase their revenue so as to decrease revenue deficit. Considering that 
revenue deficit can only be reduced by increasing revenue receipts, the Committee 
desire that the Department should explore opportunities in the market for growing 
business and increase efficiency through IT induction and mail optimization.”  
7. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
(a) The Department has gone through the international and national trends and taken 
various initiatives in order to augment revenue and reduce deficit. These initiatives 
include focus and efficiency improvement in premium services, saving bank service 
and insurance service. Goi ng by the international trends Department of Posts is 
focusing on the Parcel segment as a key driver for business growth considering the 
growing market and business prospects. The increasing e -commerce market in India 
has given a boost to the parcel segment where Business to Customer (B 2 C) parcel 
volume is on the rise. With this focussed  approach, Department of Posts generated a 
revenue of Rs.149.94  crores under parcel segment during 2015 -16 registering an 
overall increase of 33% over 2014 -15. With this focussed approach  Department of 
Posts is expected to increase its revenue earnings an d contain the deficit in future. 
Additionally, to increase the throughput and reduce the time involved in handling of 
articles, Department is augmenting its infrastructure by providing requisite 
equipments and induction of appropriate technology.  
(b) Department of Posts offers a number of premium services like Speed Post, Business 
Post, Express Parcel, Business Parcel, Logistics Post etc to generate additional 
revenue. Further, the Department of Posts periodically reviews its services and 
products keeping in v iew the changing Market scenario, customer needs, industry 
benchmarks etc and takes steps/action to modify service features to improve the 
postal services and boost the revenue growth of the Department. Technology 

4 
 
integration and infrastructure up gradatio n is also being done in a systematic manner 
to increase the efficiency and throughput and reduce the cost of operation, thereby 
decreasing the revenue deficit. Following are some of the initiatives taken/ being 
taken to increase the revenue receipt in 2016-17:  
(i)  Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) has entered into an agreement with 
Department of Posts for sending their consignments though Speed Post from more 
than 80 locations across the country under Single Point Account Management 
scheme.  
(ii)  Railway tickets are sold through post offices under an agreement signed with 
the Ministry of Railways. Presently this service is available in 316 post offices across 
India.  
(iii)  Department of Posts has introduced a new initiative of 'Post Shoppe' which is 
aimed to generate additional revenue by utilizing the vacant space in Post Offices.  
(iv)  Government of India has introduced Sovereign Gold Bond scheme (SGB) in 
the Union Budget 2015 -16. During tranche I and II,  4045 Sovereign Gold Bond 
applications were collected through Post Offices across the country and the 
Certificates of holding (bonds) were issued by RBI for the same.  
(v)  Department is also entering into tie -ups with third parties for use of its 
network for selling their product/services through post offices e.g. sale of forms of 
various educational institutions/Universities, sale of mobile phones, address 
verification etc. 
(c) Revenue of the Department is also growing at a steady rate under Financial Services  
schemes.  Kisan Vikas Patras has been reintroduced in 2014 and a new scheme called 
Sukanya Samridhi Account has been launched in January 2015 which has been great 
success  
With the opening of 85.25 lakh accounts under new  scheme a revenue augmentation 
of Rs -175.26 Cr has been registered during the year 2015-16. 
.  

5 
 
(d) The IT Modernization Project of Department of Posts has already entered the 
implementation Phase.  The Project Coordination Committee and all the Project 
Implementation Committees, are put in p lace, and are vigorously monitoring the 
implementation of the Project. It is expected that the implementation of all the eight 
segments will be over as per the following timelines set for the purpose which will 
increase efficiency and quality of work. 
 
Tentative Timelines (revised) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the segment Time lines set for completion of 
implementation  
Completion of 
O&M Phase  
1 Data Centre Facility DC functioning WEF April -13 
& DRC Powered on during 
May- 2015 
July    2020 
2 Rural ICT- RSI March 2017 March 2026 
3 Rural ICT- RH March 2017 March 2022 
4 Core System Integrator March    2017 June     2021 
5 Change management Continuous activity with other 
segments 
----- 
6 Financial Solution 
Integrator 
Completed except some non 
feasible areas for network 
connectivity. 
May     2021 
7 Network Integrator 98% completed. Some difficult 
locations pending. 
Sep      2021 
8 Mail operation 
Hardware 
Dec       2016 Dec      2021 
 
Setting Up of Automated Mail Processing Centres : In sync with the requirement 
due to the changing  mail profile i.e. declining letter mail and a consequent shift 
towards parcels and e -commerce articles,  the Department has correlated setting up 
of future Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPC) at Mumbai, Chennai, 
Hyderabad and Bengaluru to conform to this segment. 
 
8. While appreciating the Department for being able to consistently maintain growth  in 
revenue generation over the years, the Committee  had recommended that more business 

6 
 
opportunities must be created by the Department to further increase their revenue and 
decrease revenue deficit. Considering that the deficit in revenue can be reduced by 
increasing revenue receipts, the Committee had desired that the Department should increase 
efficiency through IT induction and mail optimization.  The Department, in their Action 
Taken Replies, have enumerated the initiatives taken  by them to increase the ir revenue 
receipts. The Committee, however, feel that the Department need to give more focused 
attention to their IT Modernization Project by setting strict deadlines and meeting them 
without any compromises.   The Committee further feel that since there is limited scope in 
reducing the revenue expenditure, th e only way to move forward is to increase the revenue 
receipts and trust that the initiatives taken by the Department would go a long way in 
helping them to improve their revenue receipts, thereby reducing their revenue deficit in the 
long run.    
SETTING UP AUTOMATED MAIL PROCESSING CENTERS (AMPCS)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.4) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department are in the process of setting up Automated 
Mail Processing Centers (AMPCs) at Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. 
The AMPC at Delhi is handling 5.6 lakh articles per day (1.6 lakh Speed Post articles 
and 4 lakh  unregistered mail), whereas the AMPC at Kolkata is handling 2.61 lakh 
articles per day (57000 Speed Post and 2.04 lakh unregistered mail). However, the 
AMPC at Mumbai had stopped functioning since April 2015 as the sorting machines 
have over lived their l ife span. The percentage of Speed Post articles at AMPCs 
Delhi and Kolkata vis -a-vis total Speed Post mail handled by the Department is 
approximately 20 percent. The percentage of unregistered mail at AMPCs Delhi and 
Kolkata vis-a-vis total unregistered mail handled by the Department is approximately 
3.5 percent. The Committee understand that the Mumbai International Airport 
(MIAL) has offered suitable land for setting of AMPC and the Department have 
accepted the same. The process of signing the agreement i s in the final stage and will 
be executed shortly. The Department have also decided to set up AMPC at 
Departmental land at MMS Complex Chennai. Suitable land for setting up of AMPC 
at Bengaluru has been purchased from the Karnataka Industrial Area Developm ent 
Board (KIADB) near Bengaluru Airport. Similarly, suitable land for setting up of 
AMPC at Hyderabad has been purchased from the Government of Andhra Pradesh 
near Hyderabad Airport. In spite of the progress made in acquiring land for setting up 
of AMPCs in Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad, the Committee note that 
the scheme could not take off within the envisaged time frame due to non -
finalization of the consultant. The Committee recommend that the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for hiring consultant which is under process should be finalized and 

7 
 
issued at the earliest. Since the mail profile all over the country has undergone a 
significant change in the last few years, the Committee are of the view that setting up 
of AMPCs at these cities will be imme nsely helpful in streaming the mail delivery 
mechanism.”  
10. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 
“In sync with the requirement due to the changing  mail profile i.e. declining letter 
mail and a consequent shift towards p arcels and e -commerce articles,  the 
Department has initiated setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPC) 
at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru to conform to this segment.  The 
Department is also in the process of finalizing a consultant f or the Parcel Network 
Optimization Project (PNOP) for designing an optimum parcel network with a 
combination of facilities for manual to semi -automatic to automatic processing of 
parcels on a pan -India basis. These two activities of PNOP and AMPCs will now  be 
synergized. Thus an integrated parcel network will be created, consisting not only of 
AMPCs at four locations, but also semi -automatic sorting centres at other locations 
generating significant mail volume thereby synergizing end to end mail processing 
activities and creating enhanced capacity to handle the growing e -commerce 
business. Consequently, the EFC memo for the proposed AMPCs is being revised, 
following which, the RFP for hiring the consultant would be issued.” 
11. While noting that in spite of the progress made in acquiring land for setting up of 
Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) in Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and 
Hyderabad, the scheme could not take off within the envisaged time frame due to non -
finalization of the Consultant, the Committee had recommended that the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for hiring consultant which is under process should be finalized and issued 
at the earliest. In view of the significant change in  the mail profile all over the country in the 
last few years, the Committee  had fel t that setting up of AMPCs at these cities would be 
immensely helpful in streamlining the mail delivery mechanism. The Department, in their 
Action Taken Replies have stated that apart from setting up of Automated Mail Processing 
Centres (AMPC) at M umbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru to conform to the 
changing mail profile, the Department are also in the process of finalizing a consultant for 
the Parcel Network Optimization Project (PNOP) which would  design an optimum parcel 
network with faciliti es for manual to semi -automatic to automatic processing of parcels on 
pan-India basis. Consequently , the Committee have been informed that the EFC memo for 
the proposed AMPCs is being revised  and the RFP for hiring the consultant would be issued  
later.  While lauding the efforts of the Department to synergize the activities of Parcel 
Network Optimization Project (PNOP) and Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) to 
create an integrated parcel network, the Committee  are, however, unhappy to note that the  

8 
 
Department has been coming up with a routine kind of replies in the matter of setting up of 
AMPCs and would like to know what prevented the Department to float RFP in all these 
years for AMPCs.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that setting up of AMPCs  at major 
cities like Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad  which is long overdue  now and 
needs to be addressed on a priority basis  as it is a critical pre-requisite in improving overall 
efficiency of the entire delivery process should be accorded due p riority and the Department 
should make all efforts to set and meet strict deadlines for the same .  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three months. 
 
E-COMMERCE SEGMENT 
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are given to understand that one area which holds tremendous 
opportunity for revenue generation for the Department is the fast growing                    
e-Commerce segment. To fulfill the needs of the e -Commerce sector and to increase 
its revenue receipts, the Department have taken several measures such as 
introduction of Cash on Delivery (COD) facility, upgradation of Parcel booking and 
handling facilitie s, providing technological support which includes seamless data 
integration through Application Programme Interface (API) to the e -Commerce 
companies, introduction of Nodal/Mechanized delivery in 11 major cities, same/next 
day delivery along with delivery on Public Holiday/Sunday and beyond business 
hours in 7 cities, establishment of 34 major routes for fast, secure and reliable 
transmission of parcels, fitting of more than 950 Mail Vans with GPS devices for 
online monitoring of mail movement, etc. Several  major e-Commerce players in the 
country are being provided delivery services by the Department. The Committee note 
that there has been considerable increase in revenue generated by Express and 
Business Parcel. During 2014 -15, an amount of Rs. 112.47 crore  was earned by the 
Department, witnessing a growth of 45 percent over the revenue in 2013 -14. 
Revenue generated from these two services in the current financial year, till February 
2016, is Rs. 131 crore showing a growth of 65 percent over the correspondin g period 
of the previous year. While observing that numerous steps are being taken by the 
Department to capture the e -Commerce market, the Committee emphasize that the 
real challenge is to overcome competition from private courier services which are 
also actively operating in the market. The Department need to find innovative and 
alternative measures to meet this challenge in order to gain larger market share in this 
segment.”  
 
 

9 
 
13. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 “Department continuously endeavors to leverage its vast network to develop the 
business, to reach out to its customers and to contribute to the growth of the country. 
Regular review of its product offerings and induction of modern technology and 
equipments to increase the throughput are part of its business strategy. Department is 
currently having more than 900 e-commerce customers on board to whom fulfillment 
services are offered. The customer base is increasing day by day and all major e -
commerce players lik e Amazon, Flipkart, Snapdeal, Shopclues, Yepme; Naaptol etc 
are associated with Department. In order to meet the capacity requirement to cater to 
the demand of the growing e -commerce market, Department of Posts has established 
57 Parcel Booking/ Integrated  Parcel Centres and 3 more such centres are being 
established in the current financial year. These centres are being established at key 
locations considering the potential and requirements and are not limited only to 
metro cities. Department has also intro duced an SMS alert facility once the articles 
are received in the delivery Post Offices as well as when articles are sent out for 
delivery. These actions are taken as per prevailing market practices to provide value 
to the customers as well as to improve t he satisfaction level. These actions will help 
the Department to be the market leader in delivery of e-commerce consignments.” 
 
14. The Committee had noted that one area which holds tremendous opportunity for 
revenue generation for the Department is the fast g rowing e-Commerce segment. To fulfill 
the needs of the e -Commerce sector and to increase its revenue receipts, the Department 
have taken several measures such as introduction of Cash on Delivery (COD) facility, 
upgradation of Parcel booking and handling facilities, providing technological support which 
includes seamless data integration through Application Programme Interface (API) to the e -
Commerce companies, introduction of Nodal/Mechanized delivery in 11 major cities, 
same/next day delivery , etc.  While noting these steps, the Committee had emphasized that 
the real challenge  in capturing the e -Commerce market  is overcoming competition from 
private courier services which are also actively operating in the market.  The Department, in 
their Action Note, have stated that they are currently having more than 900 e -commerce 
customers on board to whom fulfillment services are  being offered and all major e -
commerce players like Amazon, Flipkart, Snapdeal, Shopclues, Yepme ; Naaptol etc are 
associated with Department. In order to meet the capacity requirement to cater to the 
demand of the growing e-commerce market, Department of Posts ha ve established 57 Parcel 
Booking/ Integrated Parcel Centres and 3 more such centres are b eing established in the 
current financial year. Department have  also introduced an SMS alert facility once the 
articles are received in the delivery Post Offices as well as when articles are sent out for 
delivery.  While appreciating the various steps take n to improve customer satisfaction and 

10 
 
garner more market share in the     e-Commerce segment, the Committee feel that there is a 
lot more to be done by the Department to tap the huge potential of e -commerce market in 
order to increase its revenue earnings  and reiterate the need to focus on the emerging e -
Commerce segment as a major source of future revenue and take a holistic approach to 
establish itself as a delivery partner of choice for e -Commerce companies.  The Committee 
feel that emergence of e -Commerce is a great opportunity for the Department to position 
itself as a service provider of choice and also augment its revenue receipts to curtail its 
revenue deficit.   The Committee would like to be apprised of further initiatives taken by 
Department in this direction. 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION  
 
 (Recommendation Sl.No.13) 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that IT Induction and Modernization is an important scheme of 
the Department that got the maximum outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all the 
schemes for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Department have submitted that there 
was low utilization of fund in t he years 2012-13 to 2014-15 due to the complexity of 
the project and the delay at the end of various authorities/agencies involved in the 
approval and implementation of projects. The Committee have been informed that 
through effective monitoring of implementation, the project is being brought on track 
and there have been significant achievements under the IT Modernization Project in 
2015-16. During the year 2015 -16, an amount of Rs. 276.40 crore was allocated at 
BE which was increased to Rs.331.10 crore at RE and the actual utilization upto 
February, 2016 was Rs.197.11 crore. The Committee note that out of the 8 segments 
under the scheme, Data Centre & DR has already been completed. With regard to the 
remaining 7 segments, the Department have stated that Net work Connectivity will be 
completed by March, 2016, subject to technical feasibility/alternate solutions; 
Financial Solution will be completed by April, 2016 in technically feasible sites; 
Mail Operation Hardware will be completed by December 2016; and the  remaining 4 
segments, viz. Rural ICT -Application, Core System Integrator, Rural H/W & 
Connectivity, and Change Management will be completed by March 2017. The 
Committee note that the scheme has been subsumed in the Scheme Postal Operations 
w.e.f. 2016 -17. With regard to the status of computerization of Post Offices, the 
Department have stated that all the 25297 Post Offices are computerized as on date. 
As on 29 -03-2016, the number of departmental post offices, RMS offices and other 
administrative offices n etworked under the Single Wide Area Network is 28,296. 
The Committee have been apprised that to ensure completion of the Scheme as per 
the timeline, various committees at different levels such as Steering Committee, 
Project Coordination Committee, Project Implementation Committee, Circle 
Monitoring Committees/Regional Monitoring Committees, etc. have been constituted 
to review implementation of different parameters and monitor progress on a regular 

11 
 
basis and to ensure that the project timelines are observed  and outcomes achieved 
within the stipulated time. In addition to this, the Secretary (Posts) and Member 
(Tech.), Department of Posts, and other senior officers personally monitor the key 
issues relating to the implementation of the Project. The Committee are of the view 
that IT induction will bring a positive impact, including transparency, accountability, 
and efficiency in the functioning of the Department. Since the remaining 7 segments 
of the Scheme are to be completed by March 2017, the Committee recom mend that 
necessary measures should be taken to ensure timely completion of the project.”  
16. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 
 “The recommendations of the committee have been noted. The various Project 
Implementation committees which are in place are vigorously monitoring the Project 
to ensure completion of its implementation by March, 2017.” 
 
17. Though t he Committee were of the view that IT induction will bring a positive 
impact, including transparency, accountability, and efficiency in the function ing of the 
Department,  as 7 out of the 8 segments of the Scheme are  scheduled to be completed by 
March 2017, only the Committee had recommended that necessary measures should be 
taken to ensure their timely completion to reap the benefits of the project.  The Department, 
in their action taken note, have stated that the various Project Implementation committees 
which are in place to monitor the implementation of the Project will ensure its completion by 
March, 2017.  The reply of Department is, however, silent about other concrete steps taken 
by Department to ensure timely completion of  project.  T he Committee  have serious 
apprehensions about the Department meeting  the deadlines and hence would again urge the 
Department to make sincere efforts to ensure that the revised timelines set for execution of 
core components of the scheme are met obviating any further spill over of the project and 
would like to be apprised of steps taken by the Department and targets achieved so far along 
with reasons for delay, if any. 
 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT  
 (Recommendation Sl.No.14) 
 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Scheme is being implemented to fulfill the Universal 
Service Obligation by providing a congenial environment for customer transaction 
and also provide a good working atmosphere to the employees. Since DoP have 
computerized all the Departmental Post Offices in the country, it has become all the 
more necessary to provide these Offices with Departmental buildings as a basic pre -
requisite for computerization; hence the scheme is being continued in the 12th Plan. 
The Committee note t hat during the year 2015 -16, an amount of Rs.34.87 crore has 

12 
 
been allocated at BE which was reduced to Rs.27.15 crore at RE and the actual 
utilization upto February, 2016 was only 17.26 crore. Out of the 10 sub -schemes 
under it, the Committee observe poor physical achievements under 5 sub -schemes, 
viz. construction of Post Offices, construction of boundary walls, construction of 
ATM Rooms, installation of Solar Power Packs, and construction of Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures. The Committee also note that 1 763 vacant plots of land are 
presently available with the Department, with Karnataka having 351 vacant plots, 
followed by Andhra Pradesh with 220, Rajasthan with 162, and Tamil Nadu with 
149. The Committee have been informed that 285 plots are situated at prime 
locations. The Department have further informed that the average size of the vacant 
plots is 1390.55 sq. mts and the average size of the plot is viable for construction of 
Post Office building/Staff Quarters. The Committee note that the proposal to 
undertake commercial utilization of land under Public Private Partnership could not 
be implemented since most of the vacant plots of land situated on prime locations 
were originally allotted for construction of Post Office buildings and Staff Quarters 
at Go vernment rates and subsidized rates by State Governments, Trust and Local 
Bodies for Postal Operations; that being so, these vacant plots cannot be used for any 
other purpose as per allotment terms and conditions or else allotment will get 
cancelled. The C ommittee further note that impediments are being faced in the 
construction of Post Office buildings/Staff Quarters at the vacant plots owned by the 
Department since land title is not readily available, in the absence of which 
municipal approval gets delaye d, while some the plots are located in inaccessible 
areas. 209 vacant plots are also stated to be under encroachment. In this regard, 
necessary instructions have already been issued to all the Heads of Postal Circles that 
eviction of unauthorized personnel from the encroached land of the Department may 
be done after seeking assistance of the law enforcing agencies for all the plots of the 
Department of Posts. Boundary walls and barbed wire fencing on important/sensitive 
plots are being constructed, subject to availability of Plan funds. The Committee 
express dissatisfaction over the performance of the Department as far as activities 
under real estate management is concerned. It needs to be realized that DoP now are 
gradually assuming centrestage after being part of delivery platform for „Digital 
India‟ Programme and being chosen to operate Payments Bank, apart from 
witnessing transformation with IT induction and modernization. Therefore, it is 
essential that congenial environment and better working atmosphere  is provided for 
which construction of Post Office buildings/Staff Quarters are to be accorded 
priority. The Committee recommend that the Department should address the 
impediments cited in this regard and come up with a plan for construction of 
buildings/Staff Quarters. The Committee expect better performance on this front and 
would like to be apprised of steps taken in this regard.”  
 
19. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
“The Committee has noted that the physical achiev ement in activities like 
Construction of Post Office, Construction of boundary walls, Construction of ATM 
rooms, Installation of Solar Power Pack and Construction of Rain water harvesting 
structure has been poor. In this context, it is stated that though a n amount of Rs. 
20.46 crores was allotted in BE in 2015 -16 with target of Construction of 12 Post 
Office buildings, an amount of Rs. 14.86 crores was available at RE stage with target 
of 9 Post Office buildings. During the year 2015 -16, a total of 8 PO building projects 

13 
 
were completed in the funds available. Apart from this, the targets for Construction 
of boundary wall, Solar Power Packs and Rain water harvesting have been 
completed. As far as construction of ATM rooms was concerned, no fund was 
allotted i n BE. However, the spillover work was completed and 105 ATM rooms 
were constructed with the available funds. Therefore, in view of the above, the 
physical achievement in various activities under Plan Scheme Estates Management 
for the year 2015 -16 has not b een poor as observed by the Committee. It is further 
noted that 100% of the funds allotted in FG 2015 -16 i.e. Rs. 25.55 crores has been 
utilized. 
 
In 2030 perspective plan projected to NITI Aayog, already construction of post 
offices/staff quarters on all the existing vacant plots of land has been taken up. 
Where ever, the approval of a project appears to be getting delayed, the project for 
construction of temporary structures will be taken up. Further, efforts would be made 
to outsource the construction of  the PO buildings to CPWD and/or other 
organizations who are already carrying out construction activities. This will help in 
covering more land under construction and will therefore, help in avoiding 
encroachment issues. In the meantime, the boundary walls  are proposed to be 
constructed on the vacant plots to save against encroachment.” 
 
20. While expressing dissatisfaction over the performance of the Department as far as 
activities under real estate management are concerned the Committee had recommended 
that the Department should address the impediments cited in this regard and come up with a 
plan for construction of buildings/Staff Quarters.  The Department, in their action taken 
note, have stated that i n the 2030 perspective plan projected to NITI Aayog  construction of 
post offices/staff quarters on all the vacant plots of land  owned by the Department  has been 
taken up. Further, efforts would be made to outsource the construction of the buildings to 
CPWD or other organizations and boundary walls would be constructed on vacant plots to 
save against encroachment.  But, the Committee are of the view that such temporary 
measures will not bring solutions and only expeditious utilization of real estate assets can 
ward off encroachments.  They, therefore, urge the Dep artment to be proactive in utilizing 
land assets and apprise the Committee of the immediate steps taken in this regard along with 
proposed plan of action .  The Committee would reiterate that with DoP gradually assuming 
centrestage being part of delivery platform for ‘Digital India’ Programme and chosen to 
operate Payments Bank, apart from the transformation with IT Induction and 

14 
 
Modernization, it is essential that a congenial working environment is made available in the 
form of suitable Post Office buildings and staff quarters.  
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
BUDGET ANALYSIS  
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
 
The Committee note that the gross expenditure of the Department has been gradually 
increasing over the years. During the year 2013 -14, the Department had incurred Rs.16796.71 
crore as gross expenditure which increased to Rs.18556.56 crore during 2014 -15. During 2015-16, 
the gross expenditure of the Department set at BE was Rs.19494.26 crore which was increased to 
Rs.20184.61 crore at RE. For the year 2016 -17, an amount of Rs.23122.60 crore has been set at 
BE which is Rs.3628.34 crore more that the BE of the  previous year. The Committee have been 
informed that the gross expenditure of the Department was mainly due to Salaries and Pensions 
which constitute more than 90 percent of the gross expenditure. The Department have contended 
that it is not possible to c ut down the operational expenses due to the increasing costs on one hand 
and obligation to provide Universal Postal services to the citizens at affordable costs throughout 
the country on the other. The Committee also note that the expenditure on pension wi ll also 
gradually increase over the years. The only way to offset the growing gross expenditure of the 
Department is by increasing its revenue receipts. During the year 2013 -14, the revenue receipts of 
the Department was Rs.10730.47 crore which increased t o Rs.11635.98 crore during 2014-15. The 
estimated revenue of the Department in RE 2015 -16 is Rs.12614.01 crore against the Budget 
Estimate of Rs.12036.87 crore. The estimated revenue in BE 2016 -17 is Rs.13827.05 crore which 
is Rs.1790.18 crore more than th e BE of the previous year. The end result can be gauged from the 
fact that revenue deficit of the Department has increased from Rs.5473.10 crore during 2013 -14 to 
Rs.6258.60 crore during 2014-15. The revenue deficit at RE during 2015 -16 stands at Rs. 6925.76 
crore whereas revenue deficit at BE for the year 2016 -17 is Rs.8619.27 crore. The Committee also 
note that the revenue receipts of the Department on account of its Postal Operations as well as 
remunerations in Saving Banks services is gradually witnessi ng an increasing trend. To increase 
revenue receipts, the Committee note that the Department are making investment in Small Savings 
Schemes, emerging e -commerce market, and parcel products, namely, Express Parcel and 
Business Parcel, in addition to Speed P ost, Logistics Post and Business Post. While appreciating 
that the Department have been able to consistently maintain the increase in growth of revenue over 
the years, the Committee recommend that more business opportunities must be created by the 
Department to further increase their revenue so as to decrease revenue deficit. Considering that 
revenue deficit can only be reduced by increasing revenue receipts, the Committee desire that the 
Department should explore opportunities in the market for growing bus iness and increase 
efficiency through IT induction and mail optimization.  
Reply of the Government 
(a) The Department has gone through the international and national trends and taken various 
initiatives in order to augment revenue and reduce deficit. These initiatives include focus 
and efficiency improvement in premium services, saving bank service and insurance 
service. Going by the international trends Department of Posts is focusing on the Parcel 
segment as a key driver for business growth considering the growing market and business 
prospects. The increasing e -commerce market in India has given a boost to the parcel 

16 
 
segment where Business to Customer (B  2 C) parcel  volume is on the rise. With this 
focussed approach, Department of Posts generated  a revenue of Rs.149.94  crores under 
parcel segment during 2015-16 registering an overall increase of 33% over 2014 -15. With 
this focussed approach  Department of Posts is expected to increase its revenue earnings 
and contain the deficit in future. Additionally, to increase the throughput and reduce the 
time involved in handling of  articles, Department is augmenting its infrastructure by 
providing requisite equipments and induction of appropriate technology.  
(b) Department of Posts offers a number of premium services like Speed Post, Business Post, 
Express Parcel, Business Parcel, Logistics Post etc to generate additional revenue. Further, 
the Department of Posts periodically reviews its services and products keeping in view the 
changing Market scenario, customer needs, industry benchmarks etc and takes steps/action 
to modify service features to improve the postal services and boost the revenue growth o f 
the Department. Technology integration and infrastructure up gradation is also being done 
in a systematic manner to increase the efficiency and throughput and reduce the cost of 
operation, thereby decreasing the revenue deficit. Following are some of the  initiatives 
taken/ being taken to increase the revenue receipt in 2016-17:  
(i)  Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) has entered into an agreement with Department 
of Posts for sending their consignments though Speed Post from more than 80 locations 
across the country under Single Point Account Management scheme.  
(ii)  Railway tickets are sold through post offices under an agreement signed with the 
Ministry of Railways. Presently this service is available in 316 post offices across India.  
(iii)  Department o f Posts has introduced a new initiative of 'Post Shoppe' which is 
aimed  
to generate additional revenue by utilizing the vacant space in Post Offices.  
(iv)  Government of India has introduced Sovereign Gold Bond scheme (SGB) in the 
Union Budget 2015 -16. During tranche I and II,  4045 Sovereign Gold Bond applications 
were collected through Post Offices across the country and the Certificates of holding 
(bonds) were issued by RBI for the same.  
(v)  Department is also entering into tie -ups with third parties for use of its network for 
selling their product/services through post offices e.g. sale of forms of various educational 
institutions/Universities, sale of mobile phones, address verification etc. 
(c) Revenue of the Department is also growing at a steady rate under Financial Services 
schemes.  Kisan Vikas Patras has been reintroduce d in 2014 and a new scheme called 
Sukanya Samridhi Account has been launched in January 2015 which has been great 
success. With the opening of 85.25 lakh accounts under new  scheme a revenue 
augmentation of Rs -175.26 Cr has been registered during the year 2015-16. 
.  
(d) The IT Modernization Project of Department of Posts has already entered the 
implementation Phase.  The Project Coordination Committee and all the Project 
Implementation Committees, are put in place, and are  vigorously monitoring the 
implementation of the P roject. It is expected that the implementation of all the eight 

17 
 
segments will be over as per the following timelines set for the purpose which will increase 
efficiency and quality of work. 
Tentative Timelines (revised) 
S
l 
Name of the segment Time lines set  for completion of 
implementation  
Completion of 
O&M Phase  
1 Data Centre Facility DC functioning WEF April -13 
& DRC Powered on during 
May- 2015 
July    2020 
2 Rural ICT- RSI March 2017 March 2026 
3 Rural ICT- RH March 2017 March 2022 
4 Core System Integrator March    2017 June     2021 
5 Change management Continuous activity with other 
segments 
----- 
6 Financial Solution 
Integrator 
Completed except some non 
feasible areas for network 
connectivity. 
May     2021 
7 Network Integrator 98% completed. Some difficult 
locations pending. 
Sep      2021 
8 Mail operation Hardware Dec       2016 Dec      2021 
 
Setting Up of Automated Mail Processing Centres : In sync with the requirement due to the 
changing  mail profile i.e. declining letter mail and a consequent shift towards parcels  and e-
commerce articles ,  the Department has correlated setting up of future Automated Mail 
Processing Centres (AMPC) at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru  to conform to 
this segment.  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
REVIEW OF THE PLAN SCHEMES  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.2) 
 
The Committee note that during the year 2015 -16, an amount of Rs.468.61 crore has been 
allocated at BE which was increased to Rs.520 crore at RE for financing the Plan Schemes. The 
Committee have been informed that expenditure upto 31st March, 2016 is expe cted to be about 

18 
 
Rs.502 crore which is about 90 percent of the RE. This is a substantial improvement in utilization 
of Plan funds since only Rs.366.71 crore had been spent during 2014 -15. For the year 2016-17, an 
amount of Rs.600 crore has been allocated a t BE for the implementation of various schemes under 
Plan. The Department have stated that the actual utilization of funds in the year 2015 -16 and 
Budget Estimates 2016-17 are within the approved Plan outlays of all the Plan schemes under the 
12th Five Yea r Plan. However, the Plan provision made by the Ministry of Finance for the 
financial year 2016 -17 is lower than the demand made by the Department. The Committee have 
been informed that the pace of implementation of the IT Modernization Project has acceler ated in 
2015-16. It is anticipated that the pace of expenditure will be satisfactory during the remaining 
period of the 12th Plan. The Department have informed the Committee that during the year 2016 -
17, after discussion with the Ministry of Finance, six s chemes, viz. Mail operations, Postal Life 
Insurance, Rural Business and Access to Postal Network, Premium Services, IT Induction and 
Modernization and Philately operations will be clubbed with the „Postal Operations‟ Scheme, 
thereby reducing the number of XII Five Year Plan Schemes to four, viz. Postal Operations, 
Financial Services, Human Resource Management and Estate Management. With the 
rationalization of the Plan schemes into 4 s chemes, it is anticipated that there will be more 
rationalized administrative convenience, greater synergy in the implementation process and better 
management and monitoring of schemes. The Committee feel that it is a step in the right direction 
and the Department will reap the benefit of such rationalization in the long run.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Plan schemes of the Department of Posts have been rationalised from 10 to 4 schemes as 
per direction from Ministry of Finance which are detailed as under:-  
Sl. No. Plan Scheme Sub Scheme 
1 Postal Operation 
Postal Operation 
Rural Business & Access to Postal Network 
Mail Operation 
Philately Operations 
IT Induction & Modernization 
Premium Services 
2 Financial Services 
Postal Life Insurance 
India Post Payment Bank 
Saving Bank & Remittances 
3 Human Resources Management Training and Capacity Building 
4 Estate Management 
Purchase of Land 
Construction of Building 
It is anticipated that there will be more rationalized administrative convenience, greater 
synergy in the implementation process and management and monitoring of schemes.  

19 
 
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
MAIL OPERATIONS, INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL MAILS AND GLOBAL 
BUSINESS 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 
The Committee note that the objective of this scheme is to streamline mail operations for 
speedy transmission of mails. Some of the important Plan schemes include Mail Network 
Optimization Project, Setting up of AMP Cs, National Address Database Management Project, 
Development of Road Transport Network, Upgradation of Speed Post Centres, etc. During the 
year 2015-16, an amount of Rs.52.03 crore was allocated at BE which was reduced to Rs.46.05 
crore at RE and the actu al utilization upto February, 2016 was only 26.78 crore. This was because 
of non -utilization of funds allocated for the Parcel Network Optimization Project (PNOP) 
consultancy due to non-finalization of the consultant, allocation of funds to circles under t he Mail 
Network Optimization Project (MNOP) and Upgradation of Speed Post Centres only after receipt 
from the Ministry of Finance in July. The major components of expenditure under the referred 
schemes include procurement of hardware, operational equipment  and site preparation, which 
takes time and, therefore, the funds could not be utilized by December 2015. The Committee also 
note that the Scheme has been merged into the Postal Operations Scheme from 2016 -17. It is 
expected to have a positive impact on th e ongoing Plan activities of the Mail Business Division. It 
is also anticipated that there will be more administrative convenience, greater synergy in the 
implementation process and better management and monitoring of schemes.  
Under the Mail Network Optimization Project (MNOP) undertaken by the Department to 
improve the quality of service of mail products, articles having complete tracking information on 
the website have increased from 63 lakh (December 2009) to 2.74 crore (Janu ary 2016) and also 
have reduced percentage of mail being mis -routed due to improved monitoring of Speed Post 
articles with the help of KPIs. During 2015 -16, booking and delivery information for more than 
93% Speed Post and 80% articles have been made avail able online, 5 new national sorting hubs 
have been set up in the North East region to effectively monitor the performance of Speed Post 
mail in each of the North East States, more than 83 percent Speed Post articles booked at the Post 
offices are delivered within 3 days of booking of the articles, as compared to 78 percent during the 
previous year, and new e-Commerce article based KPIs have been developed for the monitoring of 
the booking, delivery and transmission time of Speed Post e -Commerce articles whi ch has 
contributed to the growth in the booking of e -Commerce articles by the Department. While 
appreciating the achievements made under MNOP, the Committee stress that the Department 
should optimize utilization of available funds meant for various schemes  under Mail operations. 
The Committee trust that with the merger of the scheme with Postal operations, there ought to be 
better utilization of funds resulting in greater achievements under the scheme. 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to optimally utilize the funds under the plan schemes of Postal Operation ( MNOP 
or Speed Post Centres) the funds are allocated to the Postal Circles indicating the specific purpose 
(site preparation, operational equipments, computers, etc.) for which the aforesaid funds are to be 
utilized in specific Mail offices. The utilization of funds by the circles is closely monitored at the 
Directorate. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (P A)/26th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
FINANCIAL SERVICES (SAVINGS BANK AND REMITTANCES)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.5) 
 
The Committee note that the scheme is being implemented by the Department with the 
objective to fully realize the potential of the vast customer base and credibility of India Post in the 
area of banking and promote the habit of thrift and savings among citizens of the country. T he 
Committee are concerned to find gross under -utilization of Plan funds during 2015 -16 under the 
scheme. An amount of Rs. 3.35 crore was allocated at BE which was increased to Rs.12.35 crore 
at the RE stage, while the utilization was only Rs.7.43 lakh up to February, 2016. However, the 
Public Investment Board (PIB) in their meeting held on 19th January, 2016 recommended that the 
implementation of project and flow of funds is to commence from 2016 -17 onwards. Hence, Rs.8 
crore allocated at RE 2015 -16 for th e Plan activity Setting up of India Post Payments Bank were 
surrendered at Final Grant (FG) stage. For the year 2016 -17, the Department had sought an 
allocation of Rs. 320.00 crore. However, it has been reduced to Rs. 161.70 crore at the BE stage. 
The Committee have been informed that "Setting up of India Post Payments Bank" is one of the 
schemes that would be affected due to the cut in the BE allocation for 2016 -17. Rs. 300 crore was 
proposed at BE 2016 -17 for the project against which Rs. 150 crore has be en allocated. The 
balance fund of Rs.150 crore would be sought at the first batch of Supplementary Demand for 
Grants for FY 2016 -17. The scheme Financial Services (Savings Bank and Remittances) Scheme 
and the Postal Life Insurance Scheme have been merged i nto the umbrella Financial Services 
Scheme w.e.f. 2016 -17 with a view to having better management, administrative convenience, 
improved monitoring and achieving synergy in implementation. The Committee observe that these 
steps taken by the Department for b ringing improvement in the system are noteworthy and be 
oriented towards better utilization of funds.  
Reply of the Government 
`The utilization of the plan funds is being monitored closely which would ensure that the 
allocated funds are fully utilised.  Th e Cabinet has approved the project on 1/6/2016 for setting up 
of India Post Payments Bank   with a direction to roll out all the 650 branches by September 2017 
against the earlier timeline of March 2022.  The license   for RBI for setting of the Payments B ank 
is to be obtained by March 2017 and the roll out of the project has to commence immediately. The 
time schedule available for roll out of the project is very limited. There are many pre -operational   
expenditure to be incurred at a far more accelerated pace so that necessary build out for the project 

21 
 
can be expedited. Thus additional fund to the extent of Rs 350 crore  has been sought   from 
Ministry of Finance. 
Request for additional funds in first batch of supplementary Demand for Grants  2016 -17 
was placed with Ministry of Finance as detailed below:- 
                                                                                                                                                              (in crores)  
Sl No  Name of the activity Head of Account  Amount 
allocated at 
BE stage 
2016-17 
Additional 
amount  sought  
at 
supplementary 
grant stage  
1 Capital Infusion  into 
Corporate Entity  for 
IPPB  and Grants in aid 
 5201.00.101.06.01.54 & 
3201.03.101.12.01.31/35   
150.00 350.00 
  Total 150.00 350.00 
The additional funds of only Rs. 150 crore, has been granted for  capital infusion by 
Ministry of Finance in First supplementary grant for the financial year 2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28-3/2016/BGT (PA)/26th Report dated  
01-08-2016) 
 
CENTRALIZED BANKING FOR POST OFFICE SAVINGS BANK (POSB)  
(Recommendation Sl.No.6) 
 
The Committee have  been apprised that the Department have a plan for providing Core 
Banking Solution (CBS) in all the Departmental Post Offices in a phased manner. Till 19 March 
2016, 807 Head Post Offices and 19687 Sub Post Offices (total 20494) have been provided with 
CBS facilities. All offices are likely to be covered by the end of April -May 2016. The Committee 
have also been informed that M/s Infosys Ltd., the Financial Services System Integrator (FSI), is 
implementing CBS and installing 1000 ATMs. The Department have s tated that 749 ATMs have 
been installed in Post Office premises and they have applied for inter -operability of India Post 
ATM network with the ATM network of the existing commercial banks from RBI. While hoping 
that all the Departmental Post Offices will b e provided with CBS by the end of April -May 2016, 
the Committee recommend that targeted number of ATMs of the DoP should be installed in a 
time-bound manner. To ensure that the ATMs installed are put to optimum utilization, the 
Committee also desire that t he Department should take up the matter of early clearance for inter -
operability of India Post ATMs network with RBI.  
Reply of the Government 
As on date 22723 post offices have been migrated to CBS and 946 ATMs have been 
installed in Post Office Premises. For optimum utilization of ATMs, Department has already taken 

22 
 
up the matter of inter -operability with RBI. The same has also been approved  by RBI on 
04.07.2016.   
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
DIGITAL INDIA PROGRAMME  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.8) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that under the Digital India Programme, a total of 
150,000 Post Offices are proposed to be converted into multi service centres. The Committee note  
that the India Post Payments Bank will drive the benefits of financial inclusion by bringing a host 
of payments/financial products to suit the needs of different strata of society with special focus on 
the marginalized sections and citizens in rural areas . Some of these benefits are direct benefits 
transfer (DBT) of social security payments of various Ministries; utility bill payments for 
electricity, water, telephone, gas, etc.; facilitating payments of various Central and State 
Government and Municipal dues and fees of Universities/educational institutions; person to person 
remittances, both domestic and cross -border- special focus will be on providing, economical, safe 
and convenient money transfer facilities to migrant labourers, NRIs remitting money to  relatives, 
institutions, etc.; demand Deposits (Current account and Savings Account) - with special focus on 
MSMEs, small entrepreneurs, Village Panchayats & SHGs; distribution of third party financial 
products such as Insurance (health & general), mutual funds and Pension products; and access to 
formal credit products by acting as Banking Correspondent of banks & MFIs. Considering that 
Digital India is a flagship programme of the Government of India, it is the considered view of the 
Committee that the Depa rtment should leave no stone unturned to ensure the success of the 
programme. The Committee would also like to emphasize that the provision of the above services 
to the masses, especially in the rural areas, will considerably help in achieving financial in clusion 
in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
Department of Posts, through its IT Modernization Project, is making all out efforts to 
digitise 1,55,000 Post Offices across the nation. These digitised post offices will play important 
role in financial in clusion of the marginalized population of the country. These digitized post 
offices will also cater to the e -Commerce need of the population who are living in semi urban and 
rural India.  
The IT Modernization Project of the Department of Posts, once  enter s the operational 
phase, shall bridge the Digital Divide of Rural and Urban India and support the “Digital India” 
programme of Government of India. The Project is being monitored at the highest level in the 
Department and it shall be the endeavour of the D epartment to successfully deliver the project 
within the shortest possible time frame. In sync with the digital revolution sweeping the country, 
Payments Bank will deploy the state of the art internet and mobile banking platforms, digital 
wallets and other  pre-paid instruments to ease customers acquisition, enhance customer 
convenience and encourage a gradual shift towards a less cash economy. 

23 
 
Deployment of RICT/RH devices will help the DoP for its enhanced role in disbursement 
of social sector benefits under DBT and citizen centric services. Deployment of RICT/ RH devices 
in 1.29 lakh Rural Branch Post offices is expected to be completed by March-2017.  
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
PREMIUM SERVICES  
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 
The Committee note that due to increasing competition from a large number of players, the 
Department have to focus on improving service delivery, transparency and customer sensitivity and 
introducing a wide range of generic and customized premium products and services. During the year 2015 -
16, an amount of Rs.11.55 crore was allocated at BE which was marginally increased to Rs. 11.85 crore at 
RE and the actual utilization upto February, 2016 was Rs.9.11 crore. Th e Scheme has now been clubbed 
together with Postal Operations from 2016 -17. The Committee also note that for the growth of Speed Post 
in the country, especially in the rural areas, the Heads of Circles have been empowered to expand Speed 
Post booking servi ce in the area under their jurisdiction, keeping in view connectivity, customer‟s 
requirement and market potential. Further, Cash on Delivery (COD) facility has been introduced in Speed 
Post as well as Express and Business Parcel so that rural customers ca n also get the benefits of the e -
Commerce market. As per the CAG report laid in the Parliament in May 2015, Speed Post has been ranked 
as the best express mail delivery service across the country in comparison to all private couriers. The 
Department have collected and remitted more than Rs. 1250 crore till February -2015 since its introduction 
in December 2013 to the e/tele commerce customers. In 2014 -15, 3.44 lakh Speed Post CoD articles were 
booked where as in 2015 -16, till February, 2016, more than 10 lak h SP-CoD articles have been booked. 
During 2014-15, through Speed Post, the Department had earned revenue of Rs.1372.21 crore which was 
8.78 percent more than 2013 -14. The revenue earned under the same item during 2015 -16 upto February, 
2016 was Rs.1423.86 crore which is 11.38 percent more than the amount earned during the corresponding 
period of the previous year. While appreciating the commendable performance of the Speed Post, the 
Committee recommend that continuous efforts must be made by the Department  to remain as the best 
express mail delivery service across the country.  
Reply of the Government 
Premium Services: In order to monitor and improve the quality of service of Speed Post 
articles, especially e -Commerce articles, the Department has recently developed certain Key 
Performance Indicators viz. transmission time  of Book Now Pay Later (BNPL) Speed Post 
articles, booking hub wise delivery status of Speed Post e-Commerce articles booked by various e-
Commerce companies, etc. Besides, for reliable and secured transmission of Speed Post, especially 
e-Commerce articles, dedicated road transport network is being developed for point to point 
transmission of parcels between 35 routes across the country. 
 
The Speed Post revenue during the financial year 2015 -16 stands at Rs.1600.34 crores 
thereby registering a growth of 7% in comparison to financial year 2014 -15. The efficient & 
reliable services rendered to customers have also been appreciated by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India(C&AG) in its report laid in Parliament in May 2015.  
 

24 
 
Department has introduced Cash on Delivery facility in Speed Post in addition to 
Express/Business Parcel w.e.f. 02.12.2013 to cater the needs of the e -commerce customers. In 
order to provide complete supply chain manage ment solution by providing the return management 
solution, Department has also formulated a service namely 'Business Reply Speed Post Articles'. 
Further, apart from the existing web based Track & Trace facility, the Department has also 
introduced Track and  Trace facility through a mobile application. All these efforts will help 
establish the Department as the best express mail delivery service provider across the country.  
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 

25 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
SETTING UP AUTOMATED MAIL PROCESSING CENTERS (AMPCS)  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.4) 
 
The Committee note that the Department are  in the process of setting up Automated Mail 
Processing Centers (AMPCs) at Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. The AMPC at 
Delhi is handling 5.6 lakh articles per day (1.6 lakh Speed Post articles and 4 lakh unregistered 
mail), whereas the AMPC at Ko lkata is handling 2.61 lakh articles per day (57000 Speed Post and 
2.04 lakh unregistered mail). However, the AMPC at Mumbai had stopped functioning since April 
2015 as the sorting machines have over lived their life span. The percentage of Speed Post arti cles 
at AMPCs Delhi and Kolkata vis -a-vis total Speed Post mail handled by the Department is 
approximately 20 percent. The percentage of unregistered mail at AMPCs Delhi and Kolkata vis -
a-vis total unregistered mail handled by the Department is approximately 3.5 percent. The 
Committee understand that the Mumbai International Airport (MIAL) has offered suitable land for 
setting of AMPC and the Department have accepted the same. The process of s igning the 
agreement is in the final stage and will be executed shortly. The Department have also decided to 
set up AMPC at Departmental land at MMS Complex Chennai. Suitable land for setting up of 
AMPC at Bengaluru has been purchased from the Karnataka In dustrial Area Development Board 
(KIADB) near Bengaluru Airport. Similarly, suitable land for setting up of AMPC at Hyderabad 
has been purchased from the Government of Andhra Pradesh near Hyderabad Airport. In spite of 
the progress made in acquiring land fo r setting up of AMPCs in Mumbai, Chennai, Bengaluru and 
Hyderabad, the Committee note that the scheme could not take off within the envisaged time 
frame due to non -finalization of the consultant. The Committee recommend that the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for hiring consultant which is under process should be finalized and issued at the 
earliest. Since the mail profile all over the country has undergone a significant change in the last 
few years, the Committee are of the view that setting up of AMPCs at the se cities will be 
immensely helpful in streaming the mail delivery mechanism.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In sync with the requirement due to the changing  mail profile i.e. declining letter mail and 
a consequent shift towards parcels and e -commerce articles,  the Department has initiated setting 
up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPC) at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and 
Bengaluru to conform to this segment.  The Department is also in the process of finalizing a 
consultant for the Parcel Network Optimiza tion Project (PNOP) for designing an optimum parcel 
network with a combination of facilities for manual to semi -automatic to automatic processing of 
parcels on a pan -India basis. These two activities of PNOP and AMPCs will now be synergized. 
Thus an integrated parcel network will be created, consisting not only of AMPCs at four locations, 
but also semi -automatic sorting centres at other locations generating significant mail volume 
thereby synergizing end to end mail processing activities and creating enhanc ed capacity to handle 

27 
 
the growing e -commerce business. Consequently, the EFC memo for the proposed AMPCs is 
being revised, following which, the RFP for hiring the consultant would be issued 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that one area which holds tremendous opportunity 
for revenue generation for the Department is the fast growing e -Commerce segment. To fulfill the 
needs of the e -Commerce sector and to increase its revenue receipts, the Department have taken 
several measures such as introduction of Cash on Delivery (COD) facility, upgradation of Parcel 
booking and handling facilities, providing technological support which includes seamless data 
integration through Application Programme Interface (API) to  the e -Commerce companies, 
introduction of Nodal/Mechanized delivery in 11 major cities, same/next day delivery along with 
delivery on Public Holiday/Sunday and beyond business hours in 7 cities, establishment of 34 
major routes for fast, secure and reliab le transmission of parcels, fitting of more than 950 Mail 
Vans with GPS devices for online monitoring of mail movement, etc. Several major e -Commerce 
players in the country are being provided delivery services by the Department. The Committee 
note that the re has been considerable increase in revenue generated by Express and Business 
Parcel. During 2014-15, an amount of Rs. 112.47 crore was earned by the Department, witnessing 
a growth of 45 percent over the revenue in 2013-14. Revenue generated from these two services in 
the current financial year, till February 2016, is Rs. 131 crore showing a growth of 65 percent over 
the corresponding period of the previous year. While observing that numerous steps are being 
taken by the Department to capture the e -Commerce market, the Committee emphasize that the 
real challenge is to overcome competition from private courier services which are also actively 
operating in the market. The Department need to find innovative and alternative measures to meet 
this challenge in order to gain larger market share in this segment.  
Reply of the Government 
Department continuously endeavors to leverage its vast network to develop the business, to 
reach out to its customers and to contribute to the growth of the country. Regular review of its 
product offerings and induction of modern technology and equipments to increase the throughput 
are part of its business strategy. Department is currently having more than 900 e -commerce 
customers on board to whom fulfillment services are offered. The customer base is increasing day 
by day and all major e -commerce players l ike Amazon, Flipkart, Snapdeal, Shopclues, Yepme; 
Naaptol etc are associated with Department. In order to meet the capacity requirement to cater to 
the demand of the growing e -commerce market, Department of Posts has established 57 Parcel 
Booking/ Integrated Parcel Centres and 3 more such centres are being established in the current 
financial year. These centres are being established at key locations considering the potential and 
requirements and are not limited only to metro cities. Department has also introduced an SMS alert 
facility once the articles are received in the delivery Post Offices as well as when articles are sent 
out for delivery. These actions are taken as per prevailing market practices to provide value to the 

28 
 
customers as well as to improve the satisfaction level. These actions will help the Department to be 
the market leader in delivery of e-commerce consignments. 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
IT INDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.13) 
The Committee note  that IT Induction and Modernization is an important scheme of the 
Department that got the maximum outlay of Rs. 3046.75 crore amongst all the schemes for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Department have submitted that there was low utilization of fund in 
the years 2012 -13 to 2014 -15 due to the complexity of the project and the delay at the end of 
various authorities/agencies involved in the approval and implementation of projects. The 
Committee have been informed that through effective monitoring of impleme ntation, the project is 
being brought on track and there have been significant achievements under the IT Modernization 
Project in 2015 -16. During the year 2015 -16, an amount of Rs. 276.40 crore was allocated at BE 
which was increased to Rs.331.10 crore at RE and the actual utilization upto February, 2016 was 
Rs.197.11 crore. The Committee note that out of the 8 segments under the scheme, Data Centre & 
DR has already been completed. With regard to the remaining 7 segments, the Department have 
stated that Net work Connectivity will be completed by March, 2016, subject to technical 
feasibility/alternate solutions; Financial Solution will be completed by April, 2016 in technically 
feasible sites; Mail Operation Hardware will be completed by December 2016; and the  remaining 
4 segments, viz. Rural ICT -Application, Core System Integrator, Rural H/W & Connectivity, and 
Change Management will be completed by March 2017. The Committee note that the scheme has 
been subsumed in the Scheme Postal Operations w.e.f. 2016 -17. With regard to the status of 
computerization of Post Offices, the Department have stated that all the 25297 Post Offices are 
computerized as on date. As on 29-03-2016, the number of departmental post offices, RMS offices 
and other administrative offices n etworked under the Single Wide Area Network is 28,296. The 
Committee have been apprised that to ensure completion of the Scheme as per the timeline, 
various committees at different levels such as Steering Committee, Project Coordination 
Committee, Project Implementation Committee, Circle Monitoring Committees/Regional 
Monitoring Committees, etc. have been constituted to review implementation of different 
parameters and monitor progress on a regular basis and to ensure that the project timelines are 
observed and outcomes achieved within the stipulated time. In addition to this, the Secretary 
(Posts) and Member (Tech.), Department of Posts, and other senior officers personally monitor the 
key issues relating to the implementation of the Project. The Committee are of the view that IT 
induction will bring a positive impact, including transparency, accountability, and efficiency in the 
functioning of the Department. Since the remaining 7 segments of the Scheme are to be completed 
by March 2017, the Committee recom mend that necessary measures should be taken to ensure 
timely completion of the project.  
 
 

29 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the committee have been noted. The various Project 
Implementation committees which are in place are vigorously monit oring the Project to ensure 
completion of its implementation by March, 2017. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT  
(Recommendation Sl.No.14) 
 
The Committee note that the Scheme is being implemented to fulfill the Universal Service 
Obligation by providing a congenial environment for customer transaction and also provide a good 
working atmosphere to t he employees. Since DoP have computerized all the Departmental Post 
Offices in the country, it has become all the more necessary to provide these Offices with 
Departmental buildings as a basic pre -requisite for computerization; hence the scheme is being 
continued in the 12th Plan. The Committee note that during the year 2015 -16, an amount of 
Rs.34.87 crore has been allocated at BE which was reduced to Rs.27.15 crore at RE and the actual 
utilization upto February, 2016 was only 17.26 crore. Out of the 10 sub -schemes under it, the 
Committee observe poor physical achievements under 5 sub -schemes, viz. construction of Post 
Offices, construction of boundary walls, construction of ATM Rooms, installation of Solar Power 
Packs, and construction of Rain Water Harvest ing Structures. The Committee also note that 1763 
vacant plots of land are presently available with the Department, with Karnataka having 351 
vacant plots, followed by Andhra Pradesh with 220, Rajasthan with 162, and Tamil Nadu with 
149. The Committee have  been informed that 285 plots are situated at prime locations. The 
Department have further informed that the average size of the vacant plots is 1390.55 sq. mts and 
the average size of the plot is viable for construction of Post Office building/Staff Quart ers. The 
Committee note that the proposal to undertake commercial utilization of land under Public Private 
Partnership could not be implemented since most of the vacant plots of land situated on prime 
locations were originally allotted for construction of Post Office buildings and Staff Quarters at 
Government rates and subsidized rates by State Governments, Trust and Local Bodies for Postal 
Operations; that being so, these vacant plots cannot be used for any other purpose as per allotment 
terms and conditio ns or else allotment will get cancelled. The Committee further note that 
impediments are being faced in the construction of Post Office buildings/Staff Quarters at the 
vacant plots owned by the Department since land title is not readily available, in the a bsence of 
which municipal approval gets delayed, while some the plots are located in inaccessible areas. 209 
vacant plots are also stated to be under encroachment. In this regard, necessary instructions have 
already been issued to all the Heads of Postal C ircles that eviction of unauthorized personnel from 
the encroached land of the Department may be done after seeking assistance of the law enforcing 
agencies for all the plots of the Department of Posts. Boundary walls and barbed wire fencing on 

30 
 
important/sensitive plots are being constructed, subject to availability of Plan funds. The 
Committee express dissatisfaction over the performance of the Department as far as activities 
under real estate management is concerned. It needs to be realized that DoP now a re gradually 
assuming centrestage after being part of delivery platform for „Digital India‟ Programme and being 
chosen to operate Payments Bank, apart from witnessing transformation with IT induction and 
modernization. Therefore, it is essential that conge nial environment and better working 
atmosphere is provided for which construction of Post Office buildings/Staff Quarters are to be 
accorded priority. The Committee recommend that the Department should address the 
impediments cited in this regard and come up with a plan for construction of buildings/Staff 
Quarters. The Committee expect better performance on this front and would like to be apprised of 
steps taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee has noted that the physical achievement in activities like Construction of 
Post Office, Construction of boundary walls, Construction of ATM rooms, Installation of Solar 
Power Pack and Construction of Rain water harvesting structure has been p oor. In this context, it 
is stated that though an amount of Rs. 20.46 crores was allotted in BE in 2015 -16 with target of 
Construction of 12 Post Office buildings, an amount of Rs. 14.86 crores was available at RE stage 
with target of 9 Post Office buildin gs. During the year 2015 -16, a total of 8 PO building projects 
were completed in the funds available. Apart from this, the targets for Construction of boundary 
wall, Solar Power Packs and Rain water harvesting have been completed. As far as construction of  
ATM rooms was concerned, no fund was allotted in BE. However, the spillover work was 
completed and 105 ATM rooms were constructed with the available funds. Therefore, in view of 
the above, the physical achievement in various activities under Plan Scheme E states Management 
for the year 2015 -16 has not been poor as observed by the Committee. It is further noted that 
100% of the funds allotted in FG 2015-16 i.e. Rs. 25.55 crores has been utilized. 
 
In 2030 perspective plan projected to NITI Aayog, already construction of post offices/staff 
quarters on all the existing vacant plots of land has been taken up. Whereever, the approval of a 
project appears to be getting delayed, the project for construction of temporary structures will be 
taken up. Further, efforts  would be made to outsource the construction of the PO buildings to 
CPWD and/or other organizations who are already carrying out construction activities. This will 
help in covering more land under construction and will therefore, help in avoiding encroachm ent 
issues. In the meantime, the boundary walls are proposed to be constructed on the vacant plots to 
save against encroachment. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
POST BANK OF INDIA 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7) 
 
The Committee find that that Reserve Bank of India had granted „in principle‟ approval for 
setting up of the India Post Payments Bank(IPPB) on 7th September 2015 with a timeline of 18 
months to complete all formalities and apply for license to RBI, i.e. by  6th March 2017. The 
proposal has also been approved at the Public Investment Board (PIB) in their meeting held on 
19th January, 2016. Now, approval of the CCEA for setting up the India Post Payments Bank 
under the Department of Posts has to be obtained. A fter approval from CCEA, the entire process 
of obtaining the initial set of approvals from RBI/RoC would commence, followed by selection of 
top management, recruitment of staff, etc., before IPPB can apply for formal license from RBI 
within the prescribed deadline. A draft Cabinet Note has been forwarded to PMO on 18th March 
2016. It is anticipated that the Cabinet approval is likely to be obtained in early April 2016. All 
efforts are being made by the Department to complete all formalities and approach the  RBI for 
grant of license within the prescribed deadline. The Committee note that IPPB will set up up to 
650 branches co-located with Head/ sub -post offices at the District level. The existing network of 
Head, sub and branch post offices under each Distric t will be linked to the corresponding IPPB 
branch and used as access points (front offices) of the IPPB. The Committee have been informed 
that Payments Banks are differentiated banks, in so much as, unlike the traditional universal banks, 
they are not allowed to undertake credit directly; also they are mandated to work towards financial 
inclusion with special focus in rural areas and among the under -banked segments. The concept of 
payments bank as a differentiated bank is unique to India. The Department have stated that in view 
of the local, loyal and experienced human resources of the post office in delivering its services to 
the target clientele, it is likely to be best placed vis -a-vis its competitors in achieving real financial 
inclusion. Apart from faci ng challenges from other payments banks, universal banks and small 
finance banks, as well as from prepaid instrument (PPI) operators and companies engaged in 
domestic and international remittance business, major challenges that the IPPB will face will be i n 
adopting latest technology, ensuring consistent service quality over the entire network of 1.55 lakh 
post offices and earning enough revenue to be self -sustaining and contribute to revenue generation 
for DoP. The Committee note that the IPPB will address  the lack of access to basic financial 
services for citizens in rural and under -served areas, thus reaching out to customers in hitherto un -
remunerative areas. While acknowledging that this is a landmark measure, the Committee note that 
the Department are not sure whether the present scope of activities will generate sufficient revenue 
to sustain a national network of the size of the DoP – IPPB combine. Observing that this poses an 
enormous challenge in terms of achieving technological induction, selection of top management, 
recruitment of staff, etc., the Committee feel that strenuous efforts will have to be made by the 
Department before operationalising the IPPB. The Committee may be apprised of further progress 
made in this direction.  
 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
Payments Bank will target the hitherto financially excluded population in rural and 
underserved areas and innovate on technology and service delivery models to make access to 
financial services easy for the target clientele. Thus the activities of the Payments Banks would be 
geared towards very low margin products and the the only way for them to be viable would be to 
achieve high volumes of transactions while keeping operational costs to the minimum. In rural 
areas and pockets of urban India whe re, financially excluded population, comprising mostly of 
migrant labourers and urban poor reside, there is at present, little comfort or trust in using digital 
financial products and almost all financial transactions are in cash. Thus the IPPB‟s business 
model of offering both cash and cashless products and facilitating the same through accounts in the 
neighboring post office and through assisted digital transactions at door step through the trusted 
postmen is likely to be most successful in bringing first  time users into the formal financial 
services and catalyse the change from a predominantly cash to a less cash economy.   
Cabinet has approved the proposal of Setting up of India Post Payments Bank on 
01.06.2016. Process of incorporation of entity and rec ruitment of top management has been 
initiated. Request for Proposal (RFP) for selection of System Integrator for Setting up of India Post 
Payments Bank has been issued on 02.07.2016. All efforts are being made to complete all 
regulatory requirements before  6th March 2017 and approach RBI for grant of formal banking 
license. 
 (Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
RURAL BUSINESS AND ACCESS TO POSTAL NETWORK 
(Recommendation Sl.No.9) 
 
The Committee note that the scheme is being implemented by the Department with the 
objective to increase access to the postal network, keeping in view the Universal Service 
Obligation, and to bring postal facilities within the reach of every citizen of the  country. During 
the year 2015 -16, an amount of Rs.24.03 crore was allocated at BE which was increased to 
Rs.25.01 crore at RE and the actual utilization upto February, 2016 was Rs.18.79 crore. The 
Committee note that Franchise Scheme is being implemented as one of the activities/sub -schemes 
under the Scheme with the objective to increase access to the postal facilities in urban and semi -
urban areas where there is need and justification for opening of Post Offices but the Department is 
not in a position to open new Post Offices due to various reasons. The performance of Franchise 
Outlets (FOs) during the year 2015 -16 has indicated that there has been an increase in their 
performance under items like Stamps/Stationery sold, Speed Post Articles, and Other Reta ils. 
However, its performance has declined under items like Registered Post Articles and Money 
Orders. The Committee also note that there is a proposal for opening 1,050 new Franchise Outlets 
during the 12th Plan. The number of FOs has gradually increased from 1749 in 2012-13 to 1790 in 
2013-14; there were 2066 FOs operating during 2014 -15. Another ambitious plan launched in 
September, 1995 with the objective to provide basic postal facilities to Gram Panchayat 
Headquarters without Post Offices is the Panch ayat Sanchar Sewa Yojana (PSSY). This scheme is 
being implemented by the Gram Panchayats through agents appointed by them where opening of 

33 
 
post office is justified but it cannot be opened for some reason. During the year 2014 -15, there 
were 2658 PSSKs in the country as against 2795 PSSKs in 2013 -14. These 2658 PSSKs have sold 
stamps/stationery worth Rs.734.185 lakh and booked 10,14,860 Registered Post articles during 
2014-15. The Committee have been informed that this Scheme has not been effective, with mos t 
of the PSSKs showing nil or negligible transactions. The Committee are of the view that proper 
implementation of FOs and PSSKs can help the DoP in effectively meeting the requirement for 
opening more Post Offices in urban and rural areas. The Committee f eel that the schemes need to 
be made more attractive. The Committee hope that the merger of the Scheme into the Postal 
Operations Scheme (w.e.f 2016 -17) will improve efficiency, leading to better planning and 
implementation of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
Decline in the performance of the Franchisee Outlets(FOs) under items like Registered post 
and Money orders, may be attributed to the rising popularity of Speed post as an available 
substitute for time bound and address specific delivery with al most comparable rates. As far as 
money orders are concerned with the option of bank ATMs and India Post ATMs, there is an 
overall decline in availing of the MO facility by public. 
A revised scheme on PSSKs is under consideration with proposed expansion of the range 
of services, extension of the area of activity and enhanced commission to the agents. These revised 
features will make the scheme more attractive  and beneficial. 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.11) 
 
One item under Premium Service which has not been able to witness growth like Speed 
Post during the last three years is the Logistics Post service of the Department. The status of 
revenue generated under Logistics Post indicated that an amount of Rs.15.25 crore was earned 
during the year 2013 -14 which increased to Rs.24.43 crore in 2014 -15 and during 2015 -16 upto 
February 2016, an amount of Rs.13.21 crore has been earned by the Department. The Committee 
note that the Registrar General of India, Pawan Hans H elicopters Limited, State Government Text 
Books Corporations, etc. are the major customers availing Logistics Post services of the 
Department. In order to expand the coverage of Logistics Post services and generate more revenue, 
the Department have signed a „Memorandum of Understanding‟ with Air India to provide air 
transmission facility to Logistics Post consignments. This facility is available between 15 stations. 
Transporters have been empanelled and Circles have been empowered to make local arrangements  
also, if required. The Committee are of the view that there exists tremendous opportunity for 
growth of Logistics in the country and hence efforts must be made to make this brand more visible 
and accessible to the citizens. The Committee, therefore, recom mend to the Department to strive 
ceaselessly to tap the market potential of Logistics post in the country.  
 
 

34 
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to exploit  huge potential for growth in Logistics Post service ,  Department is 
making continuous efforts and appr oaching potential customers to get the logistics post business 
but efforts till now at  some postal regions have shown increase in business while others are yet to 
realize the business potential. Service features are being reviewed and action is being taken to 
spread awareness and visibility for the product. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Depa rtment of Posts No.F.28 -3/2016/BGT (PA)/26 th Report dated 
01-08-2016) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
15 December, 2016  Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
  

35 
 
Annexure-I  
 
 MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2016-17) HELD ON 15TH DECEMBER, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th December, 2016, from 1 515 hours                     
to 1600 hours in Committee Room ‘ B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Virender Kashyap 
6. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
9. Shri Abhishek Singh 
10. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha   
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Shri Suresh Gopi 
14. Smt. Kahkashan Perween 
15. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R. S. Kambo    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Under Secretary 
 
 

36 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following four  Draft Action Taken 
Reports:-  
I. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx ……..xxx….;  
II. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxx…;  
III. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxx……xxxxx ……..xxx..; and  
IV. Action Taken Report on the Twenty-sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants  (2016-17)’     
of the Department of Posts. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Reports and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
___________________________________________________________________________  
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
  

37 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and  10   
 Total 7 
 Percentage 50.00 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  4, 12, 13 and 14  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 28.57 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 Para Nos.:-  7, 9 and 11   
 Total 03 
 Percentage    21.43 
 
 