 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
20 


 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER 
I 
Report……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER 
II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
11 
CHAPTER 
III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………..… 
 
25 
CHAPTER 
IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
26 
CHAPTER 
V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
29 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the committee held on 18th December, 
2015 
 
34 
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in their Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)……………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2015-16)   
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
6. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
7. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
8. Shri P. Karunakaran  
9. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
11. Shrimati Hema Malini  
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
13. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharatiben Dhirubhai  Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Javed Akhtar  
23. Shri Salim Ansari  
24. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan  
25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
26. Shri Meghraj Jain  
27. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
28. Shri Derek O’Brien  
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
30. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
31. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri J. M. Baisakh - Director 
3.  Shri Abhishek Sharma - Executive Assistant 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2015 -16) having been 
authorized by the Committee, do present the Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained  in their Fifth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015 -16)’ of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       
24th April, 2015. The Department of Posts furnished their Action Taken Notes contained on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report on 22nd July, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
18th December, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
     New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
     18 December,2015 Chairperson, 
     27 Agrahayana, 1937(Saka)         Standing Committee on  
Information Technology. 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observation s/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants (2015 -16)‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on the 24th April, 2015. 
It contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as under:- 
 
i. Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 14 
 
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government 
Rec. Sl. No.: Nil 
 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
Rec. Sl. No.: 2 
 
iv. Observation/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the Government are 
interim in nature 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 3, 5, 6 and 10 
 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter -I and final action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations. 
 
A. Gross Expenditure and Revenue Receipts 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
  
  “The Committee note that in the year 2014 -15, gross expenditure of the 
Department of Posts at RE Stage was Rs.18489.85 crore as against Rs. 16464.05 
crore during the year  2013-14.  The budget estimate of gross expenditure for the 
year 2015 -16 is Rs. 19494. 26 crore. According to the Department, the net 
expenditure during the year 2014-15 (RE)   increased by 10.13% in comparison  
to 2013 -14 and the net expenditure in 2015 -16 (BE) is estimated to be around 
5.57% higher than the projection of RE in the year     2014-15. The corresponding 
revenue receipts have increased from Rs. 9787.52 crore in 2013 -14 to                 
Rs. 11,327.92 crore in 2014 -15 at RE stage. The budget estimate for the year 
2015-16 stands at Rs. 12,036.87 crore. A close look at the financia l performance 
for the past five years indicates that the Department have been able to sustain 
growth in revenue year after  year.  This is noted to be an encouraging trend.  
What is noteworthy is the fact that the percentage growth in revenue has 
surpassed the percentage growth in expenditure.  During FY 2013 -14, gross 
expenditure grew by 8.6% while revenue has shown an increase by 14.54%.  In 
respect of revenue deficit, while the budget estimate for 2014 -15 was Rs.7194.46 
crore, it came down to Rs.6517.74 crore at RE Stage.  The budget  estimate for 
the year 2015-16 is Rs.6802.05 crore.  The Committee appreciate the fact  that 
despite annual increase in revenue expenditure, the Department have been able to 
keep the revenue deficit under check.  The Committee also note that during the 
last few years, services like Speed Post and Business Post have shown increase in 
revenue receipts. Further, the Department are focusing on areas like Post Office 
Savings Bank  (POSB), parcel business from e -Commerce and expansion of PLI 
to improve their revenue generation. The Committee desire that there is a need to 
follow a twin -pronged approach of aiming for reduction in revenue expenditure 
together with measures to increase the revenue receipts of the Department.” 
 

3 
 
7. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 “Revenue from PLI & RPLI business is growing steadily.  Revenue grew by 
13.39 % in 2014-15 over 2013-14. 
 Revenue earned on Financial Services is growing every year. Kisan Vikas Patras 
have  been reintroduced in November 2014 and a new scheme called Sukanya 
Samriddhi  Account (SSA) has been launched in January 2015. During the 
year 2014-15 Revenue Receipts under SBCC has increased 15.11% over the last 
year. There has been an increase in Revenue Receipts of Post Office Savings 
Bank (POSB) leading to significant  upward revision in Actual Receipts during 
the year 2015-16.    
 The total revenue receipt under Premium Product Services has also  increased 
from Rs. 2723.55 Crores in 2013 -14 to Rs . 2828.68 Crores in 2014 -15.  During 
the last few years services like Speed Post and Business Post have recorded 
increase in revenue receipts. The Department is focusing on areas like Parcel 
Business from e-Commerce. 
 The initiatives taken in Parcel & Logistic  have resulted in growth of 3 7% under 
Business/Express Parcel. Similarly, revenue under Logistic  Post in Year 2014 -15 
has hown a growth of 60.85% over year 2013-14. 
 Department of Posts has also tied u p under Retail Post for sale of third party 
products. In  the recent past, Department of Posts has undertaken number of 
new tie -ups including sale of Mobiles and Watches etc . and has registered a 
business growth of nearly 20%. Thus, the Department is striv ing to focus on 
revenue centric areas for achieving self sustenance.” 
  
8. While appreciating the fact that despite  annual increase in revenue expenditure, the 
Department have been able to keep the revenue deficit under check, the Committee , in 
their Original Report, had recommended that there is a need to follow a tw o-pronged 
approach of aiming for reduction in revenue expenditu re together with measures to 
increase the revenue receipts of the Department.  The Department of Posts, in their Action 
Taken Note, have stated that they have been actively working towards maximizing revenue 
generation through various initiatives such as focus on Parcel business from e -Commerce, 
insurance premium from PLI and RPLI, R evenue through financial services such as Kisan 
Vikas Patras, Sukanya Samriddhi Accounts (SSA) and Post Office Savings Bank (POSB), 
increase in Revenue receipts from Premium Services such as Speed Post and Business Post, 
new initiatives in Parcel and logis tics and tie -ups under Retail Post , including sale of 
Mobiles, Watches, etc. While lauding these initiatives taken by the Department of Posts, the 

4 
 
Committee feel that since there is limited scope in reducing the revenue expenditure , the 
need for improving the revenue receipts of the Department cannot  be over -emphasized. 
Since focus on revenue generation is inevitable to reduce the revenue deficit, the Committee 
feel that a holistic approach involving identification of emerging areas for revenue 
generation, restructuring/rationalization of existing services and timely execution of Plan 
schemes such as IT Induction and Modernization Project are the need of the hour to 
improve the financial health of the Department and red uce its revenue deficit/reliance on 
budgetary support. 
 
B. IT Induction and Modernization - Underutilization of funds 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “IT Induction and Modernization is an important scheme of the Department with 
a comprehensive IT roadmap to develop network architecture, integrated software 
and effective data management, including establishment of National Data 
Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery Centre. There are eight segments/activities under 
the IT  Induction and Modernization Project which include Data Center Facility 
(DCF), Network Integrator (NI), Financial Services Integrator (FSI), Core System 
Integrator (CSI), Change Management (CM),  Rural Hardware (RH), Rural 
System Integrator (RSI) and Mail Operation Hardware (MOH). Under this 
scheme, in the year 2014-15,  Rs. 506.39 crore was allocated at BE stage which 
was reduced to Rs. 86.80 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization (upto 
February 2015) was Rs. 67.44 crore which is just 13.32 percent of the budget 
estimate. The reasons attributed to underutilization of funds relate to complex 
interdependencies amongst the eight streams of the Project requiring the 
finalization of all the RFPs in a synchronized manner, time  consuming nature of 
public procurement processes in a Government set -up, refusal of vendors to 
execute the project in two cases leading to  re-tendering and requirement of 
statutory clearances from bodies like  the Pollution Control Board and the Chief 
Controller of Explosives. The Committee have been informed that activities under 
the eight designated streams of the project are at mature stages of finalization. As 
per revised timelines, three components are to be implemented during 2015, other 
three by 2016 and the remaining two components will be executed by March, 
2017.   
 The Committee are concerned to note that various procedural delays have been 
affecting the utilization of funds in an all encompassing  scheme of the 
Department, which is likely to improve its functioning across multiple areas. The 
Committee recommend that efforts to be made to see that the revised timelines set 
for execution of core  components of the scheme are strictly complied with so to 

5 
 
obviate any furt her spill over of the project.  Expeditious 
implementation/execution of the scheme will also enable the Department to 
provide improved products and services, meet increasing competition and cater to 
rising customer expectations. The Committee will like to b e informed about the 
progress made in implementation of this project.”  
10. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
 “IT Modernization Project is in the implementation stage. The segment -wise 
progress  is as under. 
PRESENT STATUS OF THE PROJECT 
             Name of segment         Status as on 29-06-15 
Network Integrator 
(NI):- 
Provisioning of Wide Area 
Network (WAN) for 
connecting the ~ 28000 
Post offices & other admin 
offices with the Data 
Center. 
Implementation started on 28 -09-12. So far 
27528 locations have been networked on a 
single Wide Area Net work (WAN) and 
connected Data Centre. 
Mail Operations 
Hardware (MOH):- 
Providing postman 
handheld devices & 
Hardware for Mail offices 
& Transit Mail Offices 
RFP process comp leted. The successful 
bidder M/s HCL Info systems Ltd expressed 
inability to sign the contract. LoI annulled on 
26-09-14 and M/s HCL Info system has been 
blacklisted for 5 years on 25 -11-14. Action of 
blacklisting the firm which was stayed on 10 -
12-14 has now been set aside on 21 -04-15 by 
Delhi High Court. Action is taken for 
procurement of Mail Operations Hardware 
through DGS&D RC. 
Financial Services 
Integrator (FSI):- 
Core Banking Solutions for 
Post Office Savings Bank ( 
POSB), ATM facility and 
Core Insurance Solution  
Postal Life Insurance 
(Postal Life Insurance, 
Rural Postal Life Insurance 
(PLI & RPLI) 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. 
Pilot Roll out of Core Banking (CBS) and 
Life Insurance (PLI) - Completed at 124 and 
220 Post Offices. 
Totally, so far 2590 POs for CBS and 13310 
Post offices for CIS (PLI) have been 
migrated. ATM Services - installed and 
functioning at 115 Post Offices.  
Core System Integrator 
(CSI):- 
Solutions relating to Mails, 
Postal counters, 
Remittances, HR, F&A, 
Customer Inter action etc. 
Implementation started on 15 -04-13. 
Installation and commissioning of Central 
Hardware completed.  Detail Design 
Documents has been completed.  Wave 2 & 3 
UAT cycle II (for HR, MO and F & A 
completed on 06 -12-14. Wave 2 & 3 UAT 

6 
 
and Common 
Infrastructure 
cycle III of Phase I started on 27 -04-15. UAT 
at Hyderabad started on 22 -06-15. Wave 1 
Roll out is in progress. 
Rural ICT RSI (RICT 
RSI):- 
Solution for integrating & 
managing the mobile 
applications and mobile 
devices 
RFP process completed and w ork awarded. 
Contract signed on 28 -02-13. Implementation 
phase has been started on 05-05-15. 
Rural ICT Hardware 
(RICT RH):-  
Providing Connectivity and 
Hardware to all Branch 
Offices ( ~ 1,30,000 Rural 
Post  Offices) 
Vendor has been finalized, contract si gned on 
24-11-2014 and implementation phase has 
been started. Project has been kicked off on 
19-06-15. 
Data Centre Facilities 
(DCF):- 
Hosting the central servers 
at Primary Data Center at 
Navi Mumbai & 
Management of Disaster 
Recovery Center, (DRC) 
Mysore. 
Primary Data Centre  at Navi Mumbai has 
been operational  from 03.04.2013 and 
Disaster  Recovery Centre  at Mysore has 
been  operational  from  15-05-15 
Change Management  
(CM):- 
Change Management for 
all employees and 
imparting training. 
Implementation started on 15 -10-12. Training 
activities are in progress. It is ongoing 
exercise with the implementation of various 
other streams of the Project.   
 
11.  The Committee had observed that IT Induction and Modernization is an important 
scheme of the Department with a comprehensive IT roadmap to develop network 
architecture, integrated software and effective data management, including 
establishment of National Data Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery Centre. Under this 
scheme, in the year 2014 -15, Rs. 506.39 crore was allocated at BE stage which was 
reduced to Rs. 86.80 crore at RE stage ; the actual utilization (upto February 2015) was 
Rs. 67.44 crore which is just 13.32 percent of the budget estimate. The reasons 
attributed to underutilization of funds relate d to complex interdependencies amongst 
the eight streams of the Project requiring the finalization of all the RFPs in a 
synchronized manner, time consuming natu re of public procurement processes in a 
Government set-up, and refusal of vendors to execute the project in two cases leading to 
re-tendering and requirement of statutory clearances from bodies like the Pollution 

7 
 
Control Board and the Chief Controller of E xplosives. The Committee had 
recommended that efforts be made to see that the revised timelines set for execution of 
core components of the scheme are strictly complied with so as to obviate any further 
spill-over of the Project. The Department, in their A ction Taken Note, have furnished 
segment-wise present status of the project . The Committee, while observing that IT 
Induction and Modernization is an all encompassing Scheme that will improve the 
performance and efficiency of the Department across multiple functional areas, are of 
the firm opinion that any delay in the implementation of this Scheme is likely to have a 
cascading effect on other areas as well. The Committee, therefore,  reiterate that an 
effective mechanism may be evolved to ensure adherence to the revised timelines set for 
execution of core components of the Scheme without any further delay so that the 
Department can seamlessly undergo transition from a physical network  to a technology 
driven digital network which will enable it to provide improved products and services , 
while making optimum utilization of available resources to cater to rising customer 
expectations. 
 
C. Task Force on Leveraging Post Office Network 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the Department of Posts constituted a task force on 
 21.08.2014 to study and make recommendations regarding leveraging the post 
 office network in India. A total of 181 recommendations were made by the 
 task force. The Department  have informed that a group of Senior Officers has 
 been constituted to examine each recommendation of the Task Force, to obtain 
 relevant inputs from various stakeholders, including Service Unions, etc.  and to 
 chalk out a strategy for implementing specific  recommendations of the Task 
 Force along with timelines. 
 The Committee have been further informed that the recommendations of the Task 
 Force  inter-alia emphasized on Integrated Banking Solution to provide online 
 access to the  account, installation of Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) 
 throughout the country, issuance of Debit Cards and Cheque Books to the 
 account holders, provision of Handheld devic es to provide last mile delivery 
 of services to the remotest possible location in the  country, Internet based access 
 to PLI and RPLI, Centralized IT System for Mail  Operations enabling real time 
 tracking of mail, parcels and other services, Centralized Human Resource 
 Management System and Additional Retail & Agency Services. 

8 
 
The Committee have all along been urging the Department to take suitable steps 
for generation of additional business and au gmentation of revenue receipts.  They 
desire that the Government should examine the recommendations of the Task 
Force in this regard and formulate concrete strategy for the implementation of 
those recommendations in a time -bound manner so as to improve the  financial 
health of the Department of Posts and reduce revenue deficit/reliance on 
budgetary support.” 
13. The Department of Posts, in the action taken note, have stated as under:- 
  “With the approval of Hon‟ble Minister of Communications and IT, a Group of 
 Senior Officers was constituted in the Department to examine each 
 recommendation of the Task Force to obtain relevant inputs from the Divisions 
 concerned within the Postal Directorate, Field Units as well as Staff Unions and 
 Officers‟ Union; and to cha lk out a strategy for implementing specific 
 recommendation of the Task Force along with timelines, in synergy with the other 
 two reports of Internal Task Forces set up to „Scale up PLI Business‟ and 
 „Capturing e-Commerce Market‟. 
  Based on the inputs r eceived from the Group of Senior Officers ATR was 
 submitted to PMO which includes the observations of the Department of Posts on 
 individual (para wise) recommendations of the Task Force.  
  The Task Force has envisaged new role for the Department in the realm of 
 banking, insurance and e -commerce. As such, in order to generate additional 
 business and augment revenue receipt through Parcel and e -Commerce 
 Services, the Department has already entered into partnerships with Amazon, 
 Flipkart, Shopclues, Snapdeal and e- Bay. Further, the Department has plans to 
 develop and operationalise a business and  marketing strategy for the e -
 commerce market by on -boarding a Consultant Shortly and to augm ent tie -
 ups with major e -commerce and tele -commerce players for delivery across 
 the country. On most of the points covered under this, time -lines for 
 implementation have been drawn up.  
  The recommendation of the Task Force to examine the best practice s 
 being followed in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for replication in other States is 
 in alignment with the activities being pursued by the Department of Posts. 
 MNREGS wage payment using Aadhar enabled hand held devices is being done 
 through about 2700 R ural Post Offices in Jharkhand, in collaboration with Govt. 
 of Jharkhand. Various Government services, such as address verification, bill 
 payment and sale of application forms, are already being provided through Post 
 Offices in various Postal Circles ac ross the country and additional pilot projects 
 are being taken up. However, all Postal Circles have been addressed to replicate 
 models of A.P. & Telangana. Further, the Department has also addressed all the 
 Union Ministries/ Departments, State Governments and PSU‟s asking them to 
 utilize the Postal network. Responses have been received from Election 
 Commission of India, MEA, National Skill Development Agency, Labour 
 Commission of Gujarat and ICAR. Initial discussions have been initiated with 
 them to utilize the network of Post Offices. 

9 
 
  Similarly, further action on model of establishing the Post Bank of India 
 would depend upon the outcome of RBI decision on application seeking license 
 submitted by  DoP o n 30.01.2015.  It is also worth mentioning that a reference 
 about the proposal of DoP to set up Payments Bank has been made by Hon‟ble 
 Finance Minister in his Budget Speech on 28.2.2015. Based on the budget 
 announcement the nodal division has initiated process of getting approvals and 
 inputs from all other stakeholders.  
  Further, the ongoing IT Project will enable better identification/monitoring 
 of revenue centers and facilitate efficient functioning in a market oriented 
 environment.   Any necessar y structural re -engineering would be ensured by the 
 Department, based on the advanced decision support system that would become 
 available.  
  A time bound action plan on the recommendations of the Task Force is 
 being formulated by the Department. 
 
14. The Committee had noted that the Department of Posts  had constituted a Task 
Force on 21.08.2014 to study and make recommendations regarding leveraging the post 
office network in India. A total of 181 recommendations were made by the Task Force. The 
Department informed that a group of Senior Officers had been constituted to examine each 
recommendation of the Task Force  to obtain relevant inputs from various stakeholders, 
including Service Unions, etc. , and to chalk out a strategy for implementing spec ific 
recommendations of the Task Force along with timelines.  The Committee ha d all along 
been urging the Department to take appropriate steps regarding generation of additional 
business and augmentation of revenue receipts and formulate concrete strategy for the 
implementation of the Task Force  recommendations in a time -bound manner so as to 
improve their financial health and reduce revenue deficit/reliance on budgetary support.  
The Department, in their Action Taken Note, ha ve stated that with the approval of the 
Hon’ble Minister of Communications and IT, a Group of Senior Officers was constituted in 
the Department to examine each recommendation of the Task Force to obtain relevant 
inputs from various stakeholders in synergy with the other two reports of the Internal Task 
Forces set up to ‘Scale up PLI Business’ and ‘Capturing e -Commerce Market’. Based on 
the inputs received from the Group of Senior Officers , an ATR was submitted to PMO 
which includes the observations of the Department of Posts on individual recommendations 
of the Task Force.  The Task Force has envisaged  a new role for the Department in the 
realm of banking, insurance and e -commerce. The Department ha ve already entered into 
partnerships with various online retailers and plan to develop and operationalise a business 

10 
 
and marketing strategy for the e -commerce market by engaging a Consultant shortly and 
augment tie-ups with major e-commerce and tele-commerce players for delivery across the 
country. On most of the points covered under this, time-lines for implementation have been 
drawn up. The recommendation of the Task Force to examine the best practices being 
followed in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for replication in other States is in alignment 
with the activiti es being pursued by the Department of Posts. Further, the ongoing IT 
Project will enable better identification/monitoring of revenue centers and facilitate 
efficient functioning in a market oriented environment. A time -bound action plan on the 
recommendations of the Task Force is being formulated by the Department.  The 
Committee feel that w ith the emergence of new communication technologies, the 
Department of Posts are witnessing a paradigm shift in its conventional role  of delivery of 
mails. Keeping this in mind, the recommendations of the Task Force on leveraging the Post 
Office network in India are aimed at keeping the Department of Posts in sync  with the 
changing times and transform it into a robust technology-driven organization with a 
customer-centric approach. As such, the Committee feel that it is highly imperative that the 
recommendations of the Task Force are implemented expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Gross Expenditure and Revenue Receipts 
 The Committee note that in the year 2014 -15, gross expenditure of the Department of 
Posts at RE Stage was Rs.18489.85 crore as against Rs.  16464.05 crore during the year 2013-14.  
The budget estimate of gross expenditure for the year 2015 -16 is Rs. 19494.26 crore. According 
to the Department, the net expenditure during the year 2014 -15 (RE)  increased by 10.13% in 
comparison  to 2013 -14 and the net expenditure in 2015 -16 (BE) is estimated to be around 
5.57% higher than the projection of RE in the year 2014-15.  The corresponding revenue receipts 
have increased from Rs. 9787.52 crore in 2013-14 to Rs. 11,327.92 crore in 2014-15 at RE stage. 
The budget estimate for the year 2015 -16 stands at Rs. 12,036.87 crore. A close look at the 
financial performance for the past five years indicates that the Department have been able to 
sustain growth in revenue year after year.  This is noted to be an encouraging trend.  What is 
noteworthy is the fact that the percentage growth in revenue has surpassed the percentage growth 
in expenditure. During FY 2013 -14, gross expenditure grew by 8.6% while revenue has shown 
an increase by 14.54%.  In respect of revenue deficit, while the budget estimate for 2014 -5 was 
Rs.7194.46 crore, it  came down to Rs.6517.74 crore at RE Stage.  The budget estimate for the 
year 2015 -16 is Rs.6802.05 crore.  The Committee appreciate the fact that despite annual 
increase in revenue expenditure, the Department have been able to keep the revenue deficit under 
check.  The Committee also note that during the last few years, services like Speed Post and 
Business Post have shown increase in revenue receipts. Further, the Department are focusing on 
areas like Post Office Savings Bank (POSB), parcel business from e-Commerce and expansion 
of PLI to improve their revenue generation. The Committee desire that there is a need to follow a 
twin-pronged approach of aiming for reduction in revenue expenditure together with measures to 
increase the revenue receipts of the Department.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Revenue from PLI & RPLI business is growing steadily.  Revenue grew by 13.39 % in 
2014-15 over 2013-14. 

12 
 
 Revenue earned on Financial Services is growing every year. Kisan Vikas Patras have 
been reintroduced in November 2014 and a new scheme called Sukanya Samriddhi  Account 
(SSA) has been launched in January 2015. During the year 2014 -15 Revenue Receipts under 
SBCC has increased 15.11% over the last year. There has been an increase in Revenue Receipts 
of Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) leading to significant upward revision in Actual Receipts 
during the year 2015-16.    
 The total revenue receipt under Premium Product Services has also increased  from       
Rs. 2723.55 Crores in 2013 -14 to Rs . 2828.68 Crores in 2014 -15.  During the last few years 
services like Speed Post and Business Post have recorded increase in revenue receipts. The 
Department is focusing on areas like Parcel Business from e-Commerce. 
 The initiat ives taken in Parcel & Logistic  have resulted in growth of 3 7% under 
Business/Express Parcel. Similarly, revenue under Logistic  Post in Year 2014 -15 has shown a 
growth of 60.85% over year 2013-14. 
 Department of Posts has also tied up u nder Retail Post for sale of third party products. In 
the recent past, Department of Posts has undertaken number of new tie -ups including s ale of 
Mobiles and Watches etc . and has registered a business growth of nearly 20%. Thus, the 
Department is striving to focus on revenue centric areas for achieving self sustenance. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts No.F.20-2/2015/BGT (PA)/5th   Report 
dated 22-07-2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
Financial Services (Savings Bank & Remittances) – Under-utilization of funds 
 The Committee find that there has been a significant under -utilization of funds in the 
Financial Services (Savings Bank and Remittances) Scheme. The utilization was Rs. 0.47 crore 
in 2011-12, Nil in 2012-13 and Rs. 5.39 crore in 2013-14. In 2014-15, the budget estimate of Rs. 
5.07 crore was reduced to Rs. 2.33 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization upto February, 
2015 was Rs. 1.12 crore. The budget estimate for the year 2015 -16 is Rs. 3.35 crore. Explaining 

13 
 
the reasons for under -utilization of funds, it was stated that allotment under financial services 
mainly related to setting up of CPCs, ATM network and AML/CFT compliance structure, etc. 
All these activities had dependency on the roll -out of CBS under the IT Induction and 
Modernization Scheme and th e delay in IT Induction and modernization scheme led to under -
utilization of funds in the Financial Services (Savings Bank and Remittances) Scheme. 
 While taking note of the inherent link between the Financial Services and IT Induction 
Schemes, the Committ ee emphasize that roll -out of both the schemes should be expedited and 
regularly monitored so that any delay in implementation/execution of one scheme does not 
adversely affect the performance of the other schemes and the Department can ensure optimum 
utilization of the allocated funds. 
Reply of the Government 
Under utilization of funds:  The allotment of funds under financial services is mainly related to 
setting up of CPCs, ATM network and AML/CFT compliance structure etc.  All these activities 
have inter-dependency as well as dependen t on over all implementation  of IT Modernization 
Project. The delay in roll out has resulted in under utilization of funds in the Financial Services 
(Savings Bank and Remittances) Scheme.   
Rs. 1.51 crore allotted for plan scheme for Augmenting Processing Centres during the 
financial year 2014 -15has been fully utilized by Circles.  The utilization of the plan funds is 
being monitored closely  at the highest level i.e. the level of Secretary (Posts) and JS&FA  and 
best efforts are being made to ensure utilization of  allocated funds fully in future. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
Premium Services – Speed Post and Logistics Post 
 Speed Post is an important premium service offered by the Department whose market 
share in the overall courier market has increased from 24 per cent in 2010 -11 to 32.5 per cent in 
2013-14. The Department have also introduced „Speed Post - Cash on Delivery‟ facility to cater 
to the requirements of e -Commerce companies. Logistics Post is another premium service 

14 
 
offered by the Department. I n order to expand the coverage of Logistics Post and generate more 
revenue, the Department have signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Air India to provide 
air transmission facility to Logistics Post consignments. This facility is available between 15 
stations. The Department have also empanelled transporters to ensure proper road transportation 
facilities for transmission and delivery of Logistics Post. The Committee were apprised that the 
Registrar General of India (RGI), Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited, State Government Text 
Books Corporations, etc. are the major customers availing Logistics Post services of the 
Department.  
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that while the growth in revenue from 
Speed Post showed an increasing trend of 41.79 per cent in 2012 -13, it had declined to 8.78 per 
cent in 2013-14. Further, the revenue from logistics pos t has remained stagnant from 2011 -12 to 
2013-14 except for an increase in 2012 -13 owing to the one -time business of transportation of 
the Census material of the Registrar General of India (RGI).  
The Committee observe that despite the laudable performance of Speed Post in being 
amongst the foremost services showing revenue potential for the Department, issues like low 
market share and quality of service have been a matter of concern. It is evident that both Speed 
Post and Logistics Post have tremendous potential for further improvement in their overall 
market share. The Committee, therefore, will like the Department to strenuously work towards 
further increasing the market share of both the premium prod ucts by gainfully utilizing the vast 
resources available at their disposal. In this context, the Department need to take appropriate 
measures to promote awareness about the various attractive features of Speed Post by giving 
wide publicity to important fea tures such as „track and trace‟ facility, etc. amongst the targeted 
customers through all means at their disposal which can play a decisive role in making the Speed 
Post the first choice amongst the users. 
Reply of the Government 
 Logistics Post:  
 Revenue in the year 2014 -15 has shown a growth of 60.85% over the year 2013 -14 and 
total revenue has reached to Rs. 24.53 Crores. Department is contacting Government agencies, 
PSUs and prospective customers to increase business and generate more revenue under thi s 
service. 

15 
 
Speed Post: 
 The marketing and product management efforts of the Department of Posts have resulted 
in a consistent growth for the past three financial years. Revenue generated through Speed Post 
during last three (3) years are as follows: 
Year Revenue (Rs. in Crores) Percentage increase in revenue 
2012-13 1261.47 41.79 
2013-14 1372.21 8.78 
2014-15 1470.53 7.17 
 
 Department of Posts is striving continuously to  provide value additions and add -ons on 
existing products. Department of Posts has introduced free SMS (Short Messaging Service) alert 
to the mobile number of sender and addressee of Speed Post , updated at the time of booking , 
when the article reach delivery Post Office as well as when delivered. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ D epartment of PostsNo.F.20-2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 20-07-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
Premium Services – Catering to e-Commerce Sector through Speed Post Cash on Delivery 
SP (CoD) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Department have  identified e -Commerce as an 
emerging business prospect  considering that this industry is growing in India at a very fast pace. 
The Committee have been apprised that the growing online retail industry is throwing up new 
opportunities and the Department are striving to avail the same by introducing the service „Speed 
Post-Cash on Delivery (SP -CoD)‟ which is specifically targeted to address the needs of e -
Commerce companies as well as setting up of dedicated parcel hubs to handle the increasing 
parcel and e-Commerce traffic. The Department of Posts have collected and remitted more than 
Rs. 450 crore till February, 2015 through CoD since its introduction in December 2013. 

16 
 
 The Committee understand that besides initiating action to mechanize its deliveries, 
owing to demand from e -Commerce companies, the Department are providing technological 
support which includes seamless data integration through Application Programme Interface 
(API) with the e -Commerce companies. Since e -Commerce companies are looking for much 
faster delivery options like same day/ next day deliveries, the Department have also started pilot 
project in select cities to provide same day/ next day delivery so that existing customers are 
retained and new business is diverted to the Department of Pos ts. The Department have also 
entered into tie -ups with major e -Commerce players such as Amazon, Snapdeal, Flipkart, 
Myntra, Jabong and others for delivery of their consignments. 
The Committee hope that all these steps will enable the Department to be a pri ority 
choice amongst e-Commerce companies for delivery of goods ordered online. Taking note of the 
fact that e -Commerce offers a tremendous scope for business, the Committee recommend that 
the Department should proactively market its Speed Post Cash on Del ivery Service, setting up of 
dedicated parcel hubs and leverage tie -ups with major e -Retailers/e-Vendors on priority basis in 
order to take an early lead over their competitors for garnering a significant market share in the 
fast emerging e-Commerce segment. 
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Posts had introduced cash on delivery (CoD) facility as a value added 
service to Express/Business Parcel and Speed Post to cater to the needs of e -Commerce 
customers and to accrue benefit from the emerging e-Commerce market. As a result of these 
initiatives, Department of Posts has recorded a growth of 3 7 % under Express/Business Parcel 
and total revenue generated under this service has crossed Rs. 100.00 crore. Further, Department 
of Posts has also earned approximately Rs. 80-100 Crores in Speed Post in year 2014 -15 from e-
Commerce business . Since introduction of this facility of cash on delivery facility, till April 
2015, Department of Posts has collected more than Rs. 500 Crores as Cash on Delivery amount 
and remitted to the customers. In order to generate more business , Department of Posts is 
reviewing its service features to attract more e -Commerce customers. As part of  this exercise, 
Department of Posts has started pilots for Same Day/Next Day delivery in identified cities and 
identified Pin codes. Further, a National Account facility has been introduced under Speed Post. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015)  

17 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
Mail Operations, including International Mails and Global Business – Mail Network 
Optimization Project (MNOP) 
 The Committee note that MNOP was undertaken by the Department to optimize and 
consolidate the erstwhile mail network and improve the quality of service of mail products. 
MNOP has helped the Department in achieving various quality parameters such as online 
availability of booking and delivery information for more than 93% of speed post articles, online 
availability of booking and delivery information for more than 75% of Registered articles and 
delivery of more than 90% Speed Post articles within the stipulated norms. Other advantages of 
MNOP include online availability of „track and trace‟ facility for Registered and Parcel articles, 
reduced transit time and improved delivery of Speed Post articles, improved track and trace 
facility for Speed Post articles, standardization of processes at Speed Post processi ng centres, 
streamlined operations, online KPI tools for performance measurement, better monitoring and 
enhanced productivity. 
The Committee are given to understand that during 2015 -16, the Department aim to 
undertake infrastructure upgradation of 54 First  class Unregistered Mail offices, Computerized 
Registration Centres (CRCs) and Parcel hubs, infrastructure upgradation of 55 Speed Post 
Sorting Hubs/Intra Circle Hubs/ Book Now Pay Later (BNPL) centres and selection and on 
boarding of consultant for Parcel Network Optimization Project. 
In the light of these objectives, the Committee stress that quality monitoring and 
continuous improvement in services should be an ongoing activity in the Department. Since the 
Department are facing increasing competition fro m private players and quality of services is a 
critical parameter in retention of existing customers as well as acquisition of new customers , 
allocated funds need to be optimally and prudently expended to achieve these objectives.  
Reply of the Government 
 Under MNOP and Up -gradation of Speed Post Centers, Funds are allocated to all the 
Postal Circles for (i) Infrastructure up gradation which includes procurement of computer 
hardware / peripherals and other operational equipments and for (ii) Site Preparati on in the mail 

18 
 
offices. The funds are allocated for the selected office(s) with earmarked purpose and the 
Department is closely monitoring that the funds are spent prudently.   
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) 
 PLI is an important scheme of the Department with an objective to fully exploit the 
potential of the insurance sector through focus on technology and skill up - gradation, keeping in 
view the potential market growth and customer expectations. In terms of the number of Policies, 
PLI and RPLI stand second after LIC in India. However, in terms of premium, PLI and RPLI 
have managed just 2.53% of the total market share  in the Life Insurance segment in India. The 
Committee  have been informed that presently PLI can only be availed by employees of 
State/Central Government, PSUs, Defense and Paramilitary forces, autonomous/local bodies, 
public and private sector banks, Credit cooperative societies, joint ventures having a minimum of 
10% stakes, CBSE/AICTE/ICSE/MCI, accredited institutions, etc. 
The Committee observe that despite having a large number of policies, the market share 
in terms of premium income at 2.53% is quite  low; it is obvious that there is a huge scope for 
improvement in this sector. The Department may also undertake a review of the eligibility 
criteria for availing the Postal Life Insurance and look into possible expansion of the targeted 
segments. The risi ng trend in the number of complaints regarding settlement of Postal Life 
Insurance claims is certainly a matter of concern. The number of complaints has increased from 
383 in 2011 to 1423 in 2014. There is also a strong need for timely resolution of compla ints 
regarding settlement of Postal Life Insurance claims and strengthening of the complaint redressal 
mechanism by making it more accessible and transparent. The Committee may be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to increase market share of PLI/RPLI a multi-pronged strategy has been adopted. 
The client base of PLI has been expanded to cover employees of credit co -operative societies, 

19 
 
joint ventures having minimum 10% Govt/PSU stake, scheduled commercial banks, institutions 
accredited to UGC , CBSE, AICTE, MCI etc. in addition to the existing eligible clientele. All 
efforts are being made to deepen penetration and maximize coverage in this clientele base. In  
addition, premium income is the yardstick to measure performance. Thus, the focus is on getting 
new customers and to retain existing customers whereby premium income will continue to grow.  
 In so far as public grievances are concerned, following steps are being taken: 
(i)   As a preventive measure, after sales service is being monitored so that causes of grievances 
are minimized. 
(ii)     Similarly, a toll free number has been set up in all the circles for addressing queries & 
complaints of public in general and customers in particular.  
(iii)   Complaints are being pursued at all levels regularly so that redress is given expeditiously. 
(iv) A Customer Relationship Module (CRM) has been provided for in the technology based 
Core Insurance Solution project which will improve customer interface.    
As regards increase in number of complaints, it is mentioned that complaints are attended 
to expeditiously attaching due priority. All out e fforts are being made to ensure speedy redress al 
of public grievances. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) - Publicity and Marketing activities 
 The Committee note that the Department have taken various initiatives to popularize the 
insurance schemes amongst the targeted beneficiaries. These initiatives include release of 
advertisements and  publicity in all modes, computerization of all activities related to policy 
servicing and premium payments, TV commercials, Radio Jingles coupled with publicity in print 
media, increase in sum assured limit of PLI from Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 50 lakh, improvem ent of 
customer service through modernization and IT induction, organizing PLI and RPLI melas at 
identified offices/organizations and villages, respectively, in order to educate the target groups 

20 
 
about the schemes and facilitate completion of formalities. While appreciating the measures 
taken by the Department to improve its customer base in both PLI and RPLI, the Committee 
emphasize the need for sustained publicity and marketing initiatives to create awareness about 
the life insurance plans on offer and in crease the subscription of new customers. The Committee 
note that the Postmaster/Postman as a representative of the Department is widely respected and 
enjoys high credibility more especially in the rural areas, and this may be leveraged to bring in 
more subscribers into the fold of Postal Life Insurance.  
Reply of the Government 
Under the current 5-year Plan, allotted outlays under „Advertisement & Publicity‟ will be utilized 
for adequate publicity of PLI/RPLI products through various media. Marketing of  PLI and RPLI 
is already being done through regular and GDS staff including Postmen and Postmasters. In fact, 
80% of PLI business is procured through Departmental staff working as PLI agents. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
Task Force on Leveraging Post Office Network 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts constituted a task force on 21.08.2014 
to study and make recommendations regarding leveraging the post office network in India. A 
total of 181 recommendations were made by the task force. The Department have informed that a 
group of Senior Officers has been constituted to examine each recommendation of the Task 
Force, to obtain relevant inputs from various stakeholders, including Service Unions, etc. and to 
chalk out a strategy for implementing specific recommendations of the Task Force along with 
timelines. 
The Committee have been further informed that the recommendations of the Task For ce 
inter-alia emphasized on Integrated Banking Solution to provide online access to the account, 
installation of Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) throughout the country, issuance of Debit 
Cards and Cheque Books to the account holders, provision of Handheld devices to provide last 
mile delivery of services to the remotest possible location in the country, Internet based access to 
PLI and RPLI, Centralized IT System for Mail Operations enabling real time tracking of mail, 

21 
 
parcels and other services, Centralize d Human Resource Management System and Additional 
Retail & Agency Services. 
 The Committee have all along been urging the Department to take suitable steps for 
generation of additional business and augmentation of revenue receipts.  They desire that the 
Government should examine the recommendations of the Task Force in this regard and 
formulate concrete strategy for the implementation of those recommendations in a time -bound 
manner so as to improve the financial health of the Department of Posts and reduc e revenue 
deficit/reliance on budgetary support. 
Reply of the Government 
With the approval of Hon‟ble Minister of Communications and IT, a Group of Senior 
Officers was constituted in the Department to examine each r ecommendation of the Task Force  
to obtain relevant inputs from the Divisions concerned within the Postal Directorate, Field Units 
as well as Staff Unions and Officers‟ Union; and to chalk out a strategy for implementing 
specific recommendation of the Task Force along with timelines, in synergy wi th the other two 
reports of Internal Task Forces set up to „Scale up PLI Business‟ and „Capturing e -Commerce 
Market‟. 
2. Based on the inputs received from the Group of Senior Officers ATR was submitted to 
PMO which includes the observations of the Departme nt of Posts on individual (para wise) 
recommendations of the Task Force.  
3. The Task Force has envisaged new role for the Department in the realm of banking, 
insurance and e -commerce. As such, in order to generate additional business and augment 
revenue receipt through Parcel and e -Commerce Services, the Department has already entered 
into partnerships with Amazon, Flipkart, Shopclues, Snapdeal and e -Bay. Further, the 
Department has plans to develop and operationalise a business and marketing strategy for the e-
commerce market by on-boarding a Consultant by Shortly and to augment tie-ups with major e-
commerce and tele -commerce players for delivery across the country. On most of the points 
covered under this, time-lines for implementation have been drawn up.  
4. The recommendation of the Task Force to examine the best practices being followed in 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for replication in other States is in alignment with the activities 

22 
 
being pursued by the Department of Posts. MNREGS wage payment using A adhar enabled hand 
held devices is being done through about 2700 Rural Post Offices in Jharkhand, in collaboration 
with Govt. of Jharkhand. Various Government services, such as address verification, bill 
payment and sale of application forms, are already b eing provided through Post Offices in 
various Postal Circles across the country and additional pilot projects are being taken up. 
However, all Postal Circles have been addressed to replicate models of A.P. & Telangana. 
Further, the Department has also addr essed all the Union Ministries/ Departments, State 
Governments and PSU‟s asking them to utilize the Postal network. Responses have been 
received from Election Commission of India, MEA, National Skill Development Agency, 
Labour Commission of Gujarat and ICA R. Initial discussions have been initiated with them to 
utilize the network of Post Offices. 
5. Similarly, further action on model of establishing the Post Bank of India would depend 
upon the outcome of RBI decision on application seeking license submitted  by DoP on 
30.01.2015.  It is also worth mentioning that a reference about the proposal of DoP to set up 
Payments Bank has been made by Hon‟ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech on 28.2.2015. 
Based on the budget announcement the nodal division has init iated process of getting approvals 
and inputs from all other stakeholders.  
6. Further, the ongoing IT Project will enable better identification/monitoring of revenue 
centers and facilitate efficient functioning in a market oriented environment.   Any necessary 
structural re-engineering would be ensured by the Department, based on the advanced decision 
support system that would become available.  
7. A time bound action plan on the recommendations of the Task Force is being formulated 
by the Department. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 

23 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
New initiatives of Department of Posts - Delivery of seed packets and Pilot Project for 
Varanasi 
 The Committee note that an innovative mode of farm extension through postal staff is 
being tried out in several States by the Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) wherein 
seed packets of new crop varieties, along with the recommended agronomic pra ctices for their 
cultivation, are sent to farmers through Business Parcel and Express Parcel services of the 
Department through the Rural Branch Postmasters. The model has been found to be highly 
effective in increasing the awareness about Indian Agricultu ral Research Institute (IARI)  crop 
varieties. 
The Committee have been apprised that the Department of Posts have also entered into a 
tie-up with M/s Snapdeal.com to provide a platform for online sale of merchandise of the 
Varanasi weavers so as to extend the benefit of e -Commerce to this segment of society. The 
Department have stated that this has been a learning experience for them in handling of e -
Commerce business. Till February, 2015, as part of the initiative, 38 vendors were live on the 
portal with 298 products available for sale.  A joint web page of the pilot project got more than 
25000 hits per month and the initiative has provided huge brand visibility to the Department as 
well. 
The Committee appreciate the innovative measure taken by the Department for delivery 
of seed packets of new crop varieties from IARI along with recommended agronomic practices 
delivered through the Rural Branch Postmasters.  The Committee believe that this  initiative of 
the Department will, among other things , go a long way in making new crop -varieties and best 
agronomic practices accessible to farmers across the country at a nominal cost and provide a 
boost to the agriculture sector in India.  Another init iative wherein the Department have  tied up 
for delivery of the merchandise of Varanasi weavers sold online through Snapdeal Website is 
also commendable and will substantially help in providing market access to weavers in Varanasi, 
besides giving, a much needed fillip to the Varanasi handloom industry.   
 The Committee hope that the Department of Posts will continue to take such initiatives 
aimed at leveraging the vast postal network in the discharge of their social responsibilities which 
will also augment their revenue receipts. 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 New ini tiatives of Department of Posts regarding Delivery of seed packets & Pilot 
Project for Varanasi are as under:- 
i. A detailed proposal for entering into the MOU with Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute (IARI) has been received from IARI. The proposal is under consideration. 
ii. Based on the learning from the India  Post tie up with Snapdeal for Varanasi weavers, 
a Public Private Partnership modal has been developed and the Postal Circles have 
been empowered  to enter into such e -Commerce tie -ups for promoting handicraft 
artisans in their areas. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
IT Induction and Modernization - Underutilization of funds 
 IT Induction and Modernization is an important scheme of the Department with a 
comprehensive IT roadmap to develop network architecture, integrated software and effective 
data management, including establishment of National Data Centre(s) and Disaster Recovery 
Centre. There are eight segments/activities under the IT Induction and Modernization Project 
which include Data Center Facility (DCF), Network Integrato r (NI), Financial Services 
Integrator (FSI), Core System Integrator (CSI), Change Management (CM), Rural Hardware 
(RH), Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Mail Operation Hardware (MOH).  Under this scheme, 
in the year 2014-15, Rs. 506.39 crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 86.80 
crore at RE stage and the actual utilization (upto February 2015) was Rs. 67.44 crore which is 
just 13.32 percent of the budget estimate. The reasons attributed to underutilization of funds 
relate to complex inter dependencies amongst the eight streams of the Project requiring the 
finalization of all the RFPs in a synchronized manner, time consuming nature of public 
procurement processes in a Government set -up, refusal of vendors to execute the project in two 
cases leading to re -tendering and requirement of statutory clearances from bodies like the 
Pollution Control Board and the Chief Controller of Explosives. The Committee have been 
informed that activities under the eight designated streams of the project are at m ature stages of 
finalization. As per revised timelines, three components are to be implemented during 2015, 
other three by 2016 and the remaining two components will be executed by March, 2017.   
 The Committee are concerned to note that various procedural  delays have been affecting 
the utilization of funds in an all encompassing scheme of the Department, which is likely to 
improve its functioning across multiple areas. The Committee recommend that efforts to be made 
to see that the revised timelines set fo r execution of core components of the scheme are strictly 
complied with so to obviate any further spill over of the project.  Expeditious 
implementation/execution of the scheme will also enable the Department to provide improved 

27 
 
products and services, meet  increasing competition and cater to rising customer expectations. 
The Committee will like to be informed about the progress made in implementation of this 
project.  
Reply of the Government 
 IT Modernization Project is in the implementation stage. The segm ent-wise progress  is 
as under. 
         PRESENT STATUS OF THE PROJECT  
             Name of segment         Status as on 29-06-15 
Network Integrator (NI):- 
Provisioning of Wide Area 
Network (WAN) for connecting the 
~ 28000 Post offices & other admin 
offices with the Data Center. 
Implementation started on 28 -09-12. So far 27528 
locations have been networked on a single Wide Area 
Net work (WAN) and connected Data Centre. 
Mail Operations Hardware 
(MOH):- 
Providing postman handheld 
devices & Hardware for  Mail 
offices & Transit Mail Offices 
RFP process completed. The successful bidder M/s 
HCL Info systems Ltd expressed inability to sign the 
contract. LoI annulled on 26 -09-14 and M/s HCL 
Info system has been blacklisted for 5 years on 25 -
11-14. Action of bl acklisting the firm which was 
stayed on 10-12-14 has now been set aside on 21 -04-
15 by Delhi High Court. Action is taken for 
procurement of Mail Operations Hardware through 
DGS&D RC. 
Financial Services Integrator 
(FSI):- 
Core Banking Solutions for Post 
Office Savings Bank ( POSB), 
ATM facility and Core Insurance 
Solution  Postal Life Insurance 
(Postal Life Insurance, Rural Postal 
Life Insurance (PLI & RPLI) 
Implementation started on 28-09-12. 
Pilot Roll out of Core Banking (CBS) and Life 
Insurance (PLI) - Completed at 124 and 220 Post 
Offices. 
Totally, so far 2590 POs for CBS and 13310 Post 
offices for CIS (PLI) have been migrated. ATM 
Services- installed and functioning at 115 Post 
Offices.  
Core System Integrator (CSI):- 
Solutions relating to Mails, Postal 
counters, Remittances, HR, F&A, 
Customer Interaction etc. and 
Common Infrastructure 
Implementation started on 15 -04-13. Installation and 
commissioning of Central Hardware completed.  
Detail Design Documents has been completed.  Wave 
2 & 3 UAT cycle II (for HR, MO and F & A 
completed on 06 -12-14. Wave 2 & 3 UAT cycle III 
of Phase I started on 27 -04-15. UAT at Hyderabad 
started on 22-06-15. Wave 1 Roll out is in progress. 
Rural ICT RSI (RICT RSI):- 
Solution for integrating & 
managing the mobile applic ations 
and mobile devices 
RFP process completed and work awarded. Contract 
signed on 28 -02-13. Implementation phase has been 
started on 05-05-15. 

28 
 
Rural ICT Hardware (RICT 
RH):-  
Providing Connectivity and 
Hardware to all Branch Offices ( ~ 
1,30,000 Rural Post  Offices) 
Vendor has been finalized, contract signed on 24 -11-
2014 and implementation phase has been started. 
Project has been kicked off on 19-06-15. 
Data Centre Facilities (DCF):- 
Hosting the central servers at 
Primary Data Center at Navi 
Mumbai & Management of 
Disaster Recovery Center, (DRC) 
Mysore. 
Primary Data Centre  at Navi Mumbai has been 
operational  from 03.04.2013 and Disaster  Recovery 
Centre  at Mysore has been  operational  from  15-05-
15 
Change Management  (CM):- 
Change Management for all 
employees and imparting training. 
Implementation started on 15 -10-12. Training 
activities are in progress. It is ongoing exercise with 
the implementation of various other streams of the 
Project.   
 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20-2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE 
OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
IT Induction and Modernization - Networking of Departmental Post Offices 
 The Committee note that the Department have achieved computerization of 25,468 
Departmental Post Offices. However, the number of Departmental Post Offices which have been 
networked stands at 24,462. In postal circles like West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Uttrakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh, the number of Post Offices which have been computerized but not yet 
networked remains relatively high. In an era when the Department are planning to set up  a 
Payments Bank and when most of the financial transactions, viz. money remittances, payment of 
utility bills and operation of small savings accounts require real -time data transfer and 
networking with data servers/centralized data centre, it is expedient  that the Department achieve 
complete networking of all the Departmental Post offices at the earliest.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take suitable measures for full networking of 
all the Departmental Post Offices to facili tate seamless transfer of data resulting in uniformity 
and uninterrupted delivery of services to the customers.  
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that at the time of review by the Standing Committee, 24462 Departmental 
Post Offices had been network ed. Now, as on 21 -06-15 the total number of offices networked is 
27528 and the remaining offices to be networked are 1423.The overall percentage of networking 
works out to 95.1% so far. The BSNL authorities, the Primary Network Service Provider, 
declared that 1859 locations situated in remotest areas are not technically feasible for networking 
by them due to non availability of infrastructure. However in these locations, the secondary 
Network Service Provider, M/s Sify, the Vendor for Network Integrat ion is providing 
connections.  Suitable action is underway to complete the networking of remaining locations at 
the earliest. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 

30 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Financial Services (Savings Bank and Remittances) – Setting up of Post Bank of India 
 The Committee note that the Department have submitted an application to the Reserve 
Bank of India on 30.01.2015 seeking licence for setting up a Payments Bank and the evaluation 
of application is in process. The Department have their presence across the country through its 
network of 1,54,882 post offices, out of which 1,29,389 are in the rural areas which are still 
significantly unbanked. The Department also have an ex isting customer base of approximately 
34 crore customers in POSB Schemes, significant experience in disbursement for five 
Government run welfare schemes (MGNREGA, IGNOAPS, IGNWPS, IGNDPS and IGMSY) in 
which they have collectively disbursed payments of Rs. 34,655 crore over the last three years 
(2011-14) and are currently implementing  a huge IT Modernization project which will inter-alia 
enable implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS), ATM network, internet banking and 
mobile banking. The Committee feel that the DoP possess inherent advantages which make it 
ideal for setting up a Payments Bank. In a country like India where a large s egment of the 
population is still unbanked, the Department with its 1,29,389 points of presence across rural 
India can play a vital role in offering banking services in the rural areas where the presence of 
commercial banks is presently very limited.  The Committee will like to be apprised of the 
progress made in the direction of setting up of the Post Bank of India.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Department of Posts  submitted an application to RBI for  setting  up of Payments 
Bank on 30.01.2015, The same is pending before RBI and the final decision is awaited. 
 The Department has floated an Expression of Interest (EOI) for engaging a consultant for 
setting up of Post Bank in the form of a Payments Bank. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of Posts No.F.20-2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
 
 
 

31 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Setting up of Post Bank of India – Revenue Generation 
 The Committee note that the proposed Payments Bank in the form of Post Bank of India 
(PBI) will not only help in financial inclusion and drive up payments but would also benefit DoP 
financially in terms of generating revenue through transfer pricing for the usage of postal 
network and infrastructure. In the first year of its operation, PBI is projected to pay more th an 
Rs. 250 crore to the DoP for using its network. The PBI is expected to  break even in the third 
year and earn a profit of approximately Rs. 91 crore in its fifth year of operations. The 
Department will accrue further financial benefits through transfer pricing for customer 
acquisition, sales and servicing of PBI customers and usage of distribution network, IT and 
physical infrastructure and through share of commission income. The Committee find that 
besides achieving the objective of financial inclusion in the country which is a policy thrust area, 
the setting up of the Post Bank of India as a Payments Bank is likely to have a positive impact on 
the financial health of the Department as can will utilize the large postal network already in place 
for additi onal revenue generation. In view of the fact that the Department have been making 
concerted efforts to increase revenue receipts, setting up of a Payments Bank is likely to help it 
in this endeavour. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the need to expediti ously set up the Post 
Bank of India as a Payments Bank to realize the objective of financial inclusion and improve the 
financial health/revenue receipts of the Department through optimum utilization of the vast 
resources and infrastructure of the Department in the rural and unbanked areas of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 As has been stated at reply to the previous Para, Department of Posts has already sent the 
application for setting up of Post bank to RBI on 30.01.2015. The matter is being pursued 
actively and being monitored at the HQ level. Further progress would be communicated on 
receipt of approval from RBI. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
 
 

32 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
Mail Operations, including International Mails and Global Business – setting up of 
Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) 
 The Committee note that setting up of Automated Mail Processing Centres (AMPCs) is 
amongst the major activities which have been c ontinued from the Eleventh Plan. The objective 
of the scheme was to extend the AMPCs facility to more cities to enhance the mail handling 
capacity, reduce the cost of operations and improve the service quality. As part of the Eleventh 
Plan scheme, two new AMPCs were set up  at New Delhi and Kolkata which together handle 
about 8.75 lakh articles per day comprising of about 1,65,000 speed post articles which is 
approximately 10% of the total speed post volume and about 7,10,000 articles of unregistered 
mail which is approximately 0.5% of the total unregistered mail volume. 
During the Twelfth Plan, it is proposed to set up four more AMPCs at Mumbai, Chennai, 
Bengaluru and Hyderabad. The committee have been informed that the land for setting up of 
AMPCs at Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad has been identified and the possession taken by 
the Department while in Mumbai land related issues are still being resolved. 
It is disquieting to note that the Indian Postal Network comprising of about 1,55,000 post 
offices and employing about 4.60 lakh employees is functioning with only two AMPCs which 
handle just 10% of speed post articles and a mere 0.5% of unregistered mail articles. In an era 
when the Department expect to generate the bulk of revenues from speed post, l ogistics post and 
express parcel business from e -commerce companies which require same day/next day 
deliveries, manual processing of mails may prove to be a major stumbling block and hamper its 
growth in the emerging services. While emphasizing the need fo r increasing automation in mail 
processing which is a necessary pre -requisite for faster delivery, quality improvement and 
efficiency in mail operations, the Committee desire that the setting up of AMPCs may be 
expedited on a priority basis so that manual processing does not become a bottleneck and affect 
acquisition of business in emerging categories like Speed Post, logistics post and express parcel 
post. 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
Setting up of AMPCs : The approved plan scheme for setting up of AMPCs at Mu mbai, 
Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad is under process of implementation. The land at Hyderabad 
and Bangalore has been purchased from State Government and for Chennai it has been decided 
to utilize the available departmental premises. At Mumbai, MoU with Mumbai International 
Airport Ltd. is to be signed. The Request for Proposal (RFP) for hiring consultant for the project 
is on hand. 
 (Ministry of Communications & IT/ Department of PostsNo.F.20 -2/2015/BGT(PA)/5th   Report  
dated 22-07-2015) 
 
 
 
 
     New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
     18 December,2015 Chairperson, 
     27 Agrahayana, 1937(Saka)         Standing Committee on  
Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2015 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18 th December, 2015, from 1000 hours                     
to 1040 hours in Committee Room ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe,        
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Shri Paresh Rawal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Salim Ansari  
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following six Draft Action Taken Reports: -  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
II. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
IV. Action Taken Report on the Fifth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2015 -16)’ of 
the Department of Posts 
V. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx….;and 
VI. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….…..xxxxx…..…..  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for  consideration the above Report  and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec Sl. Nos.:- 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 14  
 Total 09 
 Percentage 64.28 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl.  No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- 2  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 7.15 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim nature 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  3, 5, 6 and 10  
 Total 04 
 Percentage 28.57 
 