STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on                
 ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
               LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
              NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
22 


 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on                  
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations/ which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
35 
CHAPTERIV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
36 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations/ in respect of which replie s are of 
interim in nature…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
39 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 18 th December, 
2015  
  41 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/     
Recommendations contained in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
        43 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2015-16) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
6. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
7. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
8. Shri P. Karunakaran  
9. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
10. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
11. Shrimati Hema Malini  
12. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
13. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Smt.) Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Javed Akhtar  
23. Shri Salim Ansari  
24. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan  
25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
26. Shri Meghraj Jain  
27. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
28. Shri Derek O’Brien  
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
30. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar  
31. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
(ii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2015 -2016), 
having been authorised by the Committee, do present the Twenty -second Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for 
Grants (2015 -16)‟ of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 24th April, 2015 .  The Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report on 15th October, 2015. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
18th December, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the  
Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for 
Grants (201 5-16)‟ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology). 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presen ted to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 24th April, 2015. It contained 20 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received fr om the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 19  
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and w hich require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 7  
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 18 and 20  
 
4. The Committee, in their Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), had 
undertaken a comprehensive examination of the Demands for Grants (2015 -16) of 
the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology).  While appreciating the continuous 
improvement in utilization of funds b y the Department, the Committee had 
desired that sustained and consolidated steps  needed to be taken to achieve the 
monthly and quarterly expenditure and quantifiable targets set for the current 

2 
 
fiscal.  The Committee had expressed their concern on 33% red uction of 
allocation at BE stage.  While taking note of the impediments faced in the 
implementation of projects in NER, the Committee had recommended to the 
Ministry to take  urgent steps to provide connectivity through VSAT to Common 
Service Centres ( CSCs), putting in place a mechanism for monitoring of pro per 
functioning of solar power back up units and also early finalization of necessary 
clearances for setting up of BPO s under the BPO Promotion Scheme in the North 
East Region .  The Committee had also rec ommended for taking up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance for adequate funds at RE stage for the Digital India 
Programme.  The Committee had called upon the Department to take requisite 
steps for establishment/operationalization of all the components of NeGP. For                     
e-lockers/digital locker scheme under the Digital India Programme, the Committee 
had urged the Department to conduct study for getting user’s request/satisfaction 
to address the problems associated with the scheme.  The Com mittee had also 
commented upon the Department’s measures /preparedness to tackle cyber 
threat, promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware Manufacturing, measures for 
tackling E-waste, awareness generation for E-waste, functioning of C-DAC, etc.  
 
5. The Action T aken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology) 
on each of the Observation s/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Sixth Report have been reproduced in th e relevant chapters of this Report. 
The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given on implementing the 
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases where it 
is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter 
and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with 
reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   

3 
 
Electronic Governance (NeGP ,  ‘Programme on enabling all schools with virtual 
classrooms’ and ‘Programme on Good Governance and Best Practices’) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
7. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that Electronic Governance include NeGP (approve d 
in May 2006), „Programme on Good Governance and Best Practices‟ and 
„Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms‟ (approved in   
2014-15 with a corpus of ` 100 crore each). During the year 2015 -16, as 
against the proposed allocation of ` 994 crore, the BE allocation is ` 450 
crore, whereas during the year 2014 -15, the BE and RE were ` 475.00 and 
` 479.92 crore, respectively and the actual expenditure was ` 414.90 crore. 
With regard to the progress under the „Programme on enabling all schools  
with virtual classrooms and „Good Governance and Best Practices 
schemes‟, the Committee are given to understand that the physical and 
financial targets for the year 2014-15 have been met and  ` 55.00 crore and 
` 70.87 crore have been utilized for each pro ject, respectively. In the first 
phase of  the „Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms‟, 
3500 schools and 50 DIETs having ICT infrastructure are being targeted to 
enable them with virtual classrooms in five States, namely Himachal 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Tripura and this project has 
been approved by DeitY. Further, with regard to „Good Governance and 
Best Practices‟, letters have been sent to the Ministries/Departments 
concerned and all States/UTs to formulate suitable  project proposals for the 
development of new applications and for replication of successful e -
Governance applications in various domains. The Committee note that in 
response to this, various proposals have been received of which 8 projects 
have been appro ved by the competent authority and administrative 
approvals have been issued, whereas 4 projects are at various stages of 
approval in DeitY. 
 
However, with respect to three core components of NeGP scheme (under 
Electronic Governance), viz. State Wide Area Network (SWAN), Common 
Service Centres (CSCs) and State Data Centres (SDCs) schemes, the 
Committee observe that presently SWAN has been made operational in 34 
States/UTs, of which 25 States/UTs are utilizing around 60% of bandwidth 
of the existing link cap acity. The total number of operational CSCs (as on 
28.02.2015) is 1,40,712, of which only 1,25,387 CSCs have connectivity. 
With regard to SDCs, the Committee find that 23 SDCs have been made 
operational, out of which 19 SDCs are utilizing around 50% of the  SDC 
Infrastructure (percentage of rack space utilized). The Committee also note 
that 4 SDCs have  been made operational during the year 2013-14 whereas 
only one SDC, in Mizoram, has been made operational in the year 2014 -15 
and the target set for the year  2015-16 is to complete 4 SDCs (Himachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Dadra Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu) in the year 2015 -
16. With regard to establishment/operationalisation of SWAN and CSCs, 

4 
 
there is an increase in their number when compared to the previous years. 
However, with regard to the SDCs, the number has remained the same. Not 
only this, the Committee find that the Department during the previous DFG 
(2014-15) had stated that the timeline for completing the implementation in 
two Union Territories (i.e. Dadra a nd Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu) 
was March, 2015; however, this appears not to have been achieved in the 
light of their target for this financial year 2015 -16 (to complete 4 SDCs in 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Dadra Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu). It is 
further disquieting to note that the usage of SDC Infrastructure and existing 
bandwidth have not improved over the last year‟s performance. The 
Committee have been recommending repeatedly to the Department to 
complete the establishment of these components of NeGP as per 
scheduled targets. While noting the non -completion of these components in 
all the States/non -functional status of some of the components and non -
utilization of infrastructure and the existing bandwidth capacity, the 
Committee reiterate their st and and call upon the Department to take 
requisite steps for establishment/operationalisation/roll - out of all the 
components of NeGP. The Committee also earnestly desire that efforts 
should be made to ensure that the targets set under the „Programme on 
enabling all schools with virtual classrooms‟ and „Good Governance and 
Best Practices schemes‟ are not deferred. The Committee may be kept 
apprised of the improvement made in achieving the targets under these 
schemes.” 
 
8. The Department of Electronics and Info rmation Technology, in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
“The current status of above projects is as follows: 
 
(a) Good Governance and Best Practices schemes: 2 Working Group 
meetings have been conducted and 8 projects have been approved. 
Revised DPRs are awaited for 2 projects. 
 
(b) Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms: 3500 
schools and 50 DIETs having ICT infrastructure are being targeted to make 
them enabled with virtual classrooms in five states, namely, Himachal 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Tripura. The project is 
approved and first instalment of Rs. 55.00 crores has been released to the 
implementing agency. 
 
(c) SDC: Currently, SDCs in 24 States/UTs, out of the 32 States/ UTs in 
which SDC has to be implemented, are operational. Out of the 8 States/UTs 
where implementation has not yet been completed, 2 are under 
implementation, 1 State is soon to start implementation, 4 States are under 
the bid process and for 1 State, RFP is under preparation. The State/ UT 
wise implementation status and the reasons for delays despite numerous 
reminders, letters, meetings and other handholding support to States and 
SIA are given in the table below.  As depicted in the table below, for the 

5 
 
States for which SDC implementatio n has not yet been completed, the 
reasons are majorly: 
 
• Non-availability or change in the SDC Site 
• Construction of building at site for SDC  
• Rebidding / retendering due to (a) limited response to the SDC RFP  
floated or (b) any other reason 
 
S.No State Name Status 
Non 
Availability/ 
Change of 
Identified 
Site 
Construction  
of New Site  
Rebidding / 
Retendering  
1 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Under 
Implementation   √ √ 
2 
Dadra & Nagar 
and Daman & 
Diu  
Under 
Implementation  √ √ √ 
3 Jharkhand  
Vendor Finalized, 
Implementation to 
start  
√ √ √ 
4 Goa Bids Received  √ √  
5 Uttarakhand   Bid Process 
under Progress √ √  
6 Arunachal 
Pradesh   
Bid Process 
under Progress   √ 
7 Punjab Bid Process 
under Progress √ √ √ 
8 Assam RFP under 
Preparation   √ √ 
 
(d) CSC: 1,41,353  CSCs have been made operational in 36 States/UTs as 
on 30 th April 2015. 127,188 CSCs are reported to be connected, of which, 
52,475 CSCs are using BSNL connectivity, 23,114 are using VSATs, 
25,400 CSCs are using Data cards and the remaining 26,199 are usi ng 
other forms of connectivity. Further, some VLEs have reported using 
multiple types of broadband connections. 
 
(e) SWAN: SWAN has been made operational in 34 States/UTs, of which 
25 States/UTs are utilizing around 60% of bandwidth of the existing link 
capacity.” 
 
9. The Committee, in their original Report , had inter alia  reviewed the 
progress of core components of NeGP under the e-Governance scheme , viz. 
SWAN, CSCs and SDCs  and observed that  while there was an increase in the 
number of SWAN and CSCs compared to the previous years, in case of SDCs, the 
number had remained the same.  In spite of the Committee’s repeated 

6 
 
recommendation for completion of the establishment of various components of 
NeGP as per scheduled targets, the targets for completion of the SDC scheme in 
the States of Himachal Pradesh,  Punjab, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and  Daman and 
Diu had not been achieved.  The Committee had , therefore, urged the Department 
to take requisite steps for establishment/operationalization/roll -out of all the 
components of NeGP and make efforts to ensure that the targets set under the 
‘Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms’ and ‘Good 
Governance and Best Practices schemes’ are not deferred. The Committee note 
that two Working Groups’ meetings have been conducted and eight projects have 
been approved under the scheme of ‘Good Governance and Best Practices ’.  The 
Department have also approved the Programme of enabling all schools with 
virtual classrooms and the first installment of Rs. 53 crore has been released to 
the implementing agency.  The Committee are, however, concerned to note that 
despite numerous reminders, letters, meetings and handholding support, the 
SDC implementation has not progressed well, t he reasons being non-availability 
or change i n the SDC site, construction of building at site for SDC and 
rebidding/retendering due to limited response to the SDC RFP floated or any 
other reason.  The Committee re-emphasize that the State Data Centre is one of 
the core infrastructure components of the National e -Governance Programme 
(NeGP) which aims  at consolidating services, applications and infrastructure to 
provide efficient electronic delivery of G2G, G2C and G2B services.  Keeping in 
view the fact that SDC would provide some key functionalities such as Central 
Repository of the State, Secure Data Storage, Online Delivery of Services, Citizen 
Information/Service Portal, State Intranet Portal, Disaster Recovery, Remote 
Management and Service Integration, etc., the Committee feel that any delay in 
completion of State Data Centre will derail the National e-Governance Programme 
(NeGP) as a whole.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  to the Department to 
take necessary steps to address the above deficiencies and ensure that the SDC 
is implemented in right earnest in these States without any delay.  The Committee 
may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
 
 

7 
 
Development related to Section 66A of IT Act, 2000 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
10. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“With regard to the Supreme Court judgement on Section 66A of the 
Information Technology Act, the Committee have been informed that the 
Government have welcomed the Hon‟ble Supreme Court‟s decision of 
scrapping Section 66A. The Committee also note that after detailed 
discussions, the Government had filed an affidavit before the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court making their stand clear that they respect the freedom of 
speech and expression on social media and has no intention of curbing it.  
Besides, the Department, in due course of t ime, would study and 
understand the operational implications of the judgment for any possible 
action in the future.  Regarding the future course of action following the 
Supreme Court judgement, the Committee note that the Department are 
now focusing extens ively on increasing user awareness with regard to 
responsible user behaviour and acceptable norms and how people should 
be able to use the cyber space.  The Department have also assured the 
Committee that even after Section 66A has been struck down, the IP C 
provisions still exist for any serious violation of individual privacy and 
dignity. The Committee, in their Forty -fourth Report (15 th L.S.) on DFG 
(2013-14), had noted a few controversies related to Section 66A and other 
Sections of the IT Act, 2008 (as amended) and had asked the Department 
to take necessary corrective steps for revision of the clauses of the Act and 
the Committee once again recommend to the Department to be proactive in 
such situations. The Committee would await Government‟s response in the 
matter.” 
 
11. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
“An Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, 
former Secretary, Law Commission & Secretary General has been set up 
by the Government to study and examine the existing domestic cyber laws 
and International Cyber legislations and recommend a road map with 
measures and amendments to the present laws for consideration of the 
Government. 
 
Further, in order to compreh ensively address the issues of Cyber Crimes, 
Ministry of Home Affairs has set up an Expert Group consisting of 
Academicians and Professionals of repute to prepare a roadmap for 
effectively tackling the Cyber Crimes in the country and give suitable 
recommendations on all facets of cyber crime.” 
 

8 
 
12. Regarding the future course of action  following the Supreme Court 
judgement on scrapping up of Section 66A, the Committee , in their original 
Report, had noted that the Department are focusing on in creasing user 
awareness about responsible  user behaviour on usage of cyber space.  The 
Committee had recommended to the Department to proactively watch the 
developments with regard to Section 66A and other Sections of IT Act, 2008 (as 
amended).  As a follow up to the above r ecommendation of the Committee, the 
Department have constituted an Expert Committee to study and examine the 
existing domestic cyber laws and international cyber legislations and recommend 
a roadmap with regard to amendments to the present laws.  The Ministry of Home 
Affairs ha ve also set up an expert Group to prepare a road map for effectively 
tackling cyber crimes and give suitable recommendations.  While appreciating 
the above initiatives, the Committee desire the Department to apprise them of the 
strategy chalked out by  the above  mentioned two Committees and 
implementation thereof in due course.    
Promotion of IT & ITeS Industries/Electronics & IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that during the current financial year, promotion of IT 
& ITeS Industries and promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware 
Manufacturing have been put under one head. The budgetary allocations 
during the year 2015 -16 are ` 5 crore and ` 69 crore, respec tively, for the 
two schemes. The Committee also note that as per the assessment of 
NASSCOM, the Indian IT -ITES industry is growing progressively. However, 
the fact of the matter is that in spite of several measures taken by the 
Department over the years, t here has been rapid increase in import of 
electronic items [which has increased from ` 187306.38 crore in the year 
2013-14 to ` 206399.58 crore in the year 2015 -16 (till Feb 2015)] and 
decline in exports of electronic items [which was ` 46703.78 crore duri ng 
the year 2013 -14  and  ` 33634.29 crore during the current year (till Feb 
2015)].  Nevertheless, the Committee take note of the steps taken by the 
Department to promote this sector which inter-alia include the Modified 
Special Incentive Package Scheme ( M-SIPS); Electronic Manufacturing 
Clusters (EMC); Setting up of Semiconductor Wafer Fabs; preference to 
Domestically Manufactured Electronic Products (DMEP) in Government 
procurement; Electronic Development Fund (EDF) Policy approved on 10 th 
December, 2014; Compulsory Safety Standards for Electronics; Scheme for 

9 
 
setting up/up -gradation of Labs; Promoting collaborative funding in R&D; 
Supporting research in Medical Electronics through BIRAC; National Centre 
of Excellence for Large Area Flexible Electronics ( CFLEX); National Centre 
of Excellence in Technology for Internal Security (NCETIS); Policy for 
Promotion of Fabless Design Industry; Development of Indian Conditional 
Access System (CAS); Scheme for supporting MSMEs in the electronics 
sector; Setting up of  Incubation Centre in Delhi -NCR; Setting up of 
Incubation Centre with focus on Medical Electronics at IIT Patna, etc. The 
Committee also note that rationalization of tariff and Budget announcement  
have been made during the year 2014 -15 and 2015 -16 for boo sting 
indigenous manufacturing of Mobile Handsets, Personal computers 
(Desktop, Laptop and Tablets), TVs, indigenous manufacturing of ITA 
Products, LED Lights, Medical Electronic Products, Solar Photovoltaic 
Cells, smart cards, Microwave Ovens, optical fib re cables, Semiconductor 
wafer fab, Telecommunication Equipment Manufacturing, Set Top Boxes, 
etc.  
 
The Committee have been given to understand that some areas which are 
major hurdles hindering this sector from taking off are zero duty regimes on 
217 tari ff lines [India being a signatory to the Information Technology 
Agreement-1(ITA-1) of the World Trade Organization (WTO)], the domestic 
manufacturing sector facing direct competition from the manufacturers of 
countries like China, Japan, Taiwan, South Kore a, Malaysia, United States 
of America and European countries, etc. The other identified obstacles 
relate to the declining domestic manufacturing capabilities and various 
disabilities like high finance cost, poor infrastructure and logistics, unreliable 
and poor quality of power, inverted tax duty structure wherein importers get 
favorable tax regime vis -a-vis domestic manufacturers and high transaction 
cost due to the large number of regulatory clearances requirements, etc.  
This has added to the slow growth  of Electronics and IT Hardware 
manufacturing sector. 
 
The Committee, however, note that during the year 2014 -15 the 
Department have taken up the exercise of inviting business consortium to 
set up two Semiconductor wafer fabs and they have received two 
proposals. The Committee understand that these proposals have been 
approved by the Government and the consortia are in the process of 
finalising their DPR and arranging money for the project. While appreciating 
this development, the Committee recommend to the  Department to take 
measures to see to it that there is no procedural delay in finalising and 
setting up the two Semiconductor wafer fabs.”    
 
14. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
“Letters of Intent dated 19.03.2014 were issued to the consortiums led by 
M/s. Jaiprakash Associates Ltd. and M/s. HSMC Technologies India Pvt. 
Ltd. by 28.04.2015. After providing extensions on several occasions, both 

10 
 
the consortia were required to submit the  following documents by 
31.03.2015: 
a) Revised Detailed Project Report (DPR) with detailed costing and 
implementation plan, after incorporating the deficiencies that were 
pointed out to them on 05.11.2014. 
b) Incorporation of SPV for the project, in accordance with proposed equity 
structure. 
c) At least 25% of equity funding required for Phase I of the project to be 
injected by the promoters into the SPV. 
d) A letter of in -principle approval from Financial Institutions/Banks for at 
least 10% of debt funding requirement  of Phase 1, or INR 1000 Crores, 
whichever is higher. 
e) Agreements between consortium partners specifying inter se 
performance guarantees. 
f) Proof of legal possession of adequate and suitable land as outlined in 
the proposals. 
g) Performance guarantee agreements with GoI. 
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 28.01.2015 has reconstituted the 
Empowered Committee (EC) with the following composition: 
i. Dr. V.K. Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog      …..        Chairman. 
ii. Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Chairman, Indian Space  Research 
Organisation. 
iii. Secretary, Department of Expenditure. 
iv. Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. 
v. Dr. M.J. Zarabi, Former CMD, Semiconductor Complex Ltd. (SCL) - 
Technical Expert. 
vi. Prof. Narendra Krishna Karmarkar, Distinguished Visiti ng Professor, 
IIT-Bombay. 
vii. Secretary, Department of Electronics and Information Technology - 
Member Convener. 
viii. Empowered Committee may co-opt any other experts. 
The reconstituted EC has been notified vide this Department‟s O.M. dated 
11.02.2015. Subsequently , three meetings of the EC were held on 
11.03.2015, 15.05.2015 and 26.05.2015. EC at its meeting held on 
11.03.2015 has inter -alia decided to co -opt (a) Dr. K.D. Nayak, DG - Micro 
Electronic Devices & Computational Systems, DRDO; (b) Shri V. Koteswara 
Rao, Former Director, Semi -Conductor Laboratory (SCL) as members on 
the Empowered Committee. 
However, both the consortia have not yet submitted the requisite 
documents required for demonstration of commitment. Subsequently, M/s. 
HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Lt d. vide their letter dated 31.03.2015 has 

11 
 
requested for extension of last date till 31.07.2015. M/s. Jaiprakash 
Associates Ltd. vide their letter dated 27.03.2015 has requested for certain 
amendments in the terms and conditions of the Letter of Intent. 
Empowered Committee then met both the consortia in its 23rd meeting held 
on 26.05.2015 for obtaining updates on the progress made by them in their 
respective projects, wherein inter -alia EC has decided to extend the last 
date of submission of all the document s for demonstration of commitment, 
as per para 3 of the terms and conditions of the LoI dated 19.03.2014, till 
30.09.2015  subject to the consortia conveying the date for complying to 
each of the conditions precedent to Demonstration of Commitment, as per 
LoI dated 19.03.2014, without any caveat. This would be the final extension 
and thereafter no further request for extension of time would be 
entertained.” 
 
15. The Committee had observed that the Department have taken several steps 
for promotion of IT & ITe S industries/Electronics and I T Hardware Manufacturing 
sector which, inter-alia, included the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme 
(M-SIPS), Electronic Manufacturing Clusters (EMC),  Setting up of Semicond uctor 
Wafer Fabs,  preference to Domestically Manuf actured Electronic Products 
(DMEP) in Government procurement,  Electronic Development Fund (EDF) Policy 
approved on 10 th December, 2014, Compulsory Safety Standards for Electronics, 
Scheme for setting up/up gradation of Labs,  Promoting collaborative funding in 
R&D, Policy for Promo tion of Fabless Design Industry,  Development of Indian 
Conditional Access System (CAS),  Scheme for supporting MSMEs in the 
electronics sector, etc.  With regard to the specific initiative of the Department on 
setting up of Semicondu ctor Wafer Fabs , the Committee had observed that they 
had received two proposals from two business consortia for setting up of Wafer 
Fabs which were in the process of finalizing the Detailed Project  Report (DPR).  
The Committee , while emphasizing the need for early setting up of the 
Semiconductor Wafer Fabs , had recommended  to the Department to take 
measures to ensure that there is no procedural delay in finalization and setting up 
of the two Semiconductor Wafer Fabs.  The Committee  are, however, concerned 
to note that after availing extensions on several occasions, both consorti a        
M/s. Jaiprakash Associates Ltd. and  M/s HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Ltd.  have 
not yet submitted the requisite documents  though the initial date for submission 
of DPR was 31 .03.2015.  The Committee are given to understand that  now final 
extension has been granted to both  the consortia till 30.09.2015.  The Committee, 

12 
 
while expressing their concern that the initial process of finalization of DPR is 
getting delayed, recommend to the Department to ensure that the stalemate in the 
process be addressed  and final DPRs are received from the two consortia so that 
the setting up of Semiconductor Wafer Fabs takes off without any further delay.     
 
E-waste 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
16. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“With regard to the role of DeitY in managing e -Waste, the Committee note 
that the Department‟s primary role is to develop R&D solutions for 
processing and extraction of precious metals from Printed Circuit Board 
(PCB) and plastics out of the e -waste.  The Committee further note that 
DeitY have come out with technology where plastics can be taken out, 
categorized and reused to make car bumpers and switches and they are 
trying to transfer the  technology to manufacture rs for manufacturing value 
added goods. With regard to the Printed Circuit Board as well, the 
Department have supported technology development for segregating and 
extraction of metals/components out of the PCB and they, along with 
another company, have put  up a demo plant at Bengaluru for extraction of 
about one metric tonne of metal from the PCB per day. The Committee are 
also given to understand that after the successful demo, they will give this 
technology to any manufacturer who would like to use it and  recycle the 
waste. The Department have got approval to put up the e -waste awareness 
programme under which they will do an elementary analysis and then will 
create awareness both at the manufacturer level and at the 
school/college/RWA levels and help to re cycle e -waste.  The basic 
implementation of legal framework for e -waste management is the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (M/o E&F). 
However, to address the primary problem of e -waste being taken by 
unorganized sectors and channel ized and processed in a non-friendly 
manner, DeitY are working jointly with the M/o E&F by giving technological 
solutions to them and receiving help from them for identifying areas in 
which DeitY can set up ecological parks /some plant for recycling. Takin g 
note of another initiative of DeitY of providing 25% cash back on the capital 
expenditure for e -waste processing plant, the Committee feel that there 
need to be continuous efforts on the part of the Department to manage e -
waste scientifically and more nu mber of scientific and electronic e -waste 
disposal units should be set up in future. The Committee also recommend 
to the Department to draft a policy, in co -ordination with Mo E&F, for 
increasing e-waste awareness in the country and come out with a plan fo r 
„e-waste handling site‟ in each city.” 
 

13 
 
17. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
“(i) Deity has initiated setting up of a demonstration plant at Bengaluru, 
employing its indigenously dev eloped technology. The stabilization technology 
would need more time to mature. Once the existing demonstration plant will 
successfully be operational, DeitY would explore the possibility of initiating more 
such units. 
 
(ii) DeitY would also encourage form al recyclers/ entrepreneurs to apply through 
MSIP scheme to avail subsidy for creating PCB recycling plants in India. 
 
(iii) E -waste awareness programme, encompassing few identified states, has 
recently been initiated at pilot stage for a period of 5 years . The mid -term 
correction on the current programme would be done based on the learning. More 
such initiatives would be taken up across the country on successful completion 
and based on the outcome and deliverables of this pilot project.” 
 
18. The Committee, in their original Report , had observed that the Dep artment 
have supported technology development for segregating and extraction of 
metals/components out of the PCB and have put up a demo plant at Bengaluru 
for e-waste disposal.  Taking note of the initiative  of DeitY for providing 25% cash 
back on capital expenditure for e -waste processing plant, the Committee had 
desired that continuous efforts should be made to manage e -waste scientifically 
and more number of e-waste disposal units should be set up.  The De partment 
have informed that this stabilization technology would take more time to  mature 
and once the demo plant at Bengaluru is successfully operational, they would 
explore the possibility of initiating more such units.  The Department also plan to 
encourage formal recyclers/entrepreneurs to apply through MSIP Scheme to avail 
subsidy for creating recycling plants in India.  The Committee feel that e -waste 
disposal is a serious issue which merits urgent attention, particularly when huge 
piles of  e-waste are generated as a direct offshoot of  an IT enabled society.  The 
Committee desire that the success of the Bengaluru demo plant be assessed and 
more such units for recycling/entrepreneurs be encouraged through the MSIP 
Scheme.    
 
 
 

14 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
19. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“With regard to having indigenous Set Top Boxes (STBs), during examination of 
the previous DFG (2014 -15), the Committee were informed that M/s ByDesign 
India Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore, had been shortlisted for develop ment and 
implementation of the India CAS in association with C -DAC. The Committee are 
given to understand that a Tripartite agreement had been executed between 
DeitY, C -DAC and M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, for development 
and Implementation of  Indian CAS on 18.11.2014 and upon expression of 
satisfaction by a Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG), the first   
installment of DeitY‟s support amount has already been released as advance to 
M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd. The Committee also note with  satisfaction that 
Indian CAS system is expected to be built, tested and would be ready for 
integration and deployment by November 2015. The Committee further note that 
for promoting indigenous manufacturing of STBs, the Government have taken 
several fiscal initiatives which inter-alia include imposition of Basic Customs Duty 
(BCD) of 10% on import of Set Top Boxes, extending the facility of form „C‟ to 
STBs manufacturers who had to pay CST equivalent to VAT rate (12.5%) and 
compulsory registration order fo r compliance to safety standards for curbing the 
inflow of sub -standard STBs. While appreciating the initiatives of DeitY, the 
Committee desire the Department to make all possible efforts to ensure that the 
timeline of November 2015 is adhered to and the r oll-out of the Indian CAS 
system takes place without any further delay.”  
 
20. The Department of Electronics and Information Technology , in their action taken 
note, have stated as under:- 
“Two meetings of Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG), constituted t o 
review the progress of the development and implementation of Indian Conditional 
Access System (CAS), were held on 18.02.2015 and 30.06.2015, respectively, 
wherein the progress made by M/s ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd and C -DAC in the 
project was found to be satisfactory.” 
21. During the examination of the Demands for Grants (201 4-15), the 
Committee had been informed that M/s By Design India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore , had 
been shortlisted for development and implementation of Indian version of CAS in 
association with C-DAC.  Having noted that the first installment of Deity’s support 
amount has been released to M/s By Design India Pvt. Ltd., the Committee had 
desired the Department to make all efforts to ensure that the roll out of the Indian 
CAS system takes place by the targeted timeline of November, 2015.  The 
Department have informed that t he Review and Steering Group constituted to 
review the progress of CAS has been held on 18.02.2015 and 30.06.2015  and the 

15 
 
progress made by M/s By Design India Pvt. Ltd. and C -DAC in the project has 
been found to be satisfactory .  However, as the November deadline is already 
over, the Committee apprehend that the Department have no choice but to defer 
the scheduled roll out of the Indian vari ant of CAS to a future date.    The 
Committee once again emphasize and reiterate that time is running out for the 
Indian version of CAS to be developed and released to the market and any further 
deferring of deadline for final rolling out is detrimental to indigenization of the 
system.  The Departme nt may apprise the Committee of the fresh deadline for 
rolling out of the Indian CAS.   
 

16 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
DEITY BUDGET  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that for the year 2015-16, against the proposed Gross 
Budgetary Support of ` 10050.00 crore, an allocation of ` 2568.00 crore has been made 
for DeitY. The budget estimate has been reduced by 33% compared to the BE 
allocation in the year 2014 -15. So far as the budgetary supp ort for the year 2014 -15 is 
concerned, the amount allocated at BE and RE stages were ` 3815 crore and ` 3600 
crore, respectively, and the actual utilization upto March, 2015 was ` 3471.71 crore 
which is 96% of the RE allocation.  Significantly, expenditure  for the year 2014 -15 is 
64% higher than that of 2013 -14.  The Committee note with satisfaction that the 
expenditure with respect to the BE allocations during the last three years have also 
improved from 61.99% to 91%. While appreciating the continuous imp rovement in 
expenditure, the Committee desire that the momentum gained in this direction be 
sustained and consolidated steps be taken to achieve the monthly/quarterly expenditure 
and quantifiable targets set for the current fiscal.   In the face of increas ed expenditure 
in 2014-15, a reduction of 33% of allocation at BE for the current fiscal by the Ministry of 
Finance appears a little unfair to the Department.  As such, the concern of the 
Committee in this regard should be brought to the notice of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance has been informed about the concerns of the Committee. 
 
Budgetary Provision for the North-Eastern Region (NER) and Sikkim 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary allo cation for NER and Sikkim for the 
year 2015 -16 is ` 257.00 crore.   As far as utilization of funds for this region is 
concerned, the Committee again note with satisfaction that the Department have 
improved their expenditure during the first three years of t he Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
During the previous DFG (2014 -15), the Committee had taken notice of the corrective 
measures initiated by DeitY to address impediments faced in the implementation of 
projects in NER. Those mainly related to providing connectivity  to remote locations 
through technologies like Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSAT), initiatives to provide 
solar back-up to address the power shortage problem at CSCs and a Plan to open a 
BPO in the region. With regard to the developments in these matters: 
 
(a) The Committee note that till date 1869 CSCs have been provided with 
connectivity through VSATs. During the previous DFG (2014 -15), the Committee 
had been informed that out of 2,500 VSATs sanctioned for North East and other 

17 
 
difficult areas, 1,705 VSATs h ad been installed till  30th September, 2014. While 
noting that in six months an additional 164 CSCs have only been connected 
through VSATs, the Committee apprehend that at this slow pace of connectivity, 
the Department may not be able to complete the targe t of 2500 VSATs within this 
Plan period. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Department to take 
urgent necessary steps to accomplish connectivity to CSCs in the remotest 
locations of this region through VSATs within the timeline.  
 
(b) The Committee not e that with regard to the Solar Power back -up for CSCs, 
the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, (MNRE) GoI, have approved Solar 
Power back-up proposal of Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland; 351 and 
217 Solar Power back-up units have been installed an d commissioned at CSCs in 
Manipur and Mizoram, respectively; Himachal Pradesh, Assam and J&K have 
submitted their proposals to MNRE for enabling Solar Power back -up at CSCs 
which are under consideration; Arunachal Pradesh has to re -submit the proposal 
as p er the revised benchmark set by MNRE; Uttarakhand and Tripura are 
expected to submit their proposals in this financial year.  While appreciating that 
568 CSCs have been provided with Solar Power back -up in this region, the 
Committee observe that the Depart ment have a long way to go to cover every 
single CSC in this region. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the 
Department to emulate the success of Solar Power back -up in other States like 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K and Aru nachal 
Pradesh and in the other difficult areas. The Committee also desire that the 
Department should put in place a mechanism for regular review and monitoring of 
proper functioning of Solar Power back -up units after their establishment. The 
Committee be apprised of further progress made in this regard. 
 
(c) A North East BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS) has been approved for 
creating employment opportunities for the youth of the region and for growth of IT -
ITES Industry. The Administrative Approval for implementat ion of the NEBPS to 
incentivize establishment of 5000 seats with capital support of ` 50 crore in the 
form of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for the remaining period of the Twelfth Five 
Year Plan (i.e. till 31.03.2017), has been issued on 30 th January 2015. T he 
Committee recommend that the Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), an 
autonomous society under DeitY, has been designated as the Nodal Agency for 
implementation of the NEBPS and that the Request For Proposal (RFP) document 
for open bid of this Sche me is under finalization. While lauding the initiative of 
NEBPS, the Committee  emphasise that the exercise of finalization of the Request 
For Proposal (RFP) and all the necessary clearance be completed well in time so 
that the Scheme can be implemented as  per the scheduled timelines and the 
benefit can be availed by the youth of the region at the earliest. The Committee be 
kept informed about the progress made in this regard.  
  
While appreciating the initiatives of the Department to address the 
impediments encountered in NER, the Committee stress the need for sustained 
efforts to implement these initiatives as well as remove other hindrances 
encountered.  The Committee further desire that the Department should also take 

18 
 
initiatives for promoting R&D activi ties and conduct training programmes for Cyber 
Security awareness at various North East institutions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 16 th June 2015, 1915 VSATS have been installed in North -Eastern states 
and difficult areas.  Some of the major reasons fo r delay in the VSAT installation are as 
below: 
 
 Non availability of power back-up at CSCs 
 Non availability of leveled surface for installation of VSAT antenna 
 Non availability of funds with state governments for construction of 
levelled platforms 
The Depar tment is co -ordinating with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders to meet the target within the plan period. 
The Solar Power back -up proposal is still awaited from Arunachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and Tripura.  Regular review and monitoring of proper functioning of 
Solar power back -up units are being done through the State Designated Agencies 
(SDAs) of the states. 
The North East BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS ) has been approved 
under Digital India Programme,  to incentivize BPO Operations in North East Reg ion 
(NER) for creation of employment opportunities for the youths and growth of IT -ITES 
Industry. The Administrative Approval for implementation of the NEBPS to incentivize 
establishment of 5000 seats, with capital support in the form of Viability Gap Fund ing 
(VGF), with an outlay of Rs. 50 crore (Rupees fifty crore only) for remaining period of 
12th Five Year Plan i.e. up to 31.03.2017 has been issued on 30th January 2015. 
The Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), an autonomous society under 
the Depar tment of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), Government of 
India, has been designated as the Nodal Agency for implementation of the NEBPS.  
The RFP (Request for Proposal) inviting open bids has been e -published by 
STPI on 18 th April, 2015 on th e following websites: 
http://eprocure.gov.in, www.deity.gov.in,  www.stpi.in and www.guwahati.stpi.in  
However, in order to elicit response from industry, certain eligibility criteria(s) & terms 
and conditions of NEBPS have been relaxed on 12th June, 2015 as under: 
         Any Indian company (not restricted to BPO operations) with minimum 
average turnover of Rs.5 crore over the last 3 financial years can participate 
in the bid. 
         The BPO Unit would be required to furnish a Performance Bank 
Guarantee of 5% o f the total approved support amount from a Nationalized 
Bank, valid for a period of 3 years before the release of first  instalment under 

19 
 
Capital Support, instead of Financial Bank Guarantee for  the full amount of 
total approved support amount. 
Corrigendum incorporating these changes has been e -published by STPI on      
19th June, 2015. The last date of bid submission for revised  RFP of NEBPS has been 
extended up to 13th July, 2015. 
 
Under Cyber Security programme of the Department, projects have been 
supported at various autonomous R&D Organisations and Academic Institutions in 
North East Region in various thrust areas of Cyber Security including (a) Cryptography 
and cryptanalysis, (b) Network & System Security, (c) Monitoring & Forensics and (d) 
Vulnerability Remediation & Assurance. The projects supported so far resulted in R&D 
Capacity Building, Cyber Forensics Training Infrastructure and R&D Infrastructure, 
Awareness and Training. Efforts are continued to strengthen the Cyber Security related 
activities (R&D as well as training and awareness creation activities)  in the North East 
Region by way of formulation of new projects. 
 
SCHEMES/PROJECTS OF DEITY 
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that as against the pr oposed allocation of ` 1300 crore, the 
BE provided for the year 2015 -16 for NIC is ` 700 crore. As far as the financial 
performance of NIC is concerned, the Committee understand that during the last three 
years, the outlay available at RE stage has almost been fully utilized by them.  
However, the Committee are given to understand that NIC is witnessing severe 
constraints relating to manpower, so much so that it has become extremely difficult for it 
to sustain the number of projects, as per the IT requireme nts of the States/Districts.  
The other major constraint faced by NIC is related to the expansion of basic 
infrastructure across the country. On both the issues, the Committee have been 
repeatedly expressing their concern.  W hile examining DFG (2014 -15), the Committee 
had recommended expediting the proposal for creating posts to strengthen the technical 
arm of NIC and to initiate action for upgradation of basic infrastructure at NIC centres 
across the country. In this regard, a proposal (Cabinet Note) has b een mooted by the 
Department for the creation of 1407 posts at different levels of Scientific and 
Administrative cadre. The Committee r ecommend to the Department to take the 
proposal to the conclusive end and resolve issues relating to manpower constraints  at 
the earliest. The Committee would like to re -emphasize that time -bound resolution of 
both the issues is very significant because the man power requirement is bound to 
increase in view of the setting up of the new NIC Cloud at Delhi, new Data Centre at 
Bhubaneshwar and NIC being an attached office of the Department and providing         
e-Governance ICT Infrastructure, applications and services for the delivery of citizen -
centric services. Needless to say, there is an urgent need for upgrading the basic 
infrastructure too because the Data Centres of NIC host more than 7000 websites of the 
Government. Not only this, NIC has the largest e -Mail service of the country with more 
than 90 million e -Mails per month and the NIC National Cloud is presently hosting a 

20 
 
number of critical applications on over 2500 virtual servers. The Committee desire to be 
kept apprised of the progress made in resolving the genuine concerns of NIC. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal for creating 1407 posts is under consideration f or Inter-Ministerial 
approval. Further, NIC has already created Virtual classrooms at NIC -Bhubneshwar, 
Pune and Hyderabad for organizing various technical training facilities programmes on 
technology areas.  To facilitate  NIC officers to keep them abreast  of state of the art 
technology, NIC officers are sponsored for training programmes at IITs,  IIIT, Delhi and 
IIITM Gwalior. It has been proposed to create State of the art training infrastructure at 
NIC Hqrs to launch both classroom as well as e-learning programmes. 
 
NIC infrastructure is an ongoing exercise. The need for such upgradation arises 
due to continuous change in technology. Some of the recent steps taken to upgrade 
NIC include setting up of the NIC Cloud at Delhi, approval of new Data Centre at 
Bubneshwar, upgrading NICNET by linking it with NKN, State Informatics Offices and 
District Informatics Offices in new States and new districts created across the country, 
support for new Ministries/Departments and Central Government organizations across 
the country, e -office and e -procurement infrastructure for whole of Government etc.  
The demands on NIC have increased significantly as technology becomes an integral 
part of larger number of activities of various e -Governance initiatives.  There is 
increasing demand for expanding the NIC infrastructure, particularly for additional 
manpower. 
 
 
Digital India Programme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee find that under the „Digital India Programme‟ - an umbrella 
programme of the Department for the year 2015-16 -  there have been reduced 
allocations under some of the major schemes, like Technology Development Council 
Projects, Micro-Electronics and Nano -Tech Programme, R&D in Medical Electronics & 
Health Informatics, Cyber Security (incl. CERT -In, IT Act) , Promotion of IT & ITeS 
Industries/Electronics & IT Hardware manufacturing, Technology Development for 
Indian Language and National Knowledge Network.  It is a matter of concern that the 
drastic cut in the budgetary allocations are going to adversely impact on the R&D 
activities supported under these programmes of DeitY. The Committee are given to 
understand that the major initiatives in the thrust areas of Medical Electronics and 
Health Informatics would not be taken up due to the drastic cut in allocatio n; the 
reduction will also have an impact on the implementation of the key initiatives under the 
Cyber Security programme which may hamper the pace of building a safe cyber eco -
system in the country; growth of electronics manufacturing will be affected and  there will 
also be delays in implementation of projects under the Technology Development 
Council Projects and Technology Development for Indian Language. The Committee 
foresee that these hindrances will have a cumulative adverse effect on the pace of the 

21 
 
overall technology development in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department may take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance with a view to 
getting adequate funds at RE stage so that the momentum of „Digital India Campaign‟ 
does not suffer a setback. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance has already been informed about the concerns of the 
Committee. DeitY would further take up the matter with Ministry of Finance at the 
Revised Estimates stage for providing additional fu nds to maintain the momentum of 
„Digital India Campaign‟.  
 
e-Locker/ Digital locker 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the Department have envisaged „e -Locker‟ as a part of 
the Digital India vision, which is an ecosystem with collection of repositories and 
gateways for issuers to upload the documents in the digital repositories, requesters to 
access the documents and a digital locker space for each resident to access his/her 
documents from the repositories or upload legacy documents. The Committee consider 
it to be a laudable initiative that the Beta release of Digital Locker system is done to 
provide private space on a public cloud to each citizen where he/she can keep public 
records and can even exchange it for availing various services.  It is, however, essential 
that the Department should evolve a device to address the apprehensions associated 
with „Digital Locker‟, such as security threats, data hacking, privacy issues, etc. The 
Committee are of the opinion that there is a need to have a data privacy policy to take 
care of the apprehensions associated with this praiseworthy concept and in addition the 
Department should have the requisite tool to deter any attempt to compromise data 
privacy. The Committee also recommend to the Department to conduct a study of the 
user‟s response/satisfaction so that they can specifically address any problem areas 
that come to their notice.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DeitY will create a Terms of Service (ToS) document and share it on the Digital 
Locker portal. The policy will lay down the salient aspects related to data privacy of the 
citizen‟s data hosted with Digital Locker. The security features have been considered in 
the design of the Digital Locker system so that access to the data within the system i s 
allowed to authorized users only. The system is currently hosted in the State Data 
Centre which is equipped with security devices such as Intrusion Prevention System, 
firewall etc. The data centre is also ISO 27001 security complaint. The portal is 
available via a SSL enabled secure transport layer that encrypts the communication 
between the user and the system. Additionally, a Symantec/Verisign SSL certificate 
shall be deployed on the Digital Locker System server which is recognized by all the 
browser pr oviders. Further, a comprehensive security audit for the Digital Locker 
System will be completed in due course of time. 
 

22 
 
The portal currently provides a mechanism for the user to send feedback via the 
feedback page. Dedicated resources have been deployed t o go through the user 
feedbacks and respond as per need. Any suggestion received to improve the quality of 
service is being taken into consideration by the product team. 
 
Digital India Programme and Manpower Development 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
  
The „Digital India Programme and Manpower Development‟ scheme targets HRD 
activities to ensure availability of trained human resources for the manufacturing and 
service sectors of electronics and IT industry and includes Skill Development in IT 
initiatives. Besi des, the Internet Governance component of this programme involves 
development and application by Governments, the private sector and civil society in 
their respective roles of shared principles, norms, rules, decision -making procedures 
and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the Internet. The objective of „IT 
for Masses‟ component of the programme is empowerment of women and development 
of SCs/STs using ICT.  
 
The Committee note that under this scheme, 371211 persons have been skilled 
through Aut onomous bodies viz. NIELIT, CDAC and other implementing agencies 
(registered/trained/undergoing training) till February 2015.  Further, NIELIT has trained 
25935 persons in Basic Computer Course (BCC) of 40 hrs duration.  The Committee 
have been apprised th at the Department are in the process of formulating some 
schemes/activities relating to Human Resource Development for Electronics and ICT 
sector which inter-alia include Skill Development in Electronics Hardware (being 
implemented by NCPUL/NIELIT Chandiga rh), Information Security Education and 
Awareness (ISEA) Project, Capacity building in the areas of Electronic Product Design 
and Production Technology, special Manpower Development Program for Chips to 
Systems, creation of skill development facilities in deprived areas through strengthening 
of National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT), Scheme for 
„Digital Saksharta Abhiyan‟ ( ), for Skill Development in ESDM, for Post Graduate 
and Doctorate Level, Graduate level, for vocation al Skill development, for Grass root 
level, etc. In addition, during the year 2014 -15, as against the target of 1800 women 
beneficiaries, a total of 2103 women have been trained under the „Digital India 
Programme and Manpower Development for Skill Development in IT & IT for Masses‟.  
 
The Committee also note that under the aegis of „Digital India‟ the Department 
have approved a Scheme for „Skill Development in ESDM for Digital India‟ on 
09.12.2014 to cover all the States/UTs of the country for facilitating skill development for 
3,28,000 persons in ESDM in a period of 4 years with an outlay of ` 411 crore (approx.). 
In fact, this scheme is in continuation of the scheme for financial assistance to select 
States/UTs for „Skill Development in Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) sector‟ approved earlier and is being implemented in 8 States, and both the 
Schemes are to be implemented concurrently. While appreciating the progress made 
under this Scheme, the Committee recommend to the Department to pro gressively 
evaluate and suitably modify the modules/programmes of the Scheme more practically 
as per the emerging demands of the Electronics and IT Sector. The Committee also 

23 
 
recommend to the Department to set annual targets for the ESDM Scheme and cover 
all the States/UTs as per the scheduled timeline.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has constituted an Expert Committee under the Schemes to 
recommend new courses from time to time and assess the relevance of the course on a 
periodic basis as per Industry requirement. It may be kindly noted that so far the 
Committee has approved 64 courses consisting of 21 Manufacturing sector courses and 
43 Service sector courses. As regards the annual targets for the States/UTs, it is 
indicated that an annual tar get has been assigned to each State/UT under the 
Schemes. 
 
 
Cyber Security (incl. CERT-In and IT Act) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee observe that the holistic approach of securing Indian Cyber 
space include the objective of implementing the Nat ional Security Policy which 
mandates the establishment of the National Cyber Co -ordination Centre (NCCC), 
Botnet Cleaning Centre and Malware Analysis Centre (BCCMAC). The Committee, 
while examining DFG (2014 -15), had observed under -funding and non -utilization of the 
RE allocation under Cyber Security programme and had called for an improvement in 
the situation. In this regard, the Committee note that during the year 2015 -16, though 
the allocation at BE stage is reduced around 3.5 times (i.e. ` 85 crore) aga inst the 
proposed sum of ` 297 crore, there has been an increase in the allocation when 
compared to last year‟s RE allocation of ` 62 crore. With regard to the National Cyber 
Co-ordination Centre, the projected outlay is ` 770 crore, for a period of five y ears, out 
of which the requirement for the first year is ` 266 crore. The Committee note that under 
NCCC project, the initiative of consultation with all the stakeholders as well as 
evaluation of all the technological aspects of the project initiative have   been completed 
and have reached the advance stage of approval. During the current year, the first 
stage of implementation, which includes site preparation, procurement of equipment 
and creation of manpower resource, have been proposed.  The Committee als o note 
that the project for setting up of Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre has also 
been approved with an outlay of ` 90 crore for a period of five years and for the current 
year (2015 -16), the estimated financial outlay is ` 25.85 crore. The pr oject 
implementation has already started and procurement of equipment and site preparation 
are in progress . The Committee desire that these two key  initiatives should not be 
hampered due to want of funds  as it would, in turn, hamper the pace of building a safe 
cyber eco-system in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The allocation of Rs. 85 Crores during 2015 -16 allows for setting -up of Botnet 
Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre in addition to regular operational requirements 

24 
 
of CERT -In & CAT and Cyber Security R&D. More funds are required to meet the 
requirements of National Cyber Coordination Centre project.  
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee, in their Second Report on DFG (2014 -15), had noted that 
though the number of cyber fraud cases during the last three years had come down, yet 
financial loss due to e-fraud had increased. Further, the data maintained by the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) reveals that a  total number of 10048, 8765, 9500 and 9362 cyber 
fraud cases related to Credit Cards, AT M/Debit Cards and Internet Banking have 
accounted for losses of ` 38 crore, ` 67 crore,  ` 78 crore and ` 60 crore during the 
years 2011 -12, 2012-13 and 2013 -14 (till December 2014), respectively. Besides, the 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has repo rtedly registered 46 cases (14 PEs and 
32 RCs) relating to Cyber Crime in various parts of the country during the last 3 years, 
i.e. 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 (till February). An amount of ` 90 crore, ` 158 crore and 
` 6 crore, respectively was involved in  these cases. However, the number of cases of 
Government websites being hacked has come down over the years. The report of the 
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) indicates that a total number 
of 28481, 32323 & 4241 websites were hacked by various hacker groups spread across 
the world during the years 2013, 2014 and 2015 (till Feb, 2015) and these include a 
total number of 371, 189, 155 and 19 Government websites hosted under „gov.in‟ & 
„nic.in‟ domains during the period. 
 
Mechanism/Resources/Preparedness to tackle Cyber threat 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
With regard to the mechanism/preparedness to tackle Cyber threat, the 
Committee note that apart from the provisions of  the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
initiatives by CERT -In  and guid elines/circular by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the 
Department have taken several measures like programme on development of cyber 
forensics tools and setting up of infrastructure for investigation and training of the users, 
particularly police and judi cial officers. Further, Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centres (ISACs) have been set up at the Institute for Development and Research in 
Banking Technology (IDRBT) and a website (secureyourpc.in) for children, home users 
and elderly is available for safe guarding their computer systems and learning the risks 
on internet. While acknowledging the Department‟s submission that their measures 
have been helpful in creating awareness for dealing with e -frauds, the Committee feel 
that a lot more has to be done in this field in view of the uniquely challenging nature of 
cyber space. 
The Committee are given to understand that there is no international mechanism 
to tackle cyber attacks and the Department are working with the United Nations Group 
of Government Experts to find out a uniform response. Taking note of the absence of 
uniform global cyber space norms, the Committee recommend to the Department to use 
the UN platform to come out with global cyber space norms and develop a consensus 

25 
 
for a uniform Cyber Jurisprud ence which regulates and facilitates extradition of cross -
border cyber criminals. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government to Recommendation Sl. No. 9 and 10 
 
The issue of cyber security is transnational. Accordingly, strengthening 
international cooperation to effectiv ely deal with cyber security issues has been one of 
the main focus areas of the Government and has been outlined in the National Cyber 
Security Policy 2013. In view of the need for international relationships and cooperation 
issues, the Government is makin g concerted efforts to determine the ways and means 
of expanding the international collaboration as well as exploring the possibility of 
commonality of approach between nations. Strategic cyber security cooperation with the 
other countries enables creation  of a security ring of like -minded and ICT dependent 
nations around the world that can help safety and security of cyber space.  
 
Accordingly, Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) enters into 
international cyber security cooperation arrangemen ts with organizations engaged in 
similar activities, in the form of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), to enhance its 
operational readiness.  At present such MoUs have been entered into with:  
 
a) Computer Emergency Response Team, US (US-CERT),  
b) Japanese Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Centre  
      (JP-CERT/CC) 
c)  National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), South Korea 
d) Computer Emergency Response Team, Mauritius (CERT Mauritius) 
e) Computer Emergency Response Team, Kazakhstan  (CERT Kazakhstan) 
 
Besides the above, Government of Finland, Government of Canada have signed 
MoU with Government of India on cooperation in the area of cyber security. Further, 
bilateral consultations have been initiated with Germany, Sweden, Malaysia and Brunei. 
 
Further, India is participating in the UN Group of Governmental Experts 
(UNGGE) as well as in the Council of Security Cooperation in Asia Pacific (CSCAP) for 
determining measures to enhance cooperation in the area of cyber security. 
 
 
Cyber security experts 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 
With regard to cyber security professionals, the Committee, in their Second 
Report on DFG (2014 -15), had noted that against the growing demand for cyber 
security experts in the country, which is estimated to be 5 lakh by 2016, India had only 
44,000 information security professionals. The Committee note with concern that there 
is no significant increase in the availability of cyber professionals in the country, 

26 
 
particularly with respect to Cyber auditors in the country numbering just 51. While 
appreciating the Department‟s submission that they are moving from security incident 
prevention to prediction, the Committee urge the Department to meet the estimated 
requirement of manpower to tackle cyber threats at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Cyber security experts  
 
Formal and informal methods are used for capacity building of cyber security 
professionals.  The formal mode of capacity building is proposed to be undertaken 
through the universities and educational institutions by way of offer ing degrees, the 
informal method of capacity development is proposed to be through the public private 
partnership where the private sector will play  a lead role. 
 
The technical education in the field of cyber security and information security is 
being pro vided in more than 35 AICTE approved institutes.  The students can avail 
technical education under four broad categories i.e. computer networks & information 
security, e -Security, information security in management assurance & information 
security. 
 
The Information Security Education and Awareness  (ISEA) Project aims at 
generation of manpower in the area of Information Security at various levels, train 
government officials and create mass awareness. The first phase of the project was 
completed on 31.3.2014 under which more than 42,000 students were trained in various 
formal and non -formal course at various academic institutions, NIELIT and CDAC; and 
more than 500 awareness workshops were conducted throughout the country.  Phase -
II of the project has been ini tiated with an outlay of Rs. 96.08 crore to be implemented 
over a period of 5 years w.e.f. 01.4.2014. Under the ISEA Phase -II, 1.14 lakh persons 
are proposed to be trained under formal and non -formal courses, faculty training etc. 
The project also aims to provide training to more than 13,000 Government officials and 
creating mass information security awareness targeted towards Academic users, 
Government users and General users (approximately 3 crore Internet users in five years 
through direct and indirect mode).   
 
Training centres have been set up at all the state capital of North East, Kerala, 
CBI, National Police Academy (NPA) and other organisations to facilitate advance 
training in the area of cyber crime investigations for Law and Enforcement agency.  
Computer forensic labs and training facilities have been set up in J&K states and all the 
state capitals of North East. The forensic training centres have also been set up with 
help of NASSCOM at Mumbai, Bangalore , Kolkata, Pune and Haryana. Virtual train ing 
environment, based training modules are also being introduced for training the law 
enforcement personnel.  More than 50 trainings in north eastern States and more than 
400 trainings have been conducted in Mumbai, Pune, Bangalore and Kolkata at 
respective Police headquarters exclusively for Police officers to train them in cybercrime 
detection, seizing and imaging digital evidence. In addition, about 200 training 
programmes have been organized in the area of cyber -crime and cyber forensics for 

27 
 
Judicial a cademies, Law Enforcement agencies and States Police Departments. 
Activities are continued to train more persons utilizing the cyber forensics training 
facilities created.  
 
In addition to above, CERT -In conducts awareness and exposure program once 
in 15 d ays where the technical professionals from all over the country are exposed to 
the labs, cyber security threats and the ways and means to mitigate those cyber 
attacks.  Around 5700 participants from 200 organisations attended these programmes. 
These activities are being conducted on regular basis.   
 
The Ministry of Human Resource Development has created the skill registries 
involving the programme to establish certification courses in different areas of cyber 
security in line with the industry and the country. 
 
Further, Government has initiated a public -private partnership program with the 
active involvement of private sector in the form of a Joint Working Group.   The Working 
Group produced its report and recommendations outlining the means of engagement 
with the private sector.  The report of Working Group has laid a road map for capacity 
building to meet the demands of cyber security  professionals  in a mission  mode  
through PPP  arrangements.   
 
With these initiatives, Govt. intends to expand its reach  and increase the scale 
for meeting the demand for cyber security professional work force in the country.  
 
Auditors 
 
CERT-In, is empanelling the Cyber Security auditors through a stringent testing 
mechanism, to help government and critical sector organiza tions to conduct regular 
audits. At present there are 51 Cyber Security Auditors/ Auditing Organizations 
empanelled by the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) for the 
purpose of carrying out cyber security audit related activities. The empane lment is a 
continuous process and new auditors are empanelled after successful completion of 
test procedures and verification of auditing skills. Government and critical sector 
organisations are consulting the list for their cyber security audit requirements. 
 
Right to be forgotten online 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
With regard to the emergence of the concept of „Right to be forgotten online‟, the 
Committee note that the Department are following the developments in this area so as 
to enable the Cyber Regulatory Advisory Committee (CRAC)  to deal with these issues. 
The Committee are given to understand that the Department are formulating a privacy 
legislation (the „Right to be forgotten online‟ is connected with the right to privacy) and 
they have made a re ference to the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) for 
incorporation of their view in the new law. The Committee are of the opinion that in view 
of the increased awareness regarding freedom of expression and privacy, the 
Department need to remain a lert to take cognizance of developments associated with 

28 
 
this concept and act swiftly. The Committee may be kept informed about the progress in 
formulation of the proposed law.  
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department by way of Information Technology Ac t 2000 has created 
adequate legal provisions for data security and privacy protection in respect of digital 
data. For rest of the requirements, the Department is working in close coordination with 
DoPT. 
 
Development related to Section 66A of IT Act, 2000 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
With regard to the Supreme Court judgement on Section 66A of the Information 
Technology Act, the Committee have been informed that the Government have 
welcomed the Hon‟ble Supreme Court‟s decision of scrapping Section 66A. The 
Committee also note that after detailed discussions, the Government had filed an 
affidavit before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court making their stand clear that they respect 
the freedom of speech and expression on social media and has no intention of curbing 
it.  Besides, the Department, in due course of time, would study and understand the 
operational implications of the judgment for any possible action in the future.  Regarding 
the future course of action following the Supreme Court judgement, the Committee note  
that the Department are now focusing extensively on increasing user awareness with 
regard to responsible user behaviour and acceptable norms and how people should be 
able to use the cyber space.  The Department have also assured the Committee that 
even af ter Section 66A has been struck down, the IPC provisions still exist for any 
serious violation of individual privacy and dignity. The Committee, in their Forty -fourth 
Report (15th L.S.) on DFG (2013 -14), had noted a few controversies related to Section 
66A and other Sections of the IT Act, 2008 (as amended) and had asked the 
Department to take necessary corrective steps for revision of the clauses of the Act and 
the Committee once again recommend to the Department to be proactive in such 
situations. The Committee would await Government‟s response in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, former 
Secretary, Law Commission & Secretary General has been set up by the Government 
to study and exam ine the existing domestic cyber laws and International Cyber 
legislations and recommend a road map with measures and amendments to the present 
laws for consideration of the Government. 
 
Further, in order to comprehensively address the issues of Cyber Crime s, 
Ministry of Home Affairs has set up an Expert Group consisting of Academicians and 

29 
 
Professionals of repute to prepare a roadmap for effectively tackling the Cyber Crimes 
in the country and give suitable recommendations on all facets of cyber crime. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
Promotion of IT & ITeS Industries/Electronics & IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that during the current financial year, promotion of IT & ITeS 
Industries and promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware Manufacturing have been put 
under one head. The budgetary allocations during the year 2015 -16 are ` 5 crore and ` 
69 crore, respectively, for the two schemes. The Committee also note that as per the 
assessment of NASSCOM, the Indian IT -ITES industry is growing progressively. 
However, the fact of the matter is that in spite of several measures taken by the 
Department over the years, there has been rapid increase in import of electronic items 
[which has increased from ` 187306.38 crore in the year 2013 -14 to ` 206399.58 crore 
in the year 2015-16 (till Feb 2015)] and decline in exports of electronic items [which was 
` 46703.78 crore during the year 2013 -14  and  ` 33634.29 crore during the current 
year (till Fe b 2015)].  Nevertheless, the Committee take note of the steps taken by the 
Department to promote this sector which inter-alia include the Modified Special 
Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS); Electronic Manufacturing Clusters (EMC); Setting 
up of Semiconduct or Wafer Fabs; preference to Domestically Manufactured Electronic 
Products (DMEP) in Government procurement; Electronic Development Fund (EDF) 
Policy approved on 10th December, 2014; Compulsory Safety Standards for Electronics; 
Scheme for setting up/up -gradation of Labs; Promoting collaborative funding in R&D; 
Supporting research in Medical Electronics through BIRAC; National Centre of 
Excellence for Large Area Flexible Electronics (CFLEX); National Centre of Excellence 
in Technology for Internal Security ( NCETIS); Policy for Promotion of Fabless Design 
Industry; Development of Indian Conditional Access System (CAS); Scheme for 
supporting MSMEs in the electronics sector; Setting up of Incubation Centre in Delhi -
NCR; Setting up of Incubation Centre with focus  on Medical Electronics at IIT Patna, 
etc. The Committee also note that rationalization of tariff and Budget announcement  
have been made during the year 2014 -15 and 2015 -16 for boosting indigenous 
manufacturing of Mobile Handsets, Personal computers (Desk top, Laptop and Tablets), 
TVs, indigenous manufacturing of ITA Products, LED Lights, Medical Electronic 
Products, Solar Photovoltaic Cells, smart cards, Microwave Ovens, optical fibre cables, 
Semiconductor wafer fab, Telecommunication Equipment Manufacturi ng, Set Top 
Boxes, etc.  
 
The Committee have been given to understand that some areas which are major 
hurdles hindering this sector from taking off are zero duty regimes on 217 tariff lines 
[India being a signatory to the Information Technology Agreement -1(ITA-1) of the World 
Trade Organization (WTO)], the domestic manufacturing sector facing direct 

30 
 
competition from the manufacturers of countries like China, Japan, Taiwan, South 
Korea, Malaysia, United States of America and European countries, etc. The othe r 
identified obstacles relate to the declining domestic manufacturing capabilities and 
various disabilities like high finance cost, poor infrastructure and logistics, unreliable and 
poor quality of power, inverted tax duty structure wherein importers get f avorable tax 
regime vis -a-vis domestic manufacturers and high transaction cost due to the large 
number of regulatory clearances requirements, etc.  This has added to the slow growth 
of Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing sector. 
 
The Committee, howev er, note that during the year 2014 -15 the Department 
have taken up the exercise of inviting business consortium to set up two Semiconductor 
wafer fabs and they have received two proposals. The Committee understand that 
these proposals have been approved by  the Government and the consortia are in the 
process of finalising their DPR and arranging money for the project. While appreciating 
this development, the Committee recommend to the Department to take measures to 
see to it that there is no procedural delay  in finalising and setting up the two 
Semiconductor wafer fabs.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Letters of Intent dated 19.03.2014 were issued to the consortiums led by M/s. 
Jaiprakash Associates Ltd. and M/s. HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Ltd. by 28.04.2015. 
After providing extensions on several occasions, both the consortia were required to 
submit the following documents by 31.03.2015: 
h) Revised Detailed Project Report (DPR) with detailed costing and implementation 
plan, after incorporating the deficiencies tha t were pointed out to them on 
05.11.2014. 
i) Incorporation of SPV for the project, in accordance with proposed equity structure. 
j) At least 25% of equity funding required for Phase I of the project to be injected by 
the promoters into the SPV. 
k) A letter of in -principle approval from Financial Institutions/Banks for at least 10% of 
debt funding requirement of Phase 1, or INR 1000 Crores, whichever is higher. 
l) Agreements between consortium partners specifying inter se performance 
guarantees. 
m) Proof of legal possession of adequate and suitable land as outlined in the proposals. 
n) Performance guarantee agreements with GoI. 
 The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 28.01.2015 has reconstituted the 
Empowered Committee (EC) with the following composition: 
ix. Dr. V.K. Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog      …..        Chairman. 
x. Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Chairman, Indian Space Research Organisation. 
xi. Secretary, Department of Expenditure. 
xii. Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. 
xiii. Dr. M.J. Zarabi, Former CMD, Semiconduct or Complex Ltd. (SCL) - Technical 
Expert. 

31 
 
xiv. Prof. Narendra Krishna Karmarkar, Distinguished Visiting Professor, IIT-Bombay. 
xv. Secretary, Department of Electronics and Information Technology - Member 
Convener. 
xvi. Empowered Committee may co-opt any other experts. 
 The reconstituted EC has been notified vide this Department‟s O.M. dated 
11.02.2015. Subsequently, three meetings of the EC were held on 11.03.2015, 
15.05.2015 and 26.05.2015. EC at its meeting held on 11.03.2015 has inter -alia 
decided to co -opt (a) Dr. K. D. Nayak, DG - Micro Electronic Devices & Computational 
Systems, DRDO; (b) Shri V. Koteswara Rao, Former Director, Semi -Conductor 
Laboratory (SCL) as members on the Empowered Committee. 
 However, both the consortia have not yet submitted the requisite docu ments 
required for demonstration of commitment. Subsequently, M/s. HSMC Technologies 
India Pvt. Ltd. vide their letter dated 31.03.2015 has requested for extension of last date 
till 31.07.2015. M/s. Jaiprakash Associates Ltd. vide their letter dated 27.03. 2015 has 
requested for certain amendments in the terms and conditions of the Letter of Intent. 
 Empowered Committee then met both the consortia in its 23rd meeting held on 
26.05.2015 for obtaining updates on the progress made by them in their respective 
projects, wherein inter -alia EC has decided to extend the last date of submission of all 
the documents for demonstration of commitment, as per para 3 of the terms and 
conditions of the LoI dated 19.03.2014, till 30.09.2015  subject to the consortia 
conveying the date for complying to each of the conditions precedent to Demonstration 
of Commitment, as per LoI dated 19.03.2014, without any caveat. This would be the 
final extension and thereafter no further request for extension of time would be 
entertained. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
 
E-waste 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
With regard to the role of DeitY in managing e -Waste, the Committee note that 
the Department‟s primary role is to develop R&D solutions for processing and extraction 
of precious metals from Printed Circuit Board (PCB) and plastics out of the e -waste.  
The Committee further note that DeitY have come out with technology where plastics 
can be taken out, categorized and reused to make car bumpers and switches an d they 
are trying to transfer the  technology to manufacturers for manufacturing value added 
goods. With regard to the Printed Circuit Board as well, the Department have supported 
technology development for segregating and extraction of metals/components out of the 
PCB and they, along with another company, have put up a demo plant at Bengaluru for 
extraction of about one metric tonne of metal from the PCB per day. The Committee are 
also given to understand that after the successful demo, they will give this  technology to 
any manufacturer who would like to use it and recycle the waste. The Department have 
got approval to put up the e -waste awareness programme under which they will do an 
elementary analysis and then will create awareness both at the manufactur er level and 

32 
 
at the school/college/RWA levels and help to recycle e -waste.  The basic 
implementation of legal framework for e -waste management is the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests (M/o E&F). However, to address the primary 
problem of e-waste being taken by unorganized sectors and channelized and processed 
in a non-friendly manner , DeitY are working jointly with the M/o E&F by giving 
technological solutions to them and receiving help from them for identifying areas in 
which DeitY can set up ecological parks /some plant for recycling. Taking note of 
another initiative of DeitY of providing 25% cash back on the capital expenditure for e -
waste processing plant, the Committee feel that there need to be continuous efforts on 
the part of  the Department to manage e -waste scientifically and more number of 
scientific and electronic e -waste disposal units should be set up in future. The 
Committee also recommend to the Department to draft a policy, in co-ordination with Mo 
E&F, for increasing e-waste awareness in the country and come out with a plan for „e -
waste handling site‟ in each city. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The action taken is as under: 
 
(i) Deity has initiated setting up of a demonstration plant at Bengaluru, employing its 
indigenously developed technology. The stabilization technology would need more time 
to mature. Once the existing demonstration plant will successfully be operational, DeitY 
would explore the possibility of initiating more such units. 
 
(ii) DeitY would also encourage formal recyclers/ entrepreneurs to apply through MSIP 
scheme to avail subsidy for creating PCB recycling plants in India. 
 
(iii) E-waste awareness programme, encompassing few identified states, has recently 
been initiated at pilot stage for a period of 5 y ears. The mid -term correction on the 
current programme would be done based on the learning. More such initiatives would 
be taken up across the country on successful completion and based on the outcome 
and deliverables of this pilot project. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Technology Development for Indian languages 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Technology Development for Indian Languages (TDIL) programme is playing 
an important and catalytic role in promoting developme nt of linguistic resources/tools 
and for wider proliferation of Indian language technology products and solutions. The 
Budgetary allocation and utilization under this project reveal that the targets of RE 
allocation have been met during last two years. Nev ertheless, the Committee note with 
concern that in spite of utilizing almost all the RE allocations during the previous years, 
the amount allocated for the year 2015 -16 (` 20 crore) for this programme has been 
reduced by 7 times from the proposed sum of ` 140 crore. The Committee would like the 

33 
 
Department to intimate the concern of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance.  The 
implication is accentuated in view of the Department‟s submission that the targets in 
several projects in the area of Technology, L anguage Resource and Standardization, 
under TDIL, could not be achieved due to shortage of budget and only token amount of 
Grants-in-Aid have been released to several projects, resulting in delay in achieving the 
targets. Disquietingly, during the year 201 4-15, no new projects for the development of 
Multilingual computing in future technology area could be initiated.  Further, the 
computer scientists trained under the project have left the project which has resulted in 
shortfall of the targets; the delay in  implementation of projects has a cumulative effect 
on the pace of overall technology development in this area. Considering the 
Government‟s mission of „Digital India‟, the Committee are of the opinion that there is an 
urgent need to have IT facilitates in Indian languages for spread of IT to the masses and 
hindrances in the projects will hamper the public delivery of services in local languages. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Department to mitigate the said 
consequences by enhancing the budget allocation to TDIL Programme and also pursue 
their case with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance has already been informed about the concerns of the 
Committee. DeitY would request Ministry of Finance for additional provi sions for the 
Programme at the Revised Estimates stage.  
 
C-DAC and other Autonomous Societies/Bodies  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that during the current fiscal (2015 -16) the 
schemes/projects/councils/societies like Center for Develop ment of Advanced 
Computing (C -DAC), Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & 
Research (SAMEER), Educational Research Network (ERNET), Electronics Materials 
Development Council (EMDC), Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology  (C -
MET),  NIELIT (erstwhile DOEACC ) and Media Lab Asia (MLA) have been included 
under the head „C -DAC and other Autonomous Societies/Bodies‟. The Committee 
stress that closed monitoring of the functioning of these bodies will go a long way in the 
overall performance of DeitY.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed comments of the Committee have been noted and DeitY has been 
monitoring closely the functioning of the above-cited Societies/Bodies. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
With regard to having indigenous Set To p Boxes (STBs), during examination of 
the previous DFG (2014-15), the Committee were informed that M/s ByDesign India Pvt. 
Ltd, Bangalore, had been shortlisted for development and implementation of the India 
CAS in association with C -DAC. The Committee are  given to understand that a 
Tripartite agreement had been executed between DeitY, C -DAC and M/s. ByDesign 

34 
 
India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, for development and Implementation of Indian CAS on 
18.11.2014 and upon expression of satisfaction by a Project Review and  Steering 
Group (PRSG), the first   installment of DeitY‟s support amount has already been 
released as advance to M/s. ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd. The Committee also note with 
satisfaction that Indian CAS system is expected to be built, tested and would be rea dy 
for integration and deployment by November 2015. The Committee further note that for 
promoting indigenous manufacturing of STBs, the Government have taken several fiscal 
initiatives which inter-alia include imposition of Basic Customs Duty (BCD) of 10% on 
import of Set Top Boxes, extending the facility of form „C‟ to STBs manufacturers who 
had to pay CST equivalent to VAT rate (12.5%) and compulsory registration order for 
compliance to safety standards for curbing the inflow of sub -standard STBs. While 
appreciating the initiatives of DeitY, the Committee desire the Department to make all 
possible efforts to ensure that the timeline of November 2015 is adhered to and the roll -
out of the Indian CAS system takes place without any further delay.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Two meetings of Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG), constituted to 
review the progress of the development and implementation of Indian Conditional 
Access System (CAS), were held on 18.02.2015 and 30.06.2015, respectively, wherein 
the progress made by M/s ByDesign India Pvt. Ltd and C -DAC in the project was found 
to be satisfactory. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I) 

35 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 

36 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Electronic Governance (NeGP,  ‘Programme on enablin g all schools with virtual 
classrooms’ and ‘Programme on Good Governance and Best Practices’) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that Electronic Governance include NeGP (approved in May 
2006), „Programme on Good Governance and Best Practices‟ and „Programme on 
enabling all schools with virtual classrooms‟ (approved in   2014 -15 with a corpus of ` 
100 crore each). During the year 2015 -16, as against the proposed allocation of ` 994 
crore, the BE allocation is ` 450 crore, whereas during the year  2014-15, the BE and 
RE were ` 475.00 and ` 479.92 crore, respectively and the actual expenditure was ` 
414.90 crore. With regard to the progress under the „Programme on enabling all schools 
with virtual classrooms and „Good Governance and Best Practices s chemes‟, the 
Committee are given to understand that the physical and financial targets for the year 
2014-15 have been met and  ` 55.00 crore and ` 70.87 crore have been utilized for 
each project, respectively. In the first phase of  the „Programme on enabl ing all schools 
with virtual classrooms‟, 3500 schools and 50 DIETs having ICT infrastructure are being 
targeted to enable them with virtual classrooms in five States, namely Himachal 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Tripura and this project has  been 
approved by DeitY. Further, with regard to „Good Governance and Best Practices‟, 
letters have been sent to the Ministries/Departments concerned and all States/UTs to 
formulate suitable project proposals for the development of new applications and for  
replication of successful e-Governance applications in various domains. The Committee 
note that in response to this, various proposals have been received of which 8 projects 
have been approved by the competent authority and administrative approvals have 
been issued, whereas 4 projects are at various stages of approval in DeitY. 
 
However, with respect to three core components of NeGP scheme (under 
Electronic Governance), viz. State Wide Area Network (SWAN), Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) and State Data Centr es (SDCs) schemes, the Committee observe that 
presently SWAN has been made operational in 34 States/UTs, of which 25 States/UTs 
are utilizing around 60% of bandwidth of the existing link capacity. The total number of 
operational CSCs (as on 28.02.2015) is 1,40,712, of which only 1,25,387 CSCs have 
connectivity. With regard to SDCs, the Committee find that 23 SDCs have been made 
operational, out of which 19 SDCs are utilizing around 50% of the SDC Infrastructure 
(percentage of rack space utilized). The Commi ttee also note that 4 SDCs have  been 
made operational during the year 2013 -14 whereas only one SDC, in Mizoram, has 
been made operational in the year 2014 -15 and the target set for the year 2015 -16 is to 
complete 4 SDCs (Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Dadra Na gar Haveli and Daman & Diu) 
in the year 2015 -16. With regard to establishment/operationalisation of SWAN and 
CSCs, there is an increase in their number when compared to the previous years. 
However, with regard to the SDCs, the number has remained the same.  Not only this, 

37 
 
the Committee find that the Department during the previous DFG (2014 -15) had stated 
that the timeline for completing the implementation in two Union Territories (i.e. Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu) was March, 2015; however, this appears not to 
have been achieved in the light of their target for this financial year 2015 -16 (to 
complete 4 SDCs in Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Dadra Nagar Haveli and Daman & 
Diu). It is further disquieting to note that the usage of SDC Infrastructure and existing 
bandwidth have not improved over the last year‟s performance. The Committee have 
been recommending repeatedly to the Department to complete the establishment of 
these components of NeGP as per scheduled targets. While noting the non -completion 
of these components in all the States/non -functional status of some of the components 
and non-utilization of infrastructure and the existing bandwidth capacity, the Committee 
reiterate their stand and call upon the Department to take requisite steps for 
establishment/operationalisation/roll- out of all the components of NeGP. The 
Committee also earnestly desire that efforts should be made to ensure that the targets 
set under the „Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms‟ and „Good 
Governance a nd Best Practices schemes‟ are not deferred. The Committee may be 
kept apprised of the improvement made in achieving the targets under these schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The current status of above projects is as follows: 
 
(a) Good Governance and Best Practices schemes: 2 Working Group meetings have 
been conducted and 8 projects have been approved. Revised DPRs are awaited for 2 
projects. 
 
(b) Programme on enabling all schools with virtual classrooms: 3500 schools and 50 
DIETs having ICT infrastructure  are being targeted to make them enabled with virtual 
classrooms in five states, namely, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu 
and Tripura. The project is approved and first instalment of Rs. 55.00 crores has been 
released to the implementing agency. 
 
(c) SDC: Currently, SDCs in 24 States/UTs, out of the 32 States/ UTs in which SDC 
has to be implemented, are operational. Out of the 8 States/UTs where implementation 
has not yet been completed, 2 are under implementation, 1 State is soon to start 
implementation, 4 States are under the bid process and for 1 State, RFP is under 
preparation. The State/UT wise implementation status and the reasons for delays 
despite numerous reminders, letters, meetings and other handholding support to States 
and SIA are given in the table below.  As depicted in the table below, for the States for 
which SDC implementation has not yet been completed, the reasons are majorly: 
 
• Non-availability or change in the SDC Site 
• Construction of building at site for SDC  
• Rebidding / retendering due to (a) limited response to the SDC RFP floated or (b) 
any other reason 
 
S.N
o State Name Status 
Non Availability/ 
Change of 
Identified Site 
Constructi
on  of New 
Site  
Rebidding / 
Retendering  

38 
 
1 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Under 
Implementation   √ √ 
2 
Dadra & 
Nagar and 
Daman & Diu  
Under 
Implementation  √ √ √ 
3 Jharkhand  
Vendor Finalized, 
Implementation to 
start  
√ √ √ 
4 Goa Bids Received  √ √  
5 Uttarakhand   Bid Process 
under Progress √ √  
6 Arunachal 
Pradesh   
Bid Process 
under Progress   √ 
7 Punjab Bid Process 
under Progress √ √ √ 
8 Assam RFP under 
Preparation   √ √ 
 
(d) CSC: 1,41,353 CSCs have been made operational in 36 States/UTs as on 30 th April 
2015. 127,188 CSCs are reported to be connected, of which, 52,475 CSCs are using 
BSNL connectivity, 23,114 are using VSATs, 25,400 CSCs are using Data cards and 
the remaining 26,199 are using other forms of connectivity. Further, some VLEs have 
reported using multiple types of broadband connections. 
 
(e) SWAN: SWAN has been made operational in 34 States/UTs, of which 25 States/UTs 
are utilizing around 60% of bandwidth of the existing link capacity. 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

39 
 
CHAPTER –V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE 
OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Center for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
With regard to the allocation for C-DAC, during the year 2015-16, an allocation of 
` 75.00 crore has been made as  against the proposed outlay of  ` 574.50 crore. They 
have been able to spend almost hundred per cent fund at RE stage during the past two 
years, which speaks well of this financial performance.  However, the matter of concern 
is that due to non-allocation of funds on year- to-year basis for R&D activities, C-DAC is 
unable to focus on the core areas of research and the state of -the-art infrastructure, 
which is ongoing since 2009, is being extended, resulting in cost escalation.   C -DAC is 
also paying huge money on rentals for hired premises. In add ition, there is a 
requirement of Non-Plan allocation of at least  ` 200.00 crore for salary and allowances 
of sanctioned manpower and administrative expenses of 11 centres and the Corporate 
Office. The Committee, while noting that C -DAC carries out R&D in I CT&E area, the 
organization need to be extended requisite  budget support to  enable them to 
accomplish this mandate.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimates stage. 
 
 
Electronic Materials Development Council and Centre for Materials for Electronics 
Technology (EMDC & C-MET) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that the Electronic Materials Development Council (EMDC) 
Programme has been conceived to support research in the emerging areas  of materials 
for electronics, Photonics and e -waste.  The Centre for Materials for Electronics 
Technology (C -MET), an autonomous Scientific Society under DeitY, is dedicated to 
R&D in Electronic Materials, their processing, their know -how and to develop a nd 
establish small quantity production base for materials which are crucial for high 
technology projects for space, defence, atomic energy, IT and communication. The 
Committee understand that C -MET has three laboratories located in Pune, Hyderabad 
and Thrissur.  For the year 2015 -16, as against the proposed GBS of ` 60 crore, there 
has been an allocation of ` 10 crore each for both EMDC & C -MET. The Committee 
have been informed that achievement of the targeted objectives under these two 
Council/Society is s ubject to the availability of funds. In view of the fact that 
Council/Society are dedicated to R&D in the critical and emerging area of electronic 
material and its knowhow, the Committee recommend to the Department to ensure that 
the R&D carried out by EMD C & C -MET should not suffer for want of requisite 
allocation, particularly in view of the Government‟s policy thrust on the „Make in India‟ 

40 
 
campaign. The Committee also recommend to the Department to take up their case 
with the Ministry of Finance for the required allocations, in the light of the achievements 
made by EMDC & C-MET. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee has already been sent to Ministry of Finance. 
The matter would further be taken up at the Revised Estimates stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
18  December, 2015 Chairperson,  
27 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 

41 
 
Appendix-I  
 MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2015-16) HELD ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2015 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18th December, 2015, from 1 000 hours                     
to 1040 hours in Committee Room ‘ 139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
8. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
9. Shri Paresh Rawal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Salim Ansari  
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.M. Baisakh  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following six Draft Action Taken Reports:-  
I. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx 
II. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx 
III. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx 
IV. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx 
V. …..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…..…..xxxxx….xxxx…;and  
VI. Action Taken Report on the Sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2015 -16)’ of 
the Department of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Report and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
________________________________________________________________________ 
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 

43 
 
Appendix-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 19  
 Total 17 
 Percentage 85 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 7  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 05 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 18 and 20  
 Total 02 
 Percentage 10 
 
 