 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
 SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)
 
15 


2 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2014-15)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 August, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)

3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
10 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the 
Government……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
48 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
49 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of interim in 
nature…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
50 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
*I. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of the Committee held on 11th August, 2015 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations 
contained in their Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
51 
 
 
 
 
*Not appended with the cyclostyled copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2014 -15) 
 
 Shri Anurag Singh Thakur     -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri L.K. Advani 
 3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
* 5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
 6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
  7. Dr. Anupam Hazra 
8. Dr. J. Jayavardhan 
9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
10. Shri Virender Kashyap 
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa 
12. Smt. Hema Malini 
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
  14. Ms. Mehbooba Mufti  
15. Shri Paresh Rawal 
16. Dr. (Smt.) Bhartiben Dhirubhai Shiyal 
17. Shri Abhishek Singh 
18. Shri D.K. Suresh 
19. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
20. Smt. R. Vanaroja 
@21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Javed Akhtar 
23. Shri Salim Ansari 
24. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
 25. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 27. Shri Derek O’Brien 
28. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
  29. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 30.  Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya 
# 31.  Shri Meghraj Jain 
 Secretariat  
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. M. Baisakh Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik Under Secretary 
 
         *    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.09.2014 vice Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P., vide   Bulletin Part – II w.e.f. 11.09.2014. 
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 15.07.2015 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 17.07.2015 
#  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 14.01.2015 vide Bulletin Part – II dated 16.01.2015. 
(ii)

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chair person, Standin g Committee on Information Technology (2014 -15) having 
been authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Third Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2014 -15)’ of the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                            
22nd December, 2014.  The Department of Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report on                        
16th April, 2015.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee  at their sitting held on               
11th August, 2015. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
   Information Technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (20 14-15)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                            
the 22nd December, 2014. It contained 22 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of 
Telecommunications and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4, 5, 6, 7,8,9, 10,11, 12, 13, 14, 15,16, 17,18,19,20,21 
and 22 
 
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:NIL  
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the repl y of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. No:NIL  
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
The Committee f urther desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report should be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   

2 
 
 
 
A. Telecom Enforcement and Resource Monitoring (TERM) Cells: Curbing of Illegal 
Telecom Operations 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“One of the major purposes of the creation of the Telecom Enforcement 
and Resource Monitoring (TERM) Cells is to curb illegal operations (not 
permitted under the Indian Telegraph Act) and to catch hold of those who 
violate the provisions of the Act. As per section 4 of the Indian Telegraph 
Act, 1885, within India, the Central Go vernment shall have exclusive 
privilege of establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs. Any person 
providing telegraph services in violation of the provisions of  the Telegraph 
Act falls under the category of illegal operations. The Committee have 
been informed that 559 cases of illegal telecom operations have been 
unearthed so far. The total notional loss due to such illegal telecom 
operations is approximately Rs. 780 crore. Apart from the financial loss, 
what is of serious concern, is the fact that s uch illegal operations pose a 
security threat as well to the nation because such activities may not be 
traced by the Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). Considering the wide 
ramifications of illegal operations, the Committee are of the firm view that 
the existing mechanism needs to be strengthened and made foolproof. At 
present, TERM Cells identify the clandestine activity/grey market 
operation through complaint/information, observation of unusual traffic, 
social contacts, cases under investigation, Law Enforc ement Agencies etc. 
To ensure that such activities are curbed, all Telecom Service Providers 
have also been mandated to monitor bulk connections users, Call Detailed 
Report (CDR) analysis in respect of heavy callers, mandatory transmission 
of Caller line I dentification (CLI) and customer premise inspection and 
verification. The Committee recommend that TERM Cells should come out 
with an effective mechanism to identify such illegal activity suo -motu 
rather than been dependent on other sources as mentioned ab ove so as 
to initiate timely corrective action. The· Committee also note that the 
TERM Cells are seriously handicapped by shortage of manpower and IT 
Infrastructure in identifying and raiding such illegal set -ups. To overcome 
these problems, the Committee have been informed that the issue of 
posting of adequate manpower in the DoT to carry out the assigned 
functions in an effective and time bound -manner is under examination in 
DoT, taking into consideration requirements/justification of work. 
Observing that  shortage of manpower and IT Infrastructure in the TERM 
Cells are not only affecting their vital responsibility of unearthing illegal 
set-ups but also hampering monitoring activities to enforce of adherence 
to mandatory guidelines by TSPs, the Committee re commend that the 

3 
 
 
issue of posting of adequate manpower and upgradation of infrastructure 
of the TERM Cells need urgent attention of the Department.” 
  
7. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated as 
under:- 
“TERM Cells bro adly have following sources/methods to find out the 
clandestine activity/grey market operations: 
  
(i) Through complaint/information received by any means 
(ii) Through Observation of unusual traffic in operators networks. 
(iii) Through already investigated/under investigation cases. 
(iv) Through Security/Law enforcement agencies. 
 
It is stated that out of the above mentioned methods for unearthing the 
illegal telecom operations, mechanisms envisaged under point number (ii) 
and (iii) to identify illegal activity are suo -motu me chanisms followed by 
TERM Cells. In addition to above mentioned mechanisms, there is also 
provision of Toll Free Number “1800110420” on which any person can 
register complaint while receiving international calls, if local or STD or no 
number displayed on his phone. All the TSPs have been instructed to make 
aware public of this facility through SMS. A list of such complaints received 
through Toll Free Number is then forwarded to corresponding TERM Cells 
to carry out the analysis to detect any bypassing of le gal ILD operator and 
take suitable action. All these mechanisms are in suo -moto methods of 
unearthing grey market operations. With regards t o posting of adequate 
manpower, Establishment Wing at this HQ is looking into the matter of 
induction of below JTS l evel staff at TERM Cells. This HQ is also examining 
the requirement and provisioning of both hardware and application 
software for automation of various activities related to TERM Cells.” 
 
8. The Committee had noted that the TERM Cells were seriously handi capped by 
shortage of manpower and IT infrastructure in identifying and raiding illegal telecom 
operations. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended that the Department 
should give urgent attention to the issue of posting adequate manpower and 
upgradation of infrastructure of the TERM Cells. The Committee are, however, 
concerned to note that no headway has been made by the Department in this very 
important matter. The issue of posting of adequate manpower and upgrad ing of 
infrastructure of the TERM Cells which need urgent attention are still under 
examination in DoT. In view of the Department’s own submission that shortage of 

4 
 
 
manpower hinders effective functioning of TERM Cells,  the Committee urge the 
Department to expedite posting of adequate manpower for TERM Cells.  
 
B Status of manufacturing of telecom equipment in the country 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that with the emergence of newer technology, the 
demand for telecom equipment has in creased rapidly in the country. As 
per TRAI Report dated 12 th April, 2011, the total demand for various 
categories of telecom equipment is projected to be about Rs. 1,08,000 
crore in 2015-16 and Rs. 1,70,000 crore by 2019 -20. During the year 2013 -
14, the t otal import of telecom equipment by India was for Rs. 74,115 
crore, whereas the total export of telecom equipment from India was for 
Rs. 22,800 crore only. The Committee note that the major impediments in 
the path of the telecom manufacturing industry are high cost disability due 
to high cost of financing, poor infrastructure, stiff competition from big 
established companies, lack of domestic IC manufacturing ability and lack 
of R&D fund. The Department have notified the National Telecom Policy 
(NTP) with a  vision to provide secure, reliable, affordable and high quality 
converged telecommunication services. The Committee also note that the 
Department of Telecommunications, in coordination with the Department 
of Electronics and Information Technology, have ta ken several initiatives, 
such as imposition of basic custom duty on specified telecom products, 
preference to domestic manufactures for 23 notified telecom products, 
providing financial assistance under the Electronics Manufacturing Clusters 
(EMC) Scheme a nd the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M -
SIPS), approval for setting up of two Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication 
(FAB) manufacturing facilities, proposal for promotion of Fabless design 
industry, FDI upto 100 per cent in manufacturing of telecom p roducts, etc. 
The Committee further observe that out of the 51 proposals involving 
investment of about Rs. 16441 crore, only 22 proposals involving 
investment of Rs. 2407 crore have been approved under M -SIPS. Under 
the EMC scheme, final approval has been accorded only to two Greenfield 
Electronics Manufacturing clusters and ‘in -Principle’ approval has been 
accorded to 10 applications, and Letter of Intent (LoI) have been issued to 
two consortia for setting up of two Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication 
Manufacturing facilities. Keeping in view the fact that excessive 
dependence on import of telecom equipment is not in the interest of 
nation, the Committee recommend that a coordination mechanism may 
be worked out with DeitY to urgently review the implementation s tatus of 

5 
 
 
the various initiatives under the National Telecom Policy (NTP) (2012) and 
the National Electronics Policy (NEP) (2012) so that these initiatives do not 
remain only in paper but are translated into specific action and clear cut 
result, helping to promote domestic telecom equipments manufacturing 
capabilities. Since 50 per cent of the Bill of Material (BoM) of telecom 
equipment is constituted by semiconductor based discreet and integrated 
circuit devises, the bulk of which is imported, the Committee  also 
recommend that special emphasis must be given towards developing 
manufacturing capabilities for semi -conductor and integrated circuit 
devices. In this regard, the Committee would like the Department to take 
urgent measures for setting up of two semic onductor wafer fabrication 
manufacturing facilities for which the Government have already given 
their approval. The progress made on the above initiatives should be 
intimated to the Committee.” 
 
10. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated as 
under:- 
“As noted by the Committee, the Department is working in close 
coordination with the Department  of Electronics and Information 
Technology for the promotion of domestic manufacturing of electronic 
and telecom equipment in the country, and has taken several initiatives, 
such as imposition of basic custom duty on specified telecom products, 
etc.  
The Department shall continue to work in active coordination with the 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology towards the 
promotion of Domestic manufacturing of Telecom Equipments and other 
important issues. Besides the steps being taken by DoT in coordination 
with DeitY as already mentioned above by the C ommittee, the 
Department wishes to brin g to the kind knowledge of the C ommittee that 
the Cabinet has approved for setting up of Electronics Development Fund 
(EDF) in the nature of Venture Capital Fund in December, 2014. The EDF 
will be a “Fund of Funds” to participate in “Daughter Funds” in the area of 
electronic, nano -electronics and Information Technology (IT), which 
includes Telecommunications too. A fund for telecommunications will be 
set up under the EDF as per the framework approved. The  supported  
Daughter Funds   will  promote innovation,  R&D, product  development 
and  within the  country  in the  specified  fields of ESDM,  nano -electronics 
and  IT including Telecom. 
 
The present status of the two semiconductor wafer fabrication 
manufacturing facilities is as under: 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For demonstration of commitment, both consortia  were required to 
submit the Detailed Project Report (DPR) along with detailed costing and 
implementation plan. While Detailed Project Reports were submitted by 
both M/s HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Ltd and M/s Jaiprakash Associates 
Ltd., on behalf of thei r respective consortia, however, both the consortia 
are yet to submit the other documents.”  
Preliminary assessment of Detailed Project Reports submitted by both 
consortia was undertaken by DeitY. Several deficiencies were observed in 
the Detailed Project Report which have been pointed out to them.  
 
Subsequently, both M/s HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Ltd. and M/s 
Jaiprakash Associates Ltd. sought time till 31.03.2015 and 31.01.2015 
respectively for submission of deficiencies in DPR and other documents 
required for demonstration of commitment, which has been provided with 
the approval of Empowered Committee. Both the consortia are yet to 
submit the requisite information/documents. 
 
11. The Committee note that the Department of Telecommunications are working 
in close co-ordination with the Department of Electronics and Information Technology 
(DeitY) for the promotion of domestic manufacturing of electronic and telecom 
equipment in the country.  From the Action Taken Note, the Committee note that t he 
Cabinet had approved the setting up of an Electronics Development Fund (EDF) in the 
nature of Venture Capital Fund in December, 2014, which will be a ‘Fund for Funds’ to 
participate in ‘Daughter Funds’ in the area of electronic s nano-electronics and 
Information Techn ology, including telecommunications. With regard to setting up of 
two semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing facilities, the Committee have 
been informed that several deficiencies were noted  in the initial Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) submitted by M/s Jaiprakash Associates Limited (with IBM, USA and 
 M/s Jaiprakash  
Associates Limited (with 
IBM,  US A and  Tower 
Semiconductor Limited, 
Israel as partners; JIT 
consortium) 
M/s HSMC Technologies  India 
Pvt. Ltd. (with ST 
Microelectronics and Silterra 
Malaysia Sdn. Bhd. as  
partners; HSS consortium) 
1
.
  
P
r
o
j
e
c
t
 
C
o
s
t 
INR 34,399  Crores INR 29,013 Crores 
2
.
 
T
e
c
h
n
o
l
o
g
y 
90/65/45/28 nm 90/65/45/28/22 nm 
3
.
 
C
a
p
a
c
i
t
y 
40,000 WSPM of 300 mm 
size 
40,000 WSPM of 300 mm size 
4
.
  
L
o
c
a
t
i
o
n 
Yamuna  Expressway, 
Greater Noida Uttar  
Pradesh 
Prantij, Gujarat 
   

7 
 
 
Tower Semiconductor Limited, Israel , as partners , with proposed location at Greater 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh) and M/s HSMC Technologies India Private limited (with ST 
Micro electronics  and Silterra Malay sia Sdn. Bhd. as partners  with proposed location 
at Prantij, Gujarat). Both the consortia had sought time till 31.03.2015 and 31.01.2015, 
respectively, for rectification of deficiencies  and submission  of DPR.  The two  
consortia are yet to submit the requi site information/documents. The Committee are 
of the view that there is an urgent need to promote and increase domestic 
manufacturing of telecom equipment. The Committee hope that the setting up o f 
‘Electronic Development Fund’ which has been approved by t he Cabinet will definitely 
help in promoting innovation, R&D and  product development in the country. The 
Committee also desire that the Department should also take up the matter with  the  
two consortia for submission of new DPR and other documents which ar e  already 
due, so that two semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing facilities may be set 
up at the earliest. The Committee are of the view that several initiatives taken by the 
Government will bear fruit only if focused attention is paid towards the ir effective 
implementation. Some of these policies should start exhibiting tangible results  by 
now. In view of this, t he Committee desire that sincere efforts should be made by the 
Department in this direction and apprise them of the outcome. 
C. Security concerns related to import of telecom equipment  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that during the period from April 2013 to March, 
2014, out of the total of Rs. 74,115.40 crore telecom equipmen t imported 
by the country, 61.18 per cent of the telecom import amounting to Rs. 
45347.03 crore was from China, mainly because of competitive prices 
offered by China. The Department have also conceded that at present 
India has very little capability to man ufacture hi-tech telecom equipment 
as compared to China and that modern age telecom equipment is 
vulnerable to spyware/malware, etc. in the hands of anti -national, anti -
social or other miscreants. The Committee note that to safeguard the 
security interest of the nation associated with import of telecom 
equipment, the DoT have already issued comprehensive security 

8 
 
 
guidelines in the form of Licence amendments in May/June 2011 that have 
been included in the terms and conditions of the Unified Licence which, 
inter-alia, provide for mandatory testing of telecom equipment before 
inducting them into Indian telecom network and periodic security audit. 
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that except for one SAR 
Lab and one NGN Lab presently working at TEC, New Delhi, there is no 
other lab for testing of telecom equipment. The Committee have been 
informed that there is a proposal for establishment of various labs in TEC, 
such as Security Lab for security testing of various elements and Green 
Passport Lab for certifying telecom products equipment and services on 
the basics of Energy Consumption Rating and Customer Premises 
Equipment and Terminal Lab to enable testing of various equipment, etc. 
The Committee are given to understand that the Project Estimates for  
setting up of the Security Lab is under approval in DoT and Project 
Estimates of the other labs are under preparation.  Considering the fact 
that the extensive use of foreign made telecom equipment poses serious 
threats to national security, the Committee  have serious apprehensions 
about the satisfactory testing of telecom equipment in the country in the 
absence of adequate security labs. Now that the Department of 
Telecommunications have issued guidelines for mandatory testing of 
telecom equipment before inducting them into the telecom network, the 
Committee stress that there is an urgency for the early setting up of the 
security labs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Project 
Estimates of the Security Lab which is under approval and the Project  
Estimates of the Green Passport Lab and CPE&TL Lab which are under 
preparation should be finalized at the earliest.” 
 
13. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have stated as 
under:- 
“Security Lab:  The estimate for security lab o f amounting Rs. 10 Crore 
(approx.) has been sanctioned by DoT on 17.10.2014. The tender is in the 
process of approval at DoT and will be floated shortly. 
 
Green Passport Lab:  The estimate for Green Passport Lab of amounting 
Rs. 1.09 Crore is in the process of approval at DoT.  
 
CPE &TL Lab: The estimate for CPE&TL Lab of amounting Rs. 6 Crore has 
been sanctioned by DoT on 22.01.2015. The tender documents in the 
process of preparation and approval.” 
 
14. During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2014 -15), the Department 
had conceded that at present India has very little capability to manufacture hi -Tech 

9 
 
 
telecom equipment as compared to China and that modern age telecom equipment is 
vulnerable to spyware/malware, etc. in the hands of anti -national, anti-social or other 
miscreants. Observing that not even a single Security Lab has been set up for testing of 
telecom equipment in the country, the Committee ha d recommended that the Project 
Estimate of the Security Lab which wa s under approval and the Projec t Estimate s of 
the Green Passport Lab and CPE and TL Lab which were under preparation should be 
finalized at the earliest. From the reply of the Department, the Committee note that 
the Project Estimates for Security Lab and CPE and TL Lab have been sanctio ned by the 
Department and the tender documents are in the process of approval. However, the 
project estimates fo r Green Passport Lab is still in the process of approval at DoT.  
Since the telecom sector in India is extensively using foreign made telecom eq uipment 
which can pose serious security threats, if not tested properly before inducting them 
in the telecom network, the Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need 
for early setting up of various labs in the country. In this regard, the Commit tee desire 
that the tender processes for setting up of the Security Lab and CPE and TL L ab which 
are under approval of DoT may be finalized at the earliest and the tender s floated so 
that the two labs may be put to the service of the nation at the earliest . The 
Committee also desire that the Project Estimates for Green Passport Lab which is still 
under the process of approval of DoT should also be finalized on a priority basis . The 
Committee trust that the Department w ill take concrete action and no further  delay 
will be made in expeditious   setting up of the above labs.   

10 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
DoT Budget 
 
The Committee note that the detailed Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) was laid in Lok Sabha on 4th August 2014 for 
an amount of Rs. 18065.06 crore, i.e. Rs. 11037.06 crore  under Plan and  Rs. 7028.06 
crore under Non-Plan. The Committee are concerned to note that during the y ear 2013-
14, out of Rs 8800 crore allocated under Plan at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 6650 
crore at RE stage, an amount Rs.  4794.33 crore only was utilized. The Department have 
cited non -finalization of the Network for Spectrum (NFS) project by BSNL , non -
finalization of project approval for construction of the National Institute of 
Communications and Finance (NICF) building, non -completion of validation for 
implementation of the Telecom Engineering Center (TEC) projects and the delay in 
procurement process for the Wireless Monitoring Organization (WMO) to be the main 
reasons for the shortfall in utilization. The scenario is even more disturbing when 
utilization of funds under the Capital Plan is analysed. Under the Capital Plan section, an 
amount of Rs. 2510.28 crore was allocated at BE which was reduced to Rs. 361.97 crore 
at RE stage and the actual utilization was only Rs. 215.35 crore. The Committee note 
that for the year 2014 -15, the Department have been allocated an amount of Rs. 11037 
crore under  Plan which is Rs. 2237 crore more than the allocation made at BE under 
Plan during the previous year. The allocated amount is inclusive of Rs. 3702 crore under 
Capital Plan.  The Committee note that the increase in Plan allocation is mainly because 
of the  Cabinet approval of Rs. 460 crore for the revival of ITI (equity investment), 
finalization of tender for laying 57,000 KM of OFC by BSNL and issue of Purchase Order 
for Rs. 8678.70 crore and provision of Rs. 3537 crore under USOF. The Committee are of 
the view that proper implementation of the aforesaid schemes will improve utilization 
of funds under Plan head during 2014 -15. However, the status of utilization of funds 
during 2014 -15 is not satisfactory as out of an amount of Rs. 11037 crore allocated 
under Plan, the actual utilization up to September 2014 has been only Rs. 1209.15 crore 
which is just 10.95 % of the total allocation made at BE. What is more disquieting to 
note is the fact that utilization under Capital Plan during the same period is just Rs . 2.24 
crore out of the total allocation of Rs. 3702 crore made at BE, i.e. mere 0.06 % of the 
total allocation made at BE. In the opinion of the Committee, this is a matter of serious 
concern which warrants urgent attention of the Department. When the Cab inet had 
already approved Rs. 460 crore for revival of ITI, and when tender for laying 57,000 KM 
of OFC by BSNL was finalized for which purchase order of Rs. 8678.70 crore has alredy 
been placed there could have been better utilization under Capital head. While 
observing that the Result Frame Document (RFD) is a good initiative to measure the 
status of the utilization of funds of various ongoing schemes, the Committee 

11 
 
 
recommend that suitable corrective measures needs to be taken by the Department to 
see that funds are spent prudently to achieve the milestones set for the Plan year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In this regard it is submitted that the Department is committed to observe the status of 
utilization of funds of various ongoing schemes. All out efforts  are made for judicious 
utilization of funds. However, it is pertinent to mention that BE 2014 -15 for Rs. 11037 
crore has been revised by Ministry of Finance to the tune of Rs. 2970.58 crore in Revised 
Estimate 2014-15. Out of which Rs. 1880.76 crore has b een utilized up to January, 2015 
which is 63.31% of the total allocation. However, all the concerned nodal branches are 
being instructed time to time for effective expenditure monitoring and also utilization of 
funds judiciously. 
 
(Ministry of Communicatio ns & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
 
Under IEBR, an amount of Rs. 6000.65 crore was allocated at BE stage by the 
Department in the year 2014 -15. The Committee note that the C -DoT has already 
generated an amount of Rs. 18.72 crore till September, 2014 and the only hope is from 
C-DoT which is expected to meet the annual IEBR target. In the case of BSNL, out of the 
target of Rs. 5132.17 crore at BE, the authorization upto October, 2014 was Rs. 1480 
crore only and the Outlay under RE 2014 -15 is enhanced to Rs. 7142 crore for 
completion of ongoing projects. Since MTNL is not in a position to meet the IEBR target 
of Rs. 808.46 crore set at BE, MTNL has revised its budgetary requirements for 2014 -15 
at RE stage to Rs. 452 crore and the actual utilization till September, 2014 is Rs. 69.32 
crore only. The Committee desire that utmost priority should be given by the two  PSUs 
to m eet their respective IEBR targets as it is essential for them to turn gradually turn 
self-reliant and be able  to fund schemes with their own revenue rather than depend on 
support from DoT. The Committee hope that in the best interests of the two companies , 
BSNL and MTNL would pay more attention to meeting their targets in the coming years.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All the schemes/ projections in BSNL are funded out of internal accruals/ external 
sources of funding. As a PSU, BSNL is optimally utilizing i ts own financial resources (cash 
inflows and / or external borrowings) to meet its budget proposals. The increase in 
budget proposal is based on the possibility that many projects are likely to culminate in 
the current financial year for which provision in  the outlay has been enhanced from 
Rs.5132 to Rs.7142 Crores under RE -2014-15. These projects mainly include expansion / 
addition in GSM Mobile capacity under Phase VII and other residual works. Also, the 

12 
 
 
backhaul network is being strengthened with the add ition of optical fibre cable (OFC) 
transmission equipment to cope up with the enhanced mobile & data network 
capabilities. As on Dec 2014 BSNL has authorized capital expenditure of Rs. 2394 
crores which is approximately 33 % utilization of the total budget outlay of Rs. 7142 
Crores. Close monitoring is being carried to ensure optimal utilization of funds, in RE -
2014-15. The revenue from services of MTNL in the last three years has remained more 
or less constant. The reduction in IEBR target of MTNL is  due to its inability to generate 
sufficient revenues to fund its capital expansion requirements. All efforts are being 
made by MTNL to achieve its revised targets in RE 2014 -15. C -DOT has generated its 
IEBR of Rs. 28.38 crores as on 30th November 2014.  C -DOT shall make its best efforts to 
achieve the target planned for the FY 2014-15. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
Performance of Public Sector Undertakings: Performance of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
(BSNL) 
 
The Committee note that though BSNL started mobile services in 2002 -much later 
than other private operators who were into this service in the late nineties - it was one of the 
preferred operators in the telecom sector. However, at the time when telecom network was 
expanding at a very rapid pace, the fortune of BSNL started declining, mainly due to non -
procurement of mobile equipment. BSNL also started incurring loss due to increa se in 
expenditure owing to the huge legacy workforce, inheritance of legacy wire -line systems and 
declining attraction for the same, increasing maintenance cost, stiff competition in mobile 
sector, etc. During the year 2012 -13, the total loss incurred by B SNL was Rs. 7722 crore and 
the total loss during the year 2013 -14 was Rs. 6934 crore. What is worrying for the 
Committee is the fact that for the past three years, the revenue earnings of BSNL are almost 
static whereas the expenditure continued to increase  at a steady pace during the same 
period. Evidently, efforts made so far are found inadequate to increase revenue and curtail 
losses. BSNL, of late, has taken certain steps, such as augmentation of GSM mobile network 
by 15 million lines under GSM Phase VII , introduction of Next Generation Network and data 
services etc. for increasing their revenue. Under the Phase VII GSM expansion project, 8.93 
million lines of GSM radio capacity has been rolled out in its network and the remaining roll -
out is in progress. About the future growth prospect, the Committee observe that since voice 
service has touched the maximum threshold, data services at the moment occupy the centre 
stage, where BSNL is consolidating its efforts to bank on this service to rejuvenate its posi tion 
as a leading player in this segment. The Committee do recognize that growth of voice 
services has indeed reached a level of saturation in the market and Data Services are the next 
revenue generating opportunity for the Telecom industry in the coming y ears. That being so, 
BSNL should seize this opportunity and focus on growth of Data Services, so as to bring itself 
back to the forefront as a major market player in the telecom industry. In this regard, BSNL 
can take advantage of its huge land-line infrastructure and utilize it in providing Data Services 
which no other private operators have. The BSNL owns and maintains major telecom 

13 
 
 
infrastructure in the country that can be leveraged to enhance its capacity to stay and 
compete with other players in the field of telecommunications. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL is effectively deploying its vast mobile, landline, & fiber network for providing 
both wireline and wireless broadband connections to enable the provisioning of data 
services. As observed by the Com mittee, that the voice services has reached a level of 
saturation in the market and data services are the next revenue generating opportunity for 
the Telecom industry in the coming years. With this objective to tap the growth in data 
services, BSNL is upgrading its backhaul network for both mobile & wireline structure to cope 
up with the enhanced growth in data network. In wireless segment, BSNL is providing 
broadband using 3G -GSM, EVDO & WIMAX technology. In wireline segment, BSNL is 
providing broadband us ing its copper wireline and fibre network. BSNL has launched various 
value added services in its endeavour to seize the opportunity of growth in data services as 
given below: 
 
 Various Value Added Services on SMS (short message 
service)/DATA/3G/USSD(Unstructured supplementary Service 
Data)/Mobile Television/IVR (interactive voice response)/over the 
air (OTA) Platform are being provided to BSNL customers in 
partnership with different Value Added Service Providers. 
 PRBT services and various Value Added Service s through SIM Tool 
Kit are being  provided to BSNL customers in partnership of 
different Value Added Service Providers. 
 Mobile Banking services with National Payment Corporation of 
India (NPCI) on USSD Channel. launched. Mobile banking service has 
been launched as part of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojna. 
 BSNL Hello TV Service for PC/Data card Users launched in all zones. 
 “Digital Mandi for Indian Kisan” service launched on pilot basis 
across 5 states (UP, Punjab, Haryana, Maharashtra & Odisha) in 4 
regional languages viz. Punjabi, Hindi, Odisha & Marathi, and also 
being launched in Odisha Circle on commercial basis.  
 Mobile Money Transfer Service for Deptt. of Posts launched 
recently and service is available in approximately 15,000 post 
offices which enables sending of Money Orders through mobile. 
 Value Added Services on Cell Broadcast Platform being launched 
across the country. 
 139 Railway services on SMS and USSD Platform 

14 
 
 
 M-Governance Services (SMS Based solution for Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited(IOCL), Accredited Nurse Midwife(ANM) project 
of Chhattisgarh, SMS based M -Governance Services to DeitY, SMS 
based Integrated Child Development Services( ICDS) monitoring 
service for Ministry of Women and Child development (MWCD).   
 VAS retailing services i.e. selling VAS through retail channel. 
 Facebook service on USSD channel.  
 As per Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) directions, 
Centralized VAS provisioning system cum Consent Gateway (CVPS 
cum CG) platform provided in all 4 zones to avoid complaints o f 
forced activations of VAS, has been commissioned. 
 M-health service “Ananya Project” in Bihar from BBC -World Service 
Trust. 
Services in pipeline: 
 Agreement signed with Odisha State Agriculture Marketing board 
for commercial launch of ‘Digital Mandi for Indian Kisan’ service. 
Service launch expected soon. 
 Agreement signed with SBI and M/s Triotech for the launch of 
Mobile Wallet service. Service launch expected soon. 
 Cell Broadcast services. 
 Implementation of “BSNL Live” WEB portal  
 Direct Operator Billing (DOB) service to enable selling of digital 
content through prepaid account. 
 Machine-To-Machine (M2M) service to enable machine to machine 
communication. 
 Digital signature / Mobile ID service. 
 
The following major initiatives have been undertaken by BSNL in  both wireless 
and wireline segment to improve the quality of data services in terms of speed, content 
& bandwidth availability , resulting in higher revenue generation. 
 
Wireless 
 Under Phase VII GSM Expansion project, BSNL is providing state of art equipm ent 
enhancing its data carrying capabilities in its network to provide faster data speeds to 
its valued customers. It ensures efficient utilization of spectrum IP transport in all 
network.  
 
 Wi-Fi services are being offered to customers as access network t o the new upcoming 
areas 
 
 

15 
 
 
Wireline 
 
 During this Five Year Plan (2012 -17), BSNL has planned to make the entire wire line 
customer base network IP enabled. Next Generation Network equipment based on the 
latest architecture are planned to be deployed gradual ly to replace the entire Circuit 
Switched equipments/ Digital Telephone Exchanges.  
 BSNL is providing high speed broadband up to 100 Mbps through Fibre To The Home 
(FTTH) technology. 
 Also, BSNL has taken following efforts to increase the broadband penetration using its 
vast copper network & to arrest the decline in wireline connection: 
 
 BSNL has launched many post paid plans to make broadband affordable and suitable 
for new customers as well as current customers. 
 BSNL is providing connectivity to around one  lakh Common Service Centres in rural 
areas. 
 BSNL has covered more than 1.58 lakh panchayats with broadband access. 
 BSNL is also providing broadband connections to Universities and colleges under 
National Mission for Education through Information and Commu nication 
Technology(NMEICT) scheme of Ministry of HRD. 
 
 BSNL is providing many value added services viz. Games on Demand, Entertainment, 
educational content, Broadband -VPN, Video Conferencing etc. to popular broadband 
services. 
 
 
 (Ministry of Communicatio ns & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that due to the high 4G 
spectrum cost, a major telecom player like BSNL could not get 4G spectrum and it had to 
surrender its Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) spectrum in 6 Circles. The Committee 
observe that this is not a favourable development as other Telecom Service Providers 
with 4G spectrum will definitely have an edge in data s ervices. The Committee stress 
that in order to put itself back on the path of recovery and to reverse the present trend 
of declining fortune, the BSNL has no other choice but to successfully implement the 
GSM Phase VII project which seek to augment GSM mob ile network by 15 million lines. 
This would help BSNL to augment its capacity, increase its network coverage and 
improve its Quality of Service (QoS), resulting in retention of its existing customers and 
attracting new customers. The Committee recommend th at urgent steps should be 
taken for the introduction of newer technology like Next Generation Network (NGN) 
which will not only enable BSNL to provide several value added services but also help 
the PSU to successfully compete with the private sector in dat a services and it will not 

16 
 
 
find itself lacking and unprepared for the challenges in data services. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the achievements made by BSNL in respect of phase VII 
GSM mobile expansion project as well as the status of implem entation of the Next 
Generation Network in the country along with the incremental benefits brought to the 
BSNL. The Committee also desire that preparatory work being done by BSNL vis -à-vis 
other operators with regard to 4G spectrum for rolling out data ser vices may be 
furnished to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The status report on both the projects is given below: 
 
GSM Phase VII project: As on Nov 2014, out of the total 15 million GSM lines, BSNL 
has rolled out 9.35 million lines and the remaini ng are in the process of roll out. The 
zone wise progress is given as under: 
During this Five Year Plan (2012 -17), BSNL has planned to make the entire wire line 
customer base network IP enabled. Next Generation Network equipment based on the 
latest architecture are planned to be deployed gradually to replace the entire Cir cuit 
Switched equipments/ Digital Telephone Exchanges.  
 
 Tender for 4 million lines has been finalized. In first phase, Purchase 
Order(PO) was issued for 0.5 million lines for South & East Zone. 
Installation has been completed and testing is underway. In N orth and 
West Zone POs have been issued for 0.5 million lines and installation is 
underway. 
 
 BSNL is in process of migrating Center for Development of Technology (C -
DOT) old technology exchanges covering most of the rural India, with NGN 
solution being dev eloped by C -DOT. MoU has already been signed 
between BSNL and C -DoT and PO has been issued. In first phase 100 
locations are being covered and balance sites will be covered under Phase -
2 
 
 BSNL has been allotted Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) frequency 
spectrum in the range of 2635 -2655 MHz (20 MHz). WiMAX services are 
being provided in this frequency range. The said frequency range may also 
be used to provide 4G services in future. 
 
Zone Allotted Qty (in million) Commissioned  up to Nov, 2014  (in million) 
East 4.219 1.657 
North  6.140 2.769 
West 0.629 PO placed in April, 2014 
South 4.012 4.928 
Total 15.0 9.354 

17 
 
 
 BSNL is having pan India 3G spectrum of GSM services. BSNL can provide 
data services like video calling, Video on demand, gaming etc. on GSM 3G 
on pan India basis on equally viable commercial terms. Moreover, BSNL 
has surrendered its BWA spectrum in 6 circles and has retained BWA 
Spectrum in other service areas for providing data services.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  8 the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
Performance of Public  Sector Undertakings: Performance of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam 
Limited (MTNL) 
 
The MTNL is another loss making Public Sector Undertaking whose financial position is 
precarious. The revenue generated by the Company has not shown any significant 
improvement over the years and the gap between revenue earned and working expenses is 
still in the negative, i.e. Rs. 505.14 crore. Though there was a slight decrease in the working 
expenses of MTNL, i.e. from Rs. 6428.33 crore in 2012 -13 to Rs. 4377.29 crore in the y ear 
2013-14, this is not because of any specific measures taken by MTNL for decrease in 
operating expenses but due to the Cabinet decision for taking over the liability of payment of 
pensionary benefits of the erstwhile Government employees. What is furthe r disquieting is 
the fact that the outstanding debt position of the organization is also at a perilous stage. As 
on 31st August, 2014, MTNL had accumulated a huge outstanding debt of Rs. 14,161.51 crore. 
This was mainly because of payment of spectrum charg es for 3G and BWA spectrum 
amounting to Rs. 11097.97 crore for which MTNL had to take a commercial loan of Rs. 
7033.97 crore. The Committee note that because of the deteriorating financial conditions 
and high staff cost, MTNL was forced to raise debt even to service its interest payment. 
MTNL is at present facing monthly revenue deficit of about Rs. 220 crore which is being met 
by raising loans from banks. MTNL is reportedly planning to repay the debt through short 
term measures such as reduction in HR costs through salary support, Government support on 
Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT), leasing of its real estate property, waiver of penalty for delay 
in construction, etc. However, as part of long -term measures, MTNL targets to achieve 
revenue growth of 8 -10 per c ent over the next 5 to 6 years for which MTNL has to 
upgrade/expand its network. MTNL has also embarked on an ambitious plan to set up 1100 
sites in Delhi and 1150 sites in Mumbai for 3G and 2G network to provide good quality of 
services. The Committee hav e been informed that tender in this regard has already been 
floated which is under evaluation. The Committee recommends that the Department/MTNL 
Board should take early action to finalize the aforesaid proposal so that the planned project 
fructifies withou t any delay. Tendering process which is underway for expansion/up -
gradation of M/W Backhaul should also be completed at the earliest so that the targets could 
be achieved. The Committee are also of the view that reimbursement of Rs. 4,600 crore to 

18 
 
 
MTNL for  surrendering the BWA Spectrum would provide further relief to the company. 
Since MTNL has already surrendered the BWA Spectrum, it will be in the interest of the 
company that approval is accorded by the Government at the earliest. The Committee desire 
the issue to be pursued and the Committee be apprised of the status in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendations of the committee are noted. Best efforts are being put in including 
sensitizing the concerned sections / MTNL Board of Committee’s ob servations.  Action is this 
regard are being initiated. The current status of the issues referred under Committee’s 
observations are as follows:  
  
i) Existing 3G Network Up-gradation and    Expansion of GSM / 3G RF network:  
 
Present Status: The Technical and Financial evaluation of the bids for the project 
has been completed and based on negotiations with L -1 bidder; the finalized 
proposal is under consideration of MTNL Board.  
 
ii) Expansion / Up-gradation of M/W Backhaul:  
Present Status: The technical and financial evaluation of the bids of the project 
has been completed. Financial evaluation report is under consideration of MTNL 
Management.  
 
iii) Refund of surrendered BWA Spectrum charges-  
Present Status:     
Sovereign Guarantee for raising bonds for  Rs 1,000 Crores was provided on 10 th 
March 2014 MTNL raised bonds to the tune of Rs 765 Crores in F.Y.2013-14 which 
were used for payment of long term debts 
Approval of Govt. for sovereign guarantee for the balance amount of Rs 3,768.97 
Crores received vi de DOT letter dtd 22/10/2014. MTNL raised bonds to the tune of Rs 
1500.07 Cr on 19th Nov 2014 and Rs 2268.90 Cr on 28th Nov 2014. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that one of the common problems both BSNL and MTNL are 
confronting is the employee behavior vis -à-vis customers. The representatives of BSNL 
and MTNL, while noting this point, have informed the Committee that they are 
conducting behavioral training for their staff. In the opinion of the Committee, in - 
service based companies such as BSNL and MTNL, customer service/satisfaction is a vital 
parameter of growth. In fact, a customer friendly approach is the sin e-qua-non for the 
success of basic service providing companies like BSNL and MTNL, especially when they 

19 
 
 
are competing with other established private players who are more professional in 
dealing with their customers. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that  this aspect 
should be given high priority so as to have a better image of the companies and 
increasing their customer base. In this regard, the Committee recommend that BSNL 
and MTNL should make a gap analysis at the customer service area with their marke t 
competitors. Needless to say, the services of BSNL and MTNL should be improved 
drastically to make it competitive with services being provided by the private players. It 
is imperative that performance parameters of staff of BSNL and MTNL responsible for 
customer service should be linked to customer satisfaction. The mechanism for 
redressal of complaints should be professionally managed and reviewed by the top 
Management periodically. Complaints should be addressed within laid down timeframe 
as per Service Level Agreement (SLA) and responsibility need to be fixed for any kind of 
lapse in providing better services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendations of the committee are noted and actions are being initiated to 
implement Committee’s observations/ recommendations. A customer friendly approach 
using  best business practices such as National / Key Account Managers (NAM / KEM) for 
enterprise customers, SLA agreement, market oriented tariffs / discounts, 24* 7 services 
web based interface etc have been introd uced for better redressal of complaints of 
customers aimed at enhancing customer satisfaction 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated    23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that the Government is in the process of revival and 
revitalization of BSNL and MTNL through various short -medium-and long -term 
measures. The relevant proposals for revival and revitalization of BSNL and MTNL having 
wide financial implications would have to go through established procedure before final 
decisions are taken. Some of the core issues, such as surrender with refund of BWA 
spectrum in both service areas held by MTNL and in 6 service areas held by BSNL, waiver 
of notional loan wit h BSNL, financial support of Rs. 492 crore on payment of Minimum 
Alternate Tax (MAT) by MTNL and pension matters of MTNL have already got the 
approval of the Cabinet. The remaining important issues that need urgent attention, 
such as annual financial suppo rt to BSNL and MTNL to reduce staff costs, hiving off 
mobile tower assets of BSNL into a separate company, monetization of land and building 
assets possessed by BSNL and MTNL and merger of BSNL and MTNL are yet to be taken 
up with the Cabinet. The Committe e emphasize that these are vital PSUs which are 
performing important and strategic functions, especially during events of national 
importance and natural catastrophe, etc. Further,  telecommunications is such a vital 
sector which cannot be entirely left to  the private players. The Committee takes note of 

20 
 
 
the initiatives underway with the active intervention of the Government and 
recommend that these should be translated into action for the much needed revival and 
revitalization of BSNL and MTNL. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DoT is conscious of the need for immediate action for revival of BSNL and MTNL. 
DoT is taking necessary action expeditiously and in accordance with the relevant 
procedures to place the pending matters for decision by the competent authority. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
One of the long -term measures contemplated by the Government includes the 
merger of BSNL and MTNL,  with the objective to position these PSUs to emerge as 
market leaders in the converged telecommunication market. For an in -depth study on 
the implications of the merger of the two PSUs, three Groups have been constituted to 
look into issues of human resou rces integration, technology integration and corporate 
integration. The BSNL and MTNL are also preparing restructuring plans. Based on the 
outcome of the decisions on the pending issues, the final revival Plan of BSNL and MTNL 
will be formulated incorporating the plans of the two PSUs. The Committee recommend 
that the Department should take urgent steps to bring the pending issues before the 
Cabinet for final decisions so as to expedite the revival Plan of BSNL and MTNL.  
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL and M TNL have prepared their respective restructuring plans which are 
under consideration of their management. Both BSNL and MTNL have been advised by 
DoT to finalize their plan at the earliest. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department o f 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Overall position of telecom connectivity in the country Public vs Private 
 
The Committee note that the share of the private sector in terms of number of 
subscribers has increased from 85.51 per cent to 87.13 per cent during the period from 
April 2013 to March 2014 whereas the share of the public sector declined from 14.49 
per cent to 12.87 per cent during the same period. It is also observed that during the 
period of on e year i.e. from 31 st March, 2013 to 31 st March, 2014, the number of 
subscribers of PSUs declined by 3.07 million, i.e. by 30.7 lakh subscribers in rural areas, 
whereas that of the Private Sector increased by 31.59 million, i.e. by 315.9 lakh 
subscribers. Again, in urban areas, during the same period, the number of subscribers of 

21 
 
 
PSUs declined by 6.99 million, i.e. by 69.9 lakh, whereas the number of subscribers of 
the Private Sector increased by 13.47 million, i.e. by 134.7 lakh. The decline in the share 
of public sector was attributed to decline in wireline business of BSNL and MTNL, stiff 
competition in mobile sector, lack of skill of employees of BSNL and MTNL, procedural 
delays, lack of marketing proficiency, etc. From the aforesaid position, it is ampl y clear 
that BSNL and MTNL could only perform under the regime of monopoly, but failed to 
compete in a liberalized market scenario where private players gradually gained 
dominance. The Committee observe that unless BSNL and MTNL undertake drastic 
reforms t o reorient themselves to provide better services, the Private Sector players 
may marginalize them in the market in the coming years. Therefore, the need of the 
hour is that MTNL and BSNL must make sincere and proactive efforts to increase their 
respective market share by adopting some of the best business practices of the private 
companies. In order to survive in a competitive environment, it is imperative that BSNL 
and MTNL should streamline their administrative machinery and take measures to adapt 
to chan ges brought about by the market environment. The Committee would like the 
two companies to identify their respective strengths and weaknesses and accordingly 
organize them to become market leaders in providing telecom connectivity in the 
country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the committee are noted and Best efforts 
under the circumstances are being put in to implement / achieve them. Besides taking 
steps for upgrading / expanding the networks for improving customer experience /  
satisfaction, in an effort to increase the Market Share a sales funnel concept has been 
devised which is reviewed at weekly basis at Director level.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
So far as the position of wireline v/s wireless is concerned, the Committee find 
that the share of wireless telephones has increased from 96.64 per cent at the 
beginning of the financial year to 96.65 pe r cent by the end of March 2014, whereas the 
share of wireline telephones declined marginally from 3.36 per cent to 3.05 per cent 
during the same period. The Committee noted that during the year 2013, in the United 
States of America, the number of subscrib ers per 100 inhabitants in case of wireline is 
42.22 per cent and that of wireless is 95.53 per cent. In the case of France it is 60.78 per 
cent for wireline whereas it is 98.50 per cent for wireless. Even in China, the number of 
subscribers per 100 inhabi tants in case of wireline is 19.27 per cent whereas that of 
wireless is 88.71 per cent. In stark contrast, in India the number of subscribers per 100 
inhabitants in case of wireline is a mere 2.34 per cent whereas that of wireless is 71.69 
per cent. The Co mmittee are given to understand that main reason for the existence of 
a substantial subscriber base for wire line telephony in developed countries is that the 

22 
 
 
penetration of wireline services had almost saturated before the entry of wireless 
services. However, the fact remains that India’s low wireline subscribers base is squarely 
linked with the poor performance of BSNL and MTNL who are operating in wireline 
business for several decades with massive infrastructure. The Committee is of the view 
that if the present trend continues, in the next few years the wireline subscriber base in 
India may be further marginalized and become insignificant. As such, the Department 
should try to promote the wireline subscriber base in India by adopting measures best 
suited to the country. The Committee recommends that steps taken in the direction of 
rationalizing the average cost of access wireline vis -à-vis access wireless can prove 
immensely helpful for the expansion of the wireline telephony. Committee recommends 
that the  Department should take urgent steps to bring the pending issues before the 
Cabinet for the final decisions so as to expedite the revival plan of BSNL and MTNL. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has delinked the licenses from Spectrum in the year 20 12 and 
the spectrum is being allocate to the telecom service providers through auction process. 
Accordingly, the gap between the cost of wireline and wireless services is reducing 
which may help in expansion of the wireline services. 
 
(Ministry of Communic ations & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
Rural and Urban Tele-density 
 
Tele-density, which shows the number of telephones per 100 population, is an 
important indicator of telecom penetration in the country. The Committee note that by 
the end of March, 2014, the overall tele-density in the country was 75.23 per cent. It is a 
matter of concern that when urban tele -density was 145.46 per cent in the beginning of 
2014-15, rural tele -density stood at mere 44.01 per cent. The main hurdle in increasing 
rural tele -density is primarily attributed to inaccessibility and remoteness of certain 
areas, higher capital and operational expenditure, less revenue flows, requirement  for 
viability gap funding, lack of electricity, etc. The Committee are given to understand that 
in the Twelfth Plan, there is a target to provide 1200 million connections and mobile 
access to all the villages and increase rural tele -density to 70 percent by 2017. Various 
plans formulated by the Department include providing telecom connectivity to 
uncovered villages in the North East areas by 2016, in the Himalayan States by mid -
2017, in the Borders States and Islands by mid -2017, the Left Wing Extremist af fected 
States by mid -2018 and the remaining States and Southern States by mid -2019. The 
Committee are of the view that at 145.46 per cent, while the tele -density in urban areas 
has already reached a very high level, there is an urgent need to significantly  increase 
rural tele-density from the present level of 44.01 per cent. The committee observe that 
the key for achieving the Twelfth Plan targets of achieving 70 percent rural tele -density 

23 
 
 
lies in taking requisite measures for effective implementation of th e above schemes. 
The committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The rural tele -density achieved till October 2014 is 45.44.The progress of various 
schemes of USOF for achieving increased penetration of telecom  services in rural areas 
is as below: 
(i) Village Public Telephones:  As on 30.11.2014, a total of  5,81,410 out of the 
5,93,601 inhabited villages [i.e. 97.95 %] of the country as per Census 2001 have been 
provided with Village Public Telephones (VPTs), with subsidy support from USOF. 
(ii) Scheme for Mobile Communication Services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) 
affected Areas  : Government, on 20.08.2014, approved a project to provide Mobile 
Services in 2199 locations in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas in the s tates of 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Agreement between USOF and 
BSNL has been signed w.e.f. 30.09.2014. Installation and roll out in these areas is 
targeted to be completed in 12 months. BSNL has awarded the work to successful 
bidders (M/s Vihan Networks Limited and M/s HFCL). Secretary (Telecom) has written 
D.O. letters dated 08.09.2014 to Chief Secretaries of LWE affected states, to constitute 
institutional arrangements at the State -level for monitoring the project and resolving 
implementation issues. Installation of 500 towers is targeted by March, 2015 
(iii) Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for the North -Eastern Region:  
Government has approved a proposal on  10.09.2014 to implement a Comprehensive 
Telecom Development Plan for the North -Eastern Region at estimated expenditure of 
Rs. 5336 Crore to be funded by USOF. The Project envisages provision of mobile 
coverage to 8621 identified uncovered villages, instal lation of 321 mobile tower sites 
along National Highways and strengthening of transmission network in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and 
Tripura. Award of work for assistance in the preparations of the  tender documents was 
issued on 01.10.2014 to TCIL. Benchmarking, Tendering and Evaluation by USOF 
targeted by March, 2015. 
(iv) Mobile services in uncovered villages  : A scheme to extend financial support 
from USO Fund for provisioning of mobile communication services in inhabited 
uncovered villages of the country not having mobile coverage is under consideration. It 
is estimated that there are about 55,669 villages in the country that do not have mobile 
coverage. Mobile coverage in the remaining uncovered vill ages is proposed to be 
provided in a phased manner over the next five years 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 

24 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Internet & Broadband Connectivity in the Country 
 
The Committee note that as per data released by the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), India’s mobile broadband penetration in 2013 (based 
on per 100 inhabitants) was a mere 3.2 per cent. This was much lower than the global 
average of 26.7 per cent and placed India at the 113th spot among 138 countries. India’s 
mobile broadband reach was smaller than neighbors like Nepal (13 per cent), Bhutan 
(15.6 per cent) and Sri Lanka (7.8 per cent). Some African countries like Gha na (39.9 per 
cent) and Nigeria (10.1 per cent), too, were much ahead. The Committee also note that 
as per the latest TRAI data, as on March 2014 there were 933.02 million telephone 
subscribers in the country, whereas the total number of broadband subscribe rs as on 
August 2014 is 74.3 million, which is approximately 6.2 per 100 inhabitants. The 
Department has expressed optimism that at the present growth rate of 3 to 4 million 
broadband subscribers per month and the roll -out of 3G/BWA services and the 
commissioning of the National Optical fibre Network (NoFN), the Twelfth Plan target of 
175 million broadband connections by 2017 will be achievable. However,an analysis of 
the implementation of various schemes relating to broadband under the aegis of the 
Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) give a different picture. Under the scheme of 
Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of intra District SDHQ -
DHQ of Network in service area of NE -I and NE -II, the roll -out of the scheme is yet to 
start. The scheme ‘wireless Rural Broadband connectivity to rural and remote areas’ for 
providing broadband connectivity to 5.5 lakh villages has been put on hold due to 
conflict with roll out obligation of 3G/BWA bidders. The scheme ‘Satellite Rural 
Broadband Connectivity in rural and remote areas’ for providing broadband connectivity 
to 5000 identified villages is yet to be launched. The National Optical Fibre Network 
(NoFN) for providing optical fibre connections to 2.5 lakh Gram Panchayats has been 
approved b y the Union Cabinet on 25th October, 2011 and the scheme is likely to be 
completed by December, 2016. From this, the Committee are inclined to conclude that 
poor broadband penetration in the country is mainly due to lack of infrastructure which, 
in turn, is because of the inordinate delay in the implementation of the above schemes. 
The Committee is aware that the Government are planning to bring about a broadband 
revolution in the country, especially in the rural areas, with a view to bringing different 
services to the doorsteps of the people. Moreover, the twelfth Plan had set the target of 
providing 175 million broadband connections by the year 2017. However, the poor 
status of implementation of various projects does not augur well, particularly when the 
Government has the vision to increase broadband connectivity in the country in the 
context of e -governance and under the ‘Digital India Programme’. During the course of 
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics and 
Information T echnology, the Committee have come across several schemes of the 
Department that are lagging behind due to the poor connectivity scenario. The 
Committee observed that without taking appropriate measures for early 
implementation and rolling out the schemes related to connectivity, the status of 
broadband connectivity in India will continue to lag behind other countries. The 

25 
 
 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should seriously look into the delay 
in roll -out of the above schemes while at the same  time creating a congenial 
atmosphere for increase of broadband connectivity in the country. The Committee also 
recommends that separate urban and rural data of internet and subscribers should be 
maintained in line with the system adopted in measuring the tele-density for urban and 
rural areas. This would help in clearly understanding the status of broadband and 
internet connections in the country. In this regard, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India (TRAI) may be impressed upon to put in place a mecha nism enabling maintenance 
of subscriber data segregated between rural and urban areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra - 
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in Assam:  The scheme is being implement ed by BSNL. 
As of November 2014, about 302 nodes have been installed out of total 354 nodes. 
BSNL has cited the following reasons for delay in implementation of the scheme: 
 (a) Due to heavy rains in Assam, underground cable laying is not possible 
from May to October (about six month). Even after rainy season is over, 
it becomes impossible to lay underground cable due to subsoil water. 
Thus, actual time available for execution of the project is less than six 
months in a year. Further, due to frequent bandhs , economic blockades, 
law & order problems etc. the workable time period gets further 
reduced. 
(b)  Limited numbers of contractors are available in Assam for laying of OFC 
cable. The contractors have limited resources and they mostly bring 
labourers from outside the region. They do not permit contractors of other 
area / State to take up the work in Assam. 
(c)  There is an increased tendency on part of contractors to move to courts to 
challenge the usual tender conditions i.e. eligibility and experience crit eria. 
Despite offering best possible defence, the court invariably grants stays 
which adversely affects the time schedule. In this case about 200 Route 
Kms of was under litigation and as on date about 100 Route Kms involving 
about 5 Rings is still under litigation. 
(d)  About 500 Kms. of cable laying work is involved in North Cachar (NC) Hills 
District, where it is extremely difficult to take up execution work due to 
law and order problems. Even Assam Government is also facing difficulty 
to take up any project in that area. 
(e)  Considerable time is lost in obtaining 'Right of Way' (RoW) permissions. 
The RoW permissions are normally delayed, due to the following reasons:- 
(i) The existing procedure takes long time and RoW Estimates from 
Road authorities are received after long delay. 
(ii) Sometimes the RoW charges proposed by State Government are 
exorbitantly high. Such cases necessitate correspondence and 
follow up action with PWD, which results delay in obtaining the 
RoW Permission. 

26 
 
 
(iii)  RoW permission is  denied wherever road widening is planned. In 
some of the cases though road widening is planned but land 
acquisition process is not complete. RoW permission in such cases 
is given after completion of land acquisition. 
 
(b) Optical Fibre Network Augmentatio n, Creation and Management of Intra - District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in    NE -I Circle (comprising states of Meghalaya, Mizoram & 
Tripura): The scheme is being implemented by RailTel. Work has been awarded for 
trenching and laying in respect of 20 districts out of 23 districts in Tripura, Meghalaya 
and Mizoram while tenders for remaining three districts in Mizoram are under 
finalization. 978 km of duct has been laid while 483 km of OFC has been laid. As on 
31.12.2014, 24 nodes have been connected in Tripura. The following points/ issues 
being faced by RailTel resulting in delay in creation of DHQ-SDHQ network NE-I Circle: 
    (i) Comprehensive physical & GIS based survey of the region completed in 
Sep'12 
    (ii) Not many eligible bidders available in the region for execution of work 
    (iii) No participation in tender by contractors in few sections 
    (iv) Tender cancelled due to invariably high offers received 
    (v) Tender finalization of Duct & OFC delayed due to high cost offers 
    (vi) Verification of  credentials of qualified bidders consumed considerable 
amount of time 
 
(c) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra - District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in NE -II Circle (comprising states of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur & Nagaland): The scheme is being implemented by RailTel. Work has been 
awarded for trenching and laying in respect of 18 districts out of 36 districts in 
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Manipur while tendering for remaining 18 districts 
have been refloated and are under process/finalization. 675 km of duct has been laid 
while 13 km of OFC has been laid. The rollout is yet to start in NE -II Telecom Circle. The 
following points/ issues being faced by them resulting in delay in creation of DHQ -SDHQ 
network NE-II Circle: 
    (i) Comprehensive physical & GIS based survey of the region completed in 
Dec'2012 to arrive at incremental OFC to be laid 
    (ii) Length of incremental OFC to be laid as per physical survey is about 13558 
km, which is 4468 km more than the initial estimated length 
    (iii) Capital expenditure increased by 80% due to increase in quantum of work 
    (iv) Not many eligible bidders available in the region for execution of work 
    (v) No participation in tender by contractors in few sections 
    (vi) Tender cancelled due to invariably high offers received 
    (vii) Tender finalization of Duct & OFC delayed due to high cost offers 
    (viii) Verification of credentials of qualified bidders consumed considerable 
amount of time 
 

27 
 
 
(d) National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN): NOFN Project is envisaged as a Centre-State 
joint effort. State Governments are expected to contribute by way of not levying any 
RoW charges. This requires suitable tri -partite MoU to be signed by the Government of 
India, State Governments & BBNL.  Tri-partite MoU has been signed with all states and 
Union Territories except Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep. Three Pilot Projects have been 
completed to cover all Gram Panchayats of Arain Block in Ajmer District (Rajasthan), 
Panisagar Block in North Tripura D istrict (Tripura), Paravada Block in Vishakhapatnam 
District (A.P.). As on 15.10.2012, each of the 59 Gram Panchayats in these three Pilot 
Project Blocks have been provided with 100 Mbps bandwidth each in these three blocks. 
The execution work of NOFN has been entrusted by BBNL to 3 CPSUs viz. BSNL, RailTel 
and Powergrid. Survey work is complete for more than 80% of Gram Panchayats. 
Tenders for supply of OFC and GPON equipment have been finalized and purchase 
orders have been placed. Tenders for supply of P LB duct and trenching and laying work 
are underway by 3 CPSUs. Work has already been started in 939 Blocks (out of approx. 
6,600 Blocks) covering 20,104 Gram Panchayats. The project is likely to be completed in 
a phased manner by December 2016. The reasons  for delay in the project are as given 
below: 
 
(i) OFC laving is time intensive effort: 
The project is of a mega nature covering the entire country and envisages 
laying of incremental OFC from Block HQ to Gram Panchayat. The existing 
fibre (OFC) across the cou ntry of all operators is of the order of about 10 
lakh km. Of these the three CPSUs - BSNL have laid over 7 lakh km over the 
last 15 years. 
 
(ii) Implementation capacity of 3 CPSUs: 
The work execution capacity of CPSUs (mainly BSNL) over the last few 
years has been maximum in the range of 50,000 -60,000 km per year. The 
execution capacity of PGCIL and RailTel combined is even less than that 
(<10,000 KMs per year). 
 
(iii) Procurement of Materials: 
The major material requirements of this project are OFC, GPON equipment 
and PLB duct. While supply of OFC and GPON equipment has been 
addressed, the supply of PLB duct still remains a critical issue. The project 
entails  procurement of approx. 6,00,000 km of PLB duct. Besides this, 
BSNL and private Telecom operators also requir e PLB duct for their own 
projects. Due to this large requirement of PLB duct, the price discovered 
through  the tenders is high. Therefore, to get a reasonable price, there is 
a need to stagger the procurement of PLB duct in phases over a period of 
time. 
(iv)  Labour Constraint: 

28 
 
 
Another component of the NOFN project is cable laying which is labour 
and time intensive. The project entails 6,00,000 km of trenching & cable 
laying. Besides this, BSNL and private telecom operators also have their 
own projects which ha ve considerable labour requirement. An addition, 
there are various infrastructure projects under progress consuming a large 
amount of labour. This puts a constraint on availability of labour for 
execution of the project. 
Progress of work is being regularly  reviewed on a fortnightly basis. 
Consequent to review and greater delegation of powers to the CPSUs, the 
pace of work has been accelerated fivefold in the last month.  
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
DoT Projects: 
OFC Based Network for Defence Services 
 
The Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI), in its meeting held on 3 
December, 2009, had given the approval for setting up of a n exclusive dedicated OFC 
based communication network for Defence Services to vacate the occupied frequency 
spectrum to be used for next generation mobile telephone. The Air Force Network 
which started in 2006 has already been dedicated to the Nation on 14  September, 2010. 
The Army and Navy components of the network comprising of 219 and 33 sites 
respectively, were to be completed by December, 2012. However, the tender floated by 
BSNL in 2010 could not be finalized because of the increase in tender cost fro m Rs. 2000 
crore to Rs. 7423.96 crore. The CCI, in their meeting held on 3 July, 2012, had given 
financial approval of Rs. 5236 crore over and above Rs. 8098 crore, already approved by 
them on 3rd December, 2009 for laying of alternate communication networ k for 
Defence Service in a period of 36 months, i.e by 3rd July, 2015. The status of utilization 
of funds under the scheme shows that during the year 2013 -14, out of the total 
allocation of Rs. 1356 crore at BE, which was revised to Rs. 1518 crore at RE st age, the 
actual utilization made under the project was only Rs. 211.51 crore. The Committee also 
note that out of the 10 components of the network, tender has been finalized for only 
one component, i.e. OFC cable (Tri Services Backbone and Army Access) at the cost of 
Rs. 8678.74 crore. Two components, i.e. Transmission Equipment (TRI Services 
Backbone) and IP/Access Network (Navy) are under litigation and in respect of another 
component the Unified Network Management System, Request for Proposal (RFP) has 
not yet been received from the Army. The Committee observe that there has been an 
inordinate delay in the implementation of the project with substantial time and at over 
runs and at the present pace of implementation, it is unlikely that the Department will  
achieve the targets within the given timeline. In view of the fact that spectrum 

29 
 
 
availability for mobile telephony has become inadequate due to increasing demand of 
mobile services in the country and more spectrum are required for higher national 
growth of subscriber base, the timely completion of the project has become a matter of 
immediate priority. Now that the main tender for laying 57,000 km of OFC has been 
finalized by BSNL for an amount of Rs. 8678.74 crore and Purchase Orders for all seven 
packages have been placed, the Committee would like the Department and the 
implementing agency to give special attention for the timely and successful 
implementation of the project. The tender for the remaining components may be 
finalized at the earliest and effor ts should be made to settle all the legal hurdles in the 
implementation of the project. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made 
under the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFC based Network for Defence Services under Network for Spectrum (NFS) 
Project has 10 components. Out of these ten components, NITs for seven components 
have already been invited and NIT (notice inviting tender) for the remaining three 
components is in the process. These three components are Microwave, Satellite and 
UNMS (Unified Network Management System). The status report on each component is 
at annexure. 
 
Annexure 
Monthly Progress of the implementation of Defence Network     
(As on   31.12.2014) 
 
S. No. Components of the 
Network 
Total 
sites 
Sites 
Completed 
Time by which all  Sites are to be 
completed 
1 Infrastructure work 333 248 March 2015 
 
Sr. 
No. 
 
Compon
ents of 
the 
Network 
 
Sancti
oned 
estima
ted 
cost 
Time Lines as per the Present Progress 
  (Rs 
crore) 
Floating of 
Tender 
Purchase 
Order 
Tendered 
cost 
(Rs Crore) 
Installa
-tion 
Start 
Current Status 
A B C F G H I J 

30 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
 
Compon
ents of 
the 
Network 
 
Sancti
oned 
estima
ted 
cost 
Time Lines as per the Present Progress 
  (Rs 
crore) 
Floating of 
Tender 
Purchase 
Order 
Tendered 
cost 
(Rs Crore) 
Installa
-tion 
Start 
Current Status 
A B C F G H I J 
1 
OF Cable 
(Tri-
services 
Backbon
e & 
Army 
Access) 
5174 21.06.2013 
Pkg A & B 
issues in 
July 2014. 
Rest  issued 
in Sep 
2014. 
 
8678.74 
Nov / 
Dec 
2014 
Route Survey started 
in all the packages.   
QA completed Bulk 
Production Clearance 
(BPC) and started 
Factory Acceptance 
Test jointly with Army 
for OFC, PLB Pipes & 
Accessories. 
2 
OF Cable 
(Navy 
Access) 
597 
29.07.2013 
Tender 
opened on 
10/1/14 
Feb 2015 
Approval of 
Committee 
for Tender 
Evaluation 
(CET) Report 
is under 
process 
March 
2015 
CET has completed 
Financial Evaluation 
and L1 bidder is 
M/s.TCIL.  CET report 
has been submitted to 
MM Cell for further 
action. 
3 
Transmis
sion 
Equipme
nt (Tri-
services 
Backbon
e) 
1300 20.11.2013 May 2015 Tender not 
yet opened 
Jun 
2015 
Tender to be opened  
in Jan 2015 
4 
IP/Acces
s 
Network  
(Navy) 
611 31.01.2014 May 2015 Tender not 
yet opened 
Jun 
2015 
Tender to be opened 
in Jan 2015 
5 
IP/Acces
s 
Network 
(Army) 
2300 19.11.2013 April  2015 
Tender 
opened on 
23.12.2014 
May 
2015 
Tender opened on 
23.12.2014. Techno- 
commercial 
evaluation is under  
 
progress. 6 GOFNMS 1000 22.11.2013 March 2015 
Tender 
opened on 
10.09.14 
April  
2015 
Techno-commercial 
evaluation is under 
finalization. 
7 Secrecy 
Devices 366 11.12.2014 Jun 2015 
Tender 
floated in 
Dec 2014 
Jul 
2015 
Tender to be opened 
in Feb 2015. 

31 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
 
Compon
ents of 
the 
Network 
 
Sancti
oned 
estima
ted 
cost 
Time Lines as per the Present Progress 
  (Rs 
crore) 
Floating of 
Tender 
Purchase 
Order 
Tendered 
cost 
(Rs Crore) 
Installa
-tion 
Start 
Current Status 
A B C F G H I J 
8 Microwa
ve 
Network 
183 To be 
floated Jul 2015 Tender not 
yet floated 
Jul 
2015 
Tender has not been 
floated. 
9 Satellite 
Network 133 To be 
floated Jul 2015 Tender not 
yet floated 
Aug 
2015 
Tender has not been 
floated. 
10 
Unified 
Network 
Manage
ment 
System 
1241 RFP not yet received from Army  
 
   **  Scheduled time lines as per cabinet approval :  36 months w.e.f. July 2012 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
Utilization of funds under Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) 
 
The Government had announced the Universal Service Obligation  Support Policy 
on 27th March, 2002 for augmenting the infra structure and increasing telecom coverage 
in the rural and remote areas. The resources for implementation of USO are raised 
through a Universal Service Levy (USL) which has presently been fixed at 5% of the 
Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) of the telecom servi ce providers. During the year 2013 -
14, an amount of Rs. 7896.39 crore was collected under USOF, out of which Rs. 3000 
crore was allocated at the BE/RE stage and the actual utilization was Rs. 2163.44 crore. 
The schemes which have made maximum utilization under USOF were Rs. 1500 crore for 
support for Rural Wireline Household DELs installed prior to 1 st April 2012, Rs. 514 crore 
for NOFN,   Rs. 64.40 crore for Share Mobile Infrastructure scheme (Phase -I) and Rs. 
60.48 crore for Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme, etc. During the  year 2014-15, though 
the Department had proposed an amount of Rs. 14786.74 Crore for USOF activities, an 
amount of Rs. 3537 crore only was allocated at BE stage. The Committee’s examination 
further reveals that a total number of 20 sch emes/ items are being implemented by the 

32 
 
 
Department under USOF during 2014 -15. However, out of these 20 schemes, Plan fund 
allocated in respect of 7 schemes were for making spill -over payment and not for 
achieving any new targets. Moreover, four schemes, v iz  Scheme for Mobile Services in 
uncovered villages, augmentation, creation and management of OFC Network in West 
Bengal and Sikkim, Wireless Rural Broadband connectivity to rural and remote areas and 
Satellite Rural Broadband connectivity in rural and re mote areas are yet to be launched. 
The Committee feel that early settlement of spill -over amount with respect to all the 
closed schemes will result in better restructuring and streamlining of the schemes under 
USOF. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should explore ways 
for one-time payment to the schemes for which spill -over payment is still going on and 
closure of these schemes so as to enable the Department to lay emphasis on new 
schemes. The Committee also recommend that urgent step s should be taken for the 
implementation of all the schemes of USOF, including the four schemes for which 
approval has already been taken. The Committee feel that since USOF is specially 
created for the purpose of providing telecom  coverage to people livi ng in rural and 
remote areas, any further delay in the implementation of the USOF schemes would only 
be at the cost of people living in rural areas. The Committee would like the Department 
to work in the above direction so that all the USOF scheme could be  implemented and 
their targets achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Spill over Amount : It is correct that fund requirement spillover for the schemes 
which are since closed. However, best efforts are being made for settlement  of  these 
pending claims   e arly by issuing instructions to the CCA offices from time to time.  
Recently instructions have been issued to CCA offices  vide this office letter no. 1 -
1/2014-15/USOF/Payt dated 20.01.2015  that all the pending cases be reviewed on 
monthly basis and to ex plore ways for  onetime settlement of payment  for the old 
schemes  and a final Report  has been called for by 30.04.2015. A status report in this 
regard  will be submitted in due course.  
 
(b) Implementation of schemes:   
1. Nation Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) Progress of work is being reviewed regularly on 
a fortnightly basis. Consequent to review and greater delegation of powers to the 
CPSUs, the pace of work has got accelerated fivefold in the last month. Matter of signing 
of tripartite MoU for free RoW  for NOFN is being regularly pursued at various levels 
including Secretary (T) and Hon'ble MoC&IT with Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep. A 
presentation was also made by BBNL to Tamil Nadu Government explaining the benefits 
of NOFN to State Government and rural population. 
 
2. Left Wing Extremism (LWE): A meeting to review the LWE Mobile Tower Project was 
held on 02.01.2015 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Telecom). BSNL intimated that 
in Chhattisgarh, One tower has been burnt by naxals, 06 towers are to be re located and 
18 towers are faulty. BSNL has assured that the 18 sites will be made functional by 15 th 

33 
 
 
February, 2015 by providing satellite backhaul. BSNL has also assured to make the 
remaining sites operational soon. 
 
3. Comprehensive Telecom Development P lan for the North -Eastern Region: 
Government has approved a proposal on 10.09.2014 to implement a Comprehensive 
Telecom Development Plan for the North -Eastern Region. The Project envisages 
provision of mobile coverage to 8621 identified uncovered villages,  installation of 321 
mobile tower sites along National Highways and strengthening of transmission network 
in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Tripura. Award of work for assistance in the preparations  of the tender 
documents was issued on 01.10.2014 to TCIL. Benchmarking, Tendering and Evaluation 
by USOF targeted by March, 2015. 
 
4. Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra - District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in  NE -I  & NE-II OFC laying work is under progress for several 
nodes while tenders for trenching and laying are under finalization for remaining nodes 
(Network roll out is yet to start). 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) 
 
The NOFN Project approved by the Government on 25 th November, 2011 aimed 
at connecting all the 2,50,000/ - Gram Panchayat in the Country through opti cal fibre. 
The Department have informed that NOFN project is envisaged as a Centre -State joint 
effort and the project is being executed by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), namely the 
Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL). BBNL is executing the project th rough three 
Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), viz. BSNL, Railtel and PowerGrid. The 
Committee have also been informed that a Tri -partite MoU has been signed with all 
States and union Territories except Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep. Once fully 
implemented, content providers can launch various services, such as           e -Health, e-
Education, e -Governance, etc. in rural areas. The project is being funded by USOF and 
the initial estimated cost for the project is Rs. 20,100 crore. The Committee further note 
that NOFN is one of the biggest schemes under the USOF activities of the Department of 
Telecommunications. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that there has 
been a severe under -utilization of funds under such an important scheme of USOF 
during the year 2013 -14 wherein out of Rs. 3000 crore allocation made under USOF, Rs. 
2500 crore had been allocated for NOFN and the actual utilization was only Rs. 514 
crore. During the year 2014 -15, an amount of Rs. 3537 crore has been allocated for 
USOF at  BE stage, out of which Rs. 1477.26 crore has been earmarked for the NOFN 
project. The Department have stated that for achieving physical target of 1,00,000 Gram 
Panchayat, under NOFN,   Rs. 7306.81 crore was required and non -provision of 

34 
 
 
adequate funds du ring the current Financial year will hamper achievement of physical 
targets. However, the status of implementation of the above scheme shows that the 
actual realization of targets under the scheme is for from satisfactory. Since the 
inception of the scheme  in 2011, against the target of providing 1,00,000 Gram 
Panchayats, the Committee find that works is in progress in only 415 blocks (out of 
approx. 6,600 blocks) covering 10,876 Gram Panchayats. The Committee are deeply 
distressed to note that against the target of achieving 1,00,000 Gram Panchayats during 
the current financial year, it is now expected that only 50,000 Village Panchayats will be 
connected by the end of the financial year and the target for completion of the project 
has been delayed till Dec ember, 2016. Keeping in view the fact that the initial plan was 
to complete the project by 2013, any further delay in the implementation of the project 
will only affect its targets groups. The Committee observe that the NOFN have the 
potential to act as th e backbone for broadband connectivity in rural areas, and hence 
expeditious implementation of this scheme will immensely benefit the rural masses to 
have easy access to various services, such as e -Health, e -Education, e -Governance, e -
Commerce, etc. The Com mittee desire that urgent necessary steps must be taken for 
achieving the annual targets. Regarding the requirement of funds during the current 
year, the Committee recommend that the matter may be taken up by the  Department 
with the Ministry of Finance, s o that the implementation of this scheme does not suffer 
due to want of adequate fund. The committee also desire that the signing of the Tri -
partite MoU with Tamilnadu and Lakshadweep be expedited to bring them under the 
umbrella of NOFN. The committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The work has been distributed by BBNL to 3 CPSUs viz. BSNL, Railtel and 
Powergrid. Survey work is complete for more than 80% of Gram Panchayats. Tenders 
for supply of OFC and GPON eq uipment have been finalized and purchase orders have 
been placed. Tenders for supply of PLB duct and trenching and laying work are 
underway by 3 CPSUs. Work has already started in 939 Blocks (out of approx. 6,600 
Blocks) covering 20,104 Gram Panchayats. Pr ogress of work is being regularly reviewed 
on a fortnightly basis. Consequent to review and greater delegation of powers to the 
CPSUs, the pace of work has been accelerated fivefold in the last month. Matter of 
signing of tripartite MoU for free RoW for NO FN is being regularly pursued at various 
levels with Tamil Nadu and Lakshadweep including Secretary (T) and Hon'ble MCIT. A 
presentation was also made by BBNL to Tamil Nadu explaining the benefits of NOFN to 
State Government and rural citizens. In respect  of providing  adequate fund for  NOFN 
project, Budget branch  of DoT have been requested to communicate    the concerns of 
Standing Committee to Ministry of Finance at the time of finalization / allotment of 
funds during  the current year vide this office  letter of even no dated  20.01.2015  (copy 
enclosed) as Annexure - I. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 

35 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
Providing Mobile Connectivity in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected area 
 
The committee notes that the Union Cabinet in the meeting held on 4 th June, 
2013 has approved the proposal to install mobile towers at 2199 locations identified in 9 
states which are affected by LWE and work h ad been awarded to BSNL to be completed 
within 12 months, i.e. by 4 th June, 2014. The Committee note that out of 2199 towers, 
BSNL has so far installed only 363 towers. The installation of the remaining 1836 towers 
was delayed mainly because the Capital Ex penditure (Capex) and Operational 
Expenditure (Opex) for 1836 towers discovered by BSNL through tender process was 
21.72 per cent higher than the estimated cost. It was because of this that during 2013 -
14, in spite of allocation of Rs. 237.75 crore for the  scheme, the utilization under the 
scheme was ‘Nil’. The Committee have been informed that on 20 th August, 2014, the 
Cabinet had approved project implementation cost of Rs. 3567.58 crore against a 
revised estimated cost of Rs. 3216.12 crore. The Committee observe that setting up of 
towers in the LWE affected areas has long been overdue as the initial plan was to 
complete the project by June 2014. Now that the agreement has been signed between 
BSNL and USOF on 30 September, 2014, and as per the tender requir ement of BSNL, the 
Vendors shall execute the work in 12 months from the date of signing of the agreement 
between BSNL and USOF, the Department should constantly monitor the 
implementation process by the selected vendors. The Committee view that any further  
delay would only add to the misery and discomfiture of the common man already 
affected by Left Wing Extremism. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an 
allocation of Rs. 825 crore projected at RE stage may be utilized effectively so that the 
target of setting up towers at 4888 sites by March, 2015 should be achieved positively. 
So far as the status of the existing towers is concerned, the committee have learnt that 
out of the 363 installed towers, 1 tower has been burnt by naxals, 06 towers have to be 
relocated, 18 towers are faulty and can be restored only with new VSAT media as the 
existing media has been damaged. Keeping in view the difficult terrain and problems 
associated with installation of towers in hilly area, the Committee are of the view that 
towers should not have been allowed to be installed and appropriate caution should 
have been taken at the stage of installation itself. The Committee desire that necessary 
work of repair, restoration and maintenance of all the 25 towers should be taken up on 
priority basis so that real benefit accrues to the common man living in the area. The 
committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A meeting to review the LWE Mobile Tower Project was held on 02.01.2015 
under t he Chairmanship of Secretary (Telecom). BSNL intimated that in Chhattisgarh, 
One tower has been burnt by naxals, 06 towers are to be relocated and 18 towers are 
faulty. BSNL has assured that the 18 sites will be made functional by 15th February, 

36 
 
 
2015 by providing satellite backhaul. BSNL has also assured to make the remaining sites 
operational soon. 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
Centre for Development of Telematics (C-DoT) Centralized  Monitoring System (CMS) 
 
The Centre for Development of Telematics (C -DoT) is the Telecom Research and 
Development Centre of the Government of India. C -DoT’s current focus is on the design 
and developm ent of communication and security, Research and Monitoring related to 
security management for law enforcement agencies, the development and deployment 
of next generation networks and cost effective rural wireless solutions. The Committee 
note that the C -DoT is installing the Centralized Monitoring System (CMS) for lawful 
interception and monitoring of targets as required by the Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs) which will help in reducing the manual intervention at many stages and save 
time. The Committee hav e been informed that as against  ‘PRISM’ which is the main 
surveillance system implemented by the US Government to monitor all internet traffic, 
CMS will function under the regulatory framework of India, which is target -based 
monitoring. CMS will have the capability to monitor all licensed services like GSM, 
CDMA, GPRS, 3G Video Call, PSTN, etc. Regarding any foreseeable difficulty, the 
Department have informed that since CMS is a nation -wide security project having 
multiple stakeholders such as all the Tel ecom Service Providers and their location of 
offices at different places, it is getting difficult to get them connect in the same network. 
The Committee note that C -DoT is planning to implement CMS in 21 Licensed Service 
Areas by December, 2014. The Commit tee appreciate that till September, 2014 
installation of ISF equipment at all TSP sites has been completed. During the year 2014 -
15, as against the proposed amount of Rs. 250 crore, an amount of Rs. 200 crore has 
been allocated at BE stage. The Department have expressed their apprehension that this 
would definitely affect the implementation of CMS.  The Committee, while taking note 
of the important role mandated for the Centralised Monitoring System for lawful 
interception and monitoring of the targets, des ire  that the roll out activity plan under 
CMS for the year 2014 -15 should not be allowed to suffer due to reduction in the GBS 
allocation. The Committee are of the view that introduction of CMS will definitely help 
Central and State level Law Enforcement Agencies in interception and monitoring, 
because it will provide for electronic provisioning of target numbers without any manual 
intervention from TSPs, thus enhancing the secrecy level and quick provisioning of 
target. Adequate fund should be made availa ble to the scheme by reallocating the 
resources from other idle schemes so that roll -out activity could be accomplished. The 
Committee desire the Department to take all the necessary steps and keep the 
Committee informed of the progress made in this regard. 
 

37 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
C-DOT at the RE 2014-15, has requested for enhancing its GBS allocation from Rs. 
200.00 crores to Rs. 255.00 crores so that as mentioned in the standing committee’s 
recommendations / observations above, the CMS roll -out activiti es could be 
accomplished as planned. The DOT is also reviewing progress of its various schemes / 
projects to ensure that C -DOT could be given adequate fund for carrying -out CMS roll -
out activities 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Depar tment of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
Promotion of R&D in telecom Sector 
 
As far as promotion of R&D in telecom sector is concerned, C -DoT technology 
roadmap presently is focused towards national  and strategic needs of the country. To 
fulfill the objective, some of the initiatives taken by the C -DoT include research and 
development in the areas of cutting -edge technology in Switching, Optical, Security, 
Wireless and Network management services. So me of the technology achievements 
made by the C -DoT include technological development of Giga -bit Passive Optical 
Network (GPoN), Centralized Monitoring System, NGN/Max -NG, C-DoT VoIP-based next 
generation packet technology, Broadband Wireless Technology, Shared GSM Radio 
Access Network (SG-RAN) and FTTH technology for campuses, etc. The Committee have 
also been informed that C-DoT is focusing on new areas of research, such as 4G Wireless 
technology, Next Generation PON (Passive Optical Network) technology and 100G 
DWDM technologies for optical backbone network, Terabit Capacity Router 
Technologies, etc. For development of R&D in the telecom sector, the Department have 
furnished suggestions, such as creation of a corpus fund to promote indigenous R&D, 
promotion and setting up of requisite eco -system to meet the telecom sector demand, 
providing preference to domestically manufactured telecom technology and creation of 
manufacturing fund for providing of financial support for manufacturing of indigenously 
developed technologies. The Committee endorse the suggestions and recommend the 
Department to take up the matter with the appropriate authorities for materialization 
of the proposals. With changing technological requirements and the increasing demand 
for better and newer technology in the telecom sector, the Committee emphasize that 
there is an urgent need to expand the areas of research. Since lack of R&D has also been 
cited as one of the major reasons for India’s poor manufacturing capability in telecom 
equipment thereby resulting in huge import of telecom equipment, providing further 
fillip to R&D assumes added significance. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in R&D efforts oriented to develop a platform for rendering ‘an 
innovate user access method’ for illiterate and rural population adopting internet -based 
application. 
 

38 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Internet has been perhaps the most outstanding innovation in the field of 
communication in the history of mankind. There is a huge amount of  information 
available on the Internet. Unfortunately, the rural population of India is not able to 
benefit from the available technology because of various limiting factors e.g. availability 
of requisite communication infrastructure, illiteracy, etc.  
 
C-DOT R&D efforts in some of technology areas like internet -based application, wireless 
technology, optical, resulted in development of following products, which addresses the 
above limitations to bridge the digital -divide between urban and rural India and a llows 
rural population to access internet for their day-to-day needs.  
  
 C-DOT has developed Gyansetu system, which overcomes the limiting 
factors of rural masses including low / no literacy level and requires 
exposure only to local language, for getting c onnected to the internet. 
Gyansetu application provides advanced yet simplified application that can 
interact with the rural population, in a way comfortable to them so as to 
extract the required information from the internet. The possible services 
are e -governance, e -market, e -Services, Railway Status Enquiry, e -
education etc. 
 C-DOT’s Broad Band Wireless Terminal (BBWT) provides a cost effective 
solution for reaching IP connectivity to remote and rural areas through 
wireless network.  It can also be used for Back Haul link for Wi-Fi hot spots, 
cellular base stations and base station controllers, Bank ATMs, Data base 
servers, etc. 
 C-DOT fibre Damak, a Customer Premises Equipment (CPE), is a variant of 
ONT (Optical Network Terminal), which has been developed under GPON 
technology. This fibre Damak connects to Wi -Fi solution through backhaul 
fibre and then extend services through wireless over larger distances to 
locations like schools, hospitals, IT Centres etc. in rural areas. This solution 
is ideally suited for community type of networks also where there is a 
need to have Wi -Fi enabled community centres to cater to the needs of 
the community. 
The development of such technology solutions are an “essential facility” with 
high social impact, beneficial for the c ountry in terms of economic growth and 
availability of new services for the citizens even in remotest parts of the country. Its 
implementation will allow the implementation of an all IP network, provide ultra -
broadband connectivity and support the convergence of Telecommunications-Media 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 
 

39 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
Telecom Enforcement and Resource Monitoring (TERM) Cells 
Curbing of Illegal Telecom Operations 
 
One of the major purposes of the creation of the Telecom Enforcement and 
Resource Monitoring (TERM) Cells is to curb illegal operations (not permitted under the 
Indian Telegraph Act) and to catch hold of those who violate the  provisions of the Act. 
As per section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, within India, the Central Government 
shall have exclusive privilege of establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs. Any 
person providing telegraph services in violation of the  provisions of  the Telegraph Act 
falls under the category of illegal operations. The Committee have been informed that 
559 cases of illegal telecom operations have been unearthed so far. The total notional 
loss due to such illegal telecom operations is ap proximately Rs. 780 crore. Apart from 
the financial loss, what is of serious concern, is the fact that such illegal operations pose 
a security threat as well to the nation because such activities may not be traced by the 
Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). Co nsidering the wide ramifications of illegal 
operations, the Committee are of the firm view that the existing mechanism needs to be 
strengthened and made foolproof. At present, TERM Cells identify the clandestine 
activity/grey market operation through compl aint/information, observation of unusual 
traffic, social contacts, cases under investigation, Law Enforcement Agencies etc. To 
ensure that such activities are curbed, all Telecom Service Providers have also been 
mandated to monitor bulk connections users, Call Detailed Report (CDR) analysis in 
respect of heavy callers, mandatory transmission of Caller line Identification (CLI) and 
customer premise inspection and verification. The Committee recommend that TERM 
Cells should come out with an effective mechanis m to identify such illegal activity suo -
motu rather than been dependent on other sources as mentioned above so as to initiate 
timely corrective action. The· Committee also note that the TERM Cells are seriously 
handicapped by shortage of manpower and IT In frastructure in identifying and raiding 
such illegal set -ups. To overcome these problems, the Committee have been informed 
that the issue of posting of adequate manpower in the DoT to carry out the assigned 
functions in an effective and time bound -manner i s under examination in DoT, taking 
into consideration requirements/justification of work. Observing that shortage of 
manpower and IT Infrastructure in the TERM Cells are not only affecting their vital 
responsibility of unearthing illegal set -ups but also h ampering monitoring activities to 
enforce of adherence to mandatory guidelines by TSPs, the Committee recommend that 
the issue of posting of adequate manpower and upgradation of infrastructure of the 
TERM Cells need urgent attention of the Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 TERM Cells broadly have following sources/methods to find out the clandestine 
activity/grey market operations: 
  
(i) Through complaint/information received by any means 
(ii) Through Observation of unusual traffic in operators networks. 
(iii) Through already investigated/under investigation cases. 
(iv) Through Security/Law enforcement agencies. 
 
It is stated that out of the above mentioned methods for unearthing the illegal 
telecom operations, mechanisms envisaged under point number (ii) and (iii) t o identify 
illegal activity are suo -motu mechanisms followed by TERM Cells. In addition to above 
mentioned mechanisms, there is also provision of Toll Free Number “1800110420” on 
which any person can register complaint while receiving international calls, if local or 
STD or no number displayed on his phone. All the TSPs have been instructed to make 
aware public of this facility through SMS. A list of such complaints received through Toll 
Free Number is then forwarded to corresponding TERM Cells to carry out  the analysis to 
detect any bypassing of legal ILD operator and take suitable action. All these 
mechanisms are in suo -moto methods of unearthing grey market operations. With 
regards to posting of adequate manpower , Establishment Wing at this HQ is looking  
into the matter of induction of below JTS level staff at TERM Cells. This HQ is also 
examining the requirement and provisioning of both hardware and application software 
for automation of various activities related to TERM Cells. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communicat ions & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated     .03.2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8  of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
Status of manufacturing of telecom equipment in the country 
 
The Committee note that with the emergence of newer technology, the demand 
for telecom equipment has increased rapidly in the country. As per TRAI Report dated 
12th April, 2011, the total demand for various categories of telecom equipment is 
projected to be about Rs. 1,08,000 crore in 2015 -16 and Rs. 1,70,000 crore by 2019 -20. 
During the year 2013 -14, the total import of telecom equipment by India was for Rs. 
74,115 crore, whereas the total export of telecom equipment from India was for Rs. 
22,800 crore only. The Committee note that the major impediments in the path of the 
telecom manufacturing industry are high cost disability due to high cost of financing, 

41 
 
 
poor infrastructure, stiff competition from big established companies, lack of domestic 
IC manufacturing ability and lack of R&D fund. The Department have notified the 
National Telecom Policy (NTP) with a vision to provide secure, reliable, affordable and 
high quality converged telecommunication services. The Committee also note that the 
Department of Telecommunications, in coordination with the Department of Electronics 
and Information Technology, have taken several initiatives, such as imposition of basic 
custom duty on specified telecom products, preference to domestic manufactures for 
23 noti fied telecom products, providing financial assistance under the Electronics 
Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) Scheme and the Modified Special Incentive Package 
Scheme (M-SIPS), approval for setting up of two Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication (FAB) 
manufacturing facilities, proposal for promotion of Fabless design industry, FDI upto 100 
per cent in manufacturing of telecom products, etc. The Committee further observe that 
out of the 51 proposals involving investment of about Rs. 16441 crore, only 22 proposals 
involving investment of Rs. 2407 crore have been approved under M -SIPS. Under the 
EMC scheme, final approval has been accorded only to two Greenfield Electronics 
Manufacturing clusters and ‘in-Principle’ approval has been accorded to 10 applications, 
and Letter  of Intent (LoI) have been issued to two consortia for setting up of two 
Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication Manufacturing facilities. Keeping in view the fact that 
excessive dependence on import of telecom equipment is not in the interest of nation, 
the Commi ttee recommend that a coordination mechanism may be worked out with 
DeitY to urgently review the implementation status of the various initiatives under the 
National Telecom Policy (NTP) (2012) and the National Electronics Policy (NEP) (2012) so 
that these initiatives do not remain only in paper but are translated into specific action 
and clear cut result, helping to promote domestic telecom equipments manufacturing 
capabilities. Since 50 per cent of the Bill of Material (BoM) of telecom equipment is 
constituted by semiconductor based discreet and integrated circuit devises, the bulk of 
which is imported, the Committee also recommend that special emphasis must be given 
towards developing manufacturing capabilities for semi -conductor and integrated 
circuit devices. In this regard, the Committee would like the Department to take urgent 
measures for setting up of two semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing facilities 
for which the Government have already given their approval. The progress made on the 
above initiatives should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As noted by the Committee, the Department is working in close coordination 
with the Department  of Electronics and Information Technology for the promotion of 
domestic manufacturin g of electronic and telecom equipment in the country, and has 
taken several initiatives, such as imposition of basic custom duty on specified telecom 
products, etc.  
 
The Department shall continue to work in active coordination with the 
Department of Elect ronics and Information Technology towards the promotion of 
Domestic manufacturing of Telecom Equipments and other important issues. Besides 
the steps being taken by DoT in coordination with DeitY as already mentioned above by 

42 
 
 
the committee, the Department wishes to bring to the kind knowledge of the 
committee that the Cabinet has approved for setting up of Electronics Development 
Fund (EDF) in the nature of Venture Capital Fund in December, 2014. The EDF will be a 
“Fund of Funds” to participate in “Daughter  Funds” in the area of electronic, nano -
electronics and Information Technology (IT), which includes Telecommunications too. A 
fund for telecommunications will be set up under the EDF as per the framework 
approved. The  supported  Daughter Funds   will  pro mote innovation,  R&D, product  
development and  within the  country  in the  specified  fields of ESDM,  nano -
electronics and  IT including Telecom. 
 
The present status of the two semiconductor wafer fabrication manufacturing facilities 
is as under: 
 
For demonstration of commitment, both consortia were required to submit the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) along with detailed costing and implementation plan. 
While Detailed Project Reports were submitted by both M/s HSMC Technologies India 
Pvt. Ltd and M/s Jaiprakash  Associates Ltd., on behalf of their respective consortia, 
however, both the consortia are yet to submit the other documents.  
  
Preliminary assessment of Detailed Project Reports submitted by both consortia 
was undertaken by DeitY. Several deficiencies we re observed in the Detailed Project 
Report which have been pointed out to them.  
  
Subsequently, both M/s HSMC Technologies India Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Jaiprakash 
Associates Ltd. sought time till 31.03.2015 and 31.01.2015 respectively for submission of 
deficiencies in DPR and other documents required for demonstration of commitment, 
which has been provided with the approval of Empowered Committee. Both the 
consortia are yet to submit the requisite information/documents. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  11 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 M/s Jaiprakash  Associates 
Limited (with IBM,  USA and  
Tower Semiconductor Limited, 
Israel as partners; JIT 
consortium) 
M/s HSMC Technologies  
India Pvt. Ltd. (with ST 
Microelectronics and Silterra 
Malaysia Sdn. Bhd. as  
partners; HSS consortium) 
1.  Project Cost INR 34,399  Crores INR 29,013 Crores 
2. Technology 90/65/45/28 nm 90/65/45/28/22 nm 
3. Capacity 40,000 WSPM of 300 mm size 40,000 WSPM of 300 mm 
size 4.  Location Yamuna  Expressway, 
Greater Noida Uttar  Pradesh 
Prantij, Gujarat 
   

43 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
Security concerns related to import of telecom equipment 
 
The Committee note that during the period from April 2013 to March, 2014, out 
of the total of Rs. 74,115.40 crore telecom equipment imported by the country, 61.18 
per cent of the telecom import amounting to Rs. 45347.03 crore was from China, mainly 
because of competiti ve prices offered by China. The Department have also conceded 
that at present India has very little capability to manufacture hi -tech telecom equipment 
as compared to China and that modern age telecom equipment is vulnerable to 
spyware/malware, etc. in the hands of anti-national, anti-social or other miscreants. The 
Committee note that to safeguard the security interest of the nation associated with 
import of telecom equipment, the DoT have already issued comprehensive security 
guidelines in the form of Lic ence amendments in May/June 2011 that have been 
included in the terms and conditions of the Unified Licence which, inter-alia, provide for 
mandatory testing of telecom equipment before inducting them into Indian telecom 
network and periodic security audit.  The Committee are, however, concerned to note 
that except for one SAR Lab and one NGN Lab presently working at TEC, New Delhi, 
there is no other lab for testing of telecom equipment. The Committee have been 
informed that there is a proposal for establishm ent of various labs in TEC, such as 
Security Lab for security testing of various elements and Green Passport Lab for 
certifying telecom products equipment and services on the basics of Energy 
Consumption Rating and Customer Premises Equipment and Terminal Lab to enable 
testing of various equipment, etc. The Committee are given to understand that the 
Project Estimates for setting up of the Security Lab is under approval in DoT and Project 
Estimates of the other labs are under preparation.  Considering the fa ct that the 
extensive use of foreign made telecom equipment poses serious threats to national 
security, the Committee have serious apprehensions about the satisfactory testing of 
telecom equipment in the country in the absence of adequate security labs. No w that 
the Department of Telecommunications have issued guidelines for mandatory testing of 
telecom equipment before inducting them into the telecom network, the Committee 
stress that there is an urgency for the early setting up of the security labs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Project Estimates of the Security Lab which 
is under approval and the Project Estimates of the Green Passport Lab and CPE&TL Lab 
which are under preparation should be finalized at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Security Lab: The estimate for security lab of amounting Rs. 10 Crore (approx.) has been 
sanctioned by DoT on 17.10.2014. The tender is in the process of approval at DoT and 
will be floated shortly. 
 
Green Passport Lab: The estimate for Green Passport Lab of amounting Rs. 1.09 Crore is 
in the process of approval at DoT.  
 

44 
 
 
CPE &TL Lab: The estimate for CPE&TL Lab of amounting Rs. 6 Crore has been 
sanctioned by DoT on 22.01.2015. The tender documentis in the process of preparation 
and approval.  
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated 23.03.2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  14 of the Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
Telecom Connectivity to Andaman and Nicobar Islands (ANI) and Lakshadweep Islands (LI) 
 
The Committee note that initially the undersea cabling between the mainland 
and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (ANI) was handled by the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Industrial Development Corporation (ANID CO). However, due to lack of requisite 
technical expertise by ANIDCO, the Planning Commission decided on 2 nd May, 2014 that 
the project will be implemented by DoT. The Telecommunications Consultant of India 
Limited (TCIL) had been entrusted to prepare a De tailed Project Report and the same is 
expected to be submitted by January, 2015. Separately, TRAI in their Report dated 27 th 
July, 2014, had recommended that telecom services in ANI and Lakshadweep Islands 
may be improved. The Committee note that the recom mendations of TRAI for 
improving telecom services in these two islands are under consideration of the 
Department. TRAI in the same Report, had  also recommended that keeping in view the 
strategic importance of Lakshadweep, a secure and reliable connectivit y should be 
established through submarine cable. The Recommendations of TRAI for improving 
telecom services in these two islands are under consideration of the Department. At 
present, connectivity to ANI and Lakshadweep Island is provided through satellite  and 
during 2012-13, Rs. 65 Crore was spent for satellite transponder charges for ANI and Rs. 
27 crore in case of Lakshadweep Islands. The DoT have taken up the case with the Indian 
Space Research Organization (ISRO) to waive off the satellite transponder charges for 
telecom services being provided by BSNL in the area, including ANI and Lakshadweep 
Islands, which is under consideration of the Department of Space. A proposal is also 
under consideration of the Government for providing financial support to BSN L for the 
reimbursement of satellite bandwidth charges (space segment charges) paid by it to the 
Antrix Corporation for hiring satellite transponders (both domestic and foreign  
satellites) for providing telecom services in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The  
Committee are of the view that both the Islands are strategically located and there is an 
urgent imperative to strengthen the telecom network in these two islands for better 
connectivity. Continuing to provide connectivity through satellite transponders h as 
become unviable due to the high cost of the satellite transponders. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the recommendations given by TRAI for strengthening the 
telecom connectivity in these two Islands may be finalized at the earliest. The 

45 
 
 
Committee observe that in the long run the two Island can be served best by providing 
cable link from the mainland. In this regard, effort should be made by TCIL to ensure 
that the Detailed Project Reports for Undersea Cable to ANI should be submitted within 
the specified time frame, i.e. January 2015, so that the project takes off at the earliest. 
The Committee recommend that the best possible means for strengthening telecom 
connectivity to Lakshadweep Island should also be implemented by the Department 
keeping in view its strategic locations. The Committee desire that a cost benefit analysis 
and feasibility study for laying submarine OFC in Lakshadweep Island as suggested by 
TRAI may be under taken without delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Regarding submarine O FC cable connectivity from Chennai to Part Blair, it is 
intimated that Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL) was asked by DoT 
in May 2014 to prepare a Detailed Project Report (DPR) based on desk top survey in 
accordance with the decisions tak en in the meeting held in Planning Commission. TCIL 
has already shortlisted a successful bidder in Sep, 2014 for awarding the work of Desk 
Top Survey for submarine OFC project against the Tender floated in June 2015. 
However, in view of complaints dated 25 .10.2014 and 22.12.2014 received from Shri 
Praveen Saxena through PMO/ MOC&IT, M/s TCIL has been requested vide this office 
letters dated 22.12.2014 and 01.10.2015 to send consolidated report of Independent 
External Monitor (IEM) on priority basis regardin g the tender for “Desktop Study (DTS) 
for connecting A&N Islands with Chennai, India on submarine OFC” and the complaints 
received in this regard. TCIL has intimated that the observations of IEM are likely to be 
submitted by last week of January 2015. Cons equent upon approval by DoT, the work of 
DTS is likely to be awarded by TCIL to the successful bidder by 15 th February 2015. Since 
final DPR submission by TCIL will take 10 weeks from the date of award of work, the 
final DPR is likely to be submitted by TC IL to USOF/ DoT  by 30.04.2015. After due 
diligence of DPR, approval of the Telecom Commission & the Cabinet will be obtained.  
 
(b) Regarding submarine cable connectivity for Lakshadweep, it is submitted that TRAI 
vide recommendations dated 22.07.2014 on ‘Improving Telecom Services in Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep” has recommended that keeping in view the strategic 
importance of Lakshadweep, a secure and reliable connectivity should be established 
through a submarine cable. This cable is propos ed to connect Kochi/ Cochin with 
Kavaratti, Agatti, Androth, Kalpini, Amini and Minicoy islands. For this purpose 936 Km 
submarine cable may be laid with an estimated an expenditure of Rs. 468 Crores. While 
accepting the need to provide robust and reliable  telecom connectivity to Lakshadweep 
Islands, the Telecom Commission in its meeting held on 07.11.2014 has accorded in 
principle approval to undertake a cost benefit analysis and feasibility study for laying 
submarine OFC in Lakshadweep along with validati on of the estimated cost before 
proceeding ahead. DoT has to take necessary action in this regard.  
 
(c) For augmentation of satellite band width in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) has been received from BSNL. The Telecom Commiss ion in its 

46 
 
 
meeting held on 07.11.2014 has accorded ‘in principle’ approval for estimated 
investment (CAPEX) of Rs. 82.44 Crore for augmentation of satellite system for 
improving telecom services in Andaman & Nicobar Islands and to award the work for 
augmentation of satellite bandwidth systems to BSNL on nomination basis. The 
technical requirements and detailed cost estimates for augmentation of satellite 
systems are being vetted by a technical group under Member (Technology). First 
Meeting of the Technical Group constituted under Member (T) vide letter dated 
16.11.2014 has been held on 19.12.2014 and the report is likely to be submitted by 
31.01.2015. On submission of the report by the Technical Group, the approval of the 
Telecom Commission and the cabinet will be obtained. 
 
(d) For augmentation of satellite bandwidth in Lakshadweep Islands, the Telecom 
Commission in its meeting held on 07.11.2014 has accorded ‘in principle’ approval for 
estimated investment CAPEX of Rs. 18.05 crore for augmentation of satell ite system for 
improving telecom services in Lakshadweep Islands and to award the work for 
augmentation of satellite bandwidth systems to BSNL on nomination basis. In 
accordance with the Telecom Commission decision, BSNL has been requested vide this 
office letter No. 30-174-5/2014-BB –USOF dated 17.12.2014 to submit a Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) for CAPEX requirement for augmentation of satellite bandwidth in 
Lakshadweep Islands urgently to USOF for taking further necessary action in this regard. 
The DPR is awaited from BSNL as on date. On receipt of DPR from BSNL, the technical 
requirements and detailed cost estimates for augmentation of satellite systems shall be 
vetted by a technical group under Member (Technology).  In the meeting of 
Committee of Secre taries (CoS) on “communication crisis in Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands” held on 12.06.2014, it was decided that Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) 
shall do the necessary augmentation in its satellite communication network to meet the 
needs of telecommunicatio n in Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  It was further offered in 
the agenda Note that necessary CAPEX shall be funded by Universal Service Obligation 
Fund (USOF).  Accordingly, BSNL has submitted a Detailed Project Report (DPR) for 
CAPEX to USOF.  The amount of CAPEX is Rs 82.44 crores. 
 
Telecom Commission has given ‘in principle’ approval on 07.11.2014 for 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan including provision of mobile connectivity 
for Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands with the total estimat ed 
investment of Rs. 221.05 crores consisting of the following elements:- 
 
(a) Rs 91.16 crores for providing 2G (voice) coverage in uncovered villages. 
(b) Rs 9.40 crores for providing seamless 2G (voice) connectivity along NH.  
(c) Rs 20 crores for augmentation of OFC Network. 
(d) Rs 100.49 crores for augmentation of Satellite system. 
 
For providing 2G voice coverage in uncovered villages and connectivity along with 
National Highways, Detailed Project Report (DPR) is being prepared by TCIL. 
 

47 
 
 
For augmentati on of satellite system in ANI and Lakshadweep DPR is submitted 
by BSNL, which is under examination in DoT. 
 
For the  submarine cable from Chennai to Port Blair, TCIL is expected to submit 
the Detailed Project Report (DPR) by March 2015. 
 
For submarine cable  connectivity to Lakshadweep, consultations have started 
with the Union Territory (UT) Administration preparatory to the cost benefit analysis 
and feasibility study for laying submarine OFC. 
 
 
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department  of 
Telecommunications O. M. No. 16-3/2014-B  dated  23.03.2015) 

48 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  -NIL- 
 

49 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, 
11  August, 2015  Chairperson,  
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka)  Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRD REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: - 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21 
and 22 
 
 Total   22 
 Percentage 100 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
 Total 00 
 Percentage 00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
 Total 00 
 Percentage 00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:-  NIL  
 Total 00 
 Percentage         00 
 